{"id": "9252", "revid": "764407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9252", "title": "Education", "text": "Education is the process of facilitating learning, or the acquisition of knowledge, skills, values, morals, beliefs, and habits. Educational methods include teaching, training, storytelling, discussion and directed research. Education frequently takes place under the guidance of educators, however learners can also educate themselves. Education can take place in formal or informal settings and any experience that has a formative effect on the way one thinks, feels, or acts may be considered educational. The methodology of teaching is called pedagogy.\nFormal education is commonly divided formally into such stages as preschool or kindergarten, primary school, secondary school and then college, university, or apprenticeship.\nThere are movements for education reforms, such as for improving quality and efficiency of education towards applicable relevance in the students' lives and efficient problem solving in modern or future society at large or for evidence-based education methodologies. A right to education has been recognized by some governments and the United Nations. Global initiatives aim at achieving the Sustainable Development Goal 4, which promotes quality education for all. In most regions, education is compulsory up to a certain age.\nEtymology.\nEtymologically, the word \"education\" is derived from the Latin word \"\u0113duc\u0101ti\u014d\" (\"A breeding, a bringing up, a rearing\") from \"\u0113duc\u014d\" (\"I educate, I train\") which is related to the homonym \"\u0113d\u016bc\u014d\" (\"I lead forth, I take out; I raise up, I erect\") from \"\u0113-\" (\"from, out of\") and \"d\u016bc\u014d\" (\"I lead, I conduct\").\nHistory.\nEducation began in prehistory, as adults trained the young in the knowledge and skills deemed necessary in their society. In pre-literate societies, this was achieved orally and through imitation. Story-telling passed knowledge, values, and skills from one generation to the next. As cultures began to extend their knowledge beyond skills that could be readily learned through imitation, formal education developed. Schools existed in Egypt at the time of the Middle Kingdom. \nPlato founded the Academy in Athens, the first institution of higher learning in Europe. The city of Alexandria in Egypt, established in 330 BCE, became the successor to Athens as the intellectual cradle of Ancient Greece. There, the great Library of Alexandria was built in the 3rd century BCE. European civilizations suffered a collapse of literacy and organization following the fall of Rome in CE 476.\nIn China, Confucius (551\u2013479 BCE), of the State of Lu, was the country's most influential ancient philosopher, whose educational outlook continues to influence the societies of China and neighbours like Korea, Japan, and Vietnam. Confucius gathered disciples and searched in vain for a ruler who would adopt his ideals for good governance, but his Analects were written down by followers and have continued to influence education in East Asia into the modern era.\nThe Aztecs also had a well-developed theory about education, which has an equivalent word in Nahuatl called \"tlacahuapahualiztli.\" It means \"the art of raising or educating a person\", or \"the art of strengthening or bringing up men\". This was a broad conceptualization of education, which prescribed that it begins at home, supported by formal schooling, and reinforced by community living. Historians cite that formal education was mandatory for everyone regardless of social class and gender. There was also the word \"neixtlamachiliztli\", which is \"the act of giving wisdom to the face.\" These concepts underscore a complex set of educational practices, which was oriented towards communicating to the next generation the experience and intellectual heritage of the past for the purpose of individual development and his integration into the community.\nAfter the Fall of Rome, the Catholic Church became the sole preserver of literate scholarship in Western Europe. The church established cathedral schools in the Early Middle Ages as centres of advanced education. Some of these establishments ultimately evolved into medieval universities and forebears of many of Europe's modern universities. During the High Middle Ages, Chartres Cathedral operated the famous and influential Chartres Cathedral School. The medieval universities of Western Christendom were well-integrated across all of Western Europe, encouraged freedom of inquiry, and produced a great variety of fine scholars and natural philosophers, including Thomas Aquinas of the University of Naples, Robert Grosseteste of the University of Oxford, an early expositor of a systematic method of scientific experimentation, and Saint Albert the Great, a pioneer of biological field research. Founded in 1088, the University of Bologne is considered the first, and the oldest continually operating university.\nElsewhere during the Middle Ages, Islamic science and mathematics flourished under the Islamic caliphate which was established across the Middle East, extending from the Iberian Peninsula in the west to the Indus in the east and to the Almoravid Dynasty and Mali Empire in the south.\nThe Renaissance in Europe ushered in a new age of scientific and intellectual inquiry and appreciation of ancient Greek and Roman civilizations. Around 1450, Johannes Gutenberg developed a printing press, which allowed works of literature to spread more quickly. The European Age of Empires saw European ideas of education in philosophy, religion, arts and sciences spread out across the globe. Missionaries and scholars also brought back new ideas from other civilizations\u00a0\u2013 as with the Jesuit China missions who played a significant role in the transmission of knowledge, science, and culture between China and Europe, translating works from Europe like Euclid's Elements for Chinese scholars and the thoughts of Confucius for European audiences. The Enlightenment saw the emergence of a more secular educational outlook in Europe. Much of modern traditional Western and Eastern education is based on the Prussian education system.\nIn most countries today, full-time education, whether at school or otherwise, is compulsory for all children up to a certain age. Due to this the proliferation of compulsory education, combined with population growth, UNESCO has calculated that in the next 30\u00a0years more people will receive formal education than in all of human history thus far.\nFormal.\nFormal education occurs in a structured environment whose explicit purpose is teaching students. Usually, formal education takes place in a school environment with classrooms of multiple students learning together with a trained, certified teacher of the subject. Most school systems are designed around a set of values or ideals that govern all educational choices in that system. Such choices include curriculum, organizational models, design of the physical learning spaces (e.g. classrooms), student-teacher interactions, methods of assessment, class size, educational activities, and more.\nThe International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) was created by UNESCO as a statistical base to compare education systems. In 1997, it defined 7 levels of education and 25 fields, though the fields were later separated out to form a different project. The current version ISCED 2011 has 9 rather than 7 levels, created by dividing the tertiary pre-doctorate level into three levels. It also extended the lowest level (ISCED 0) to cover a new sub-category of early childhood educational development programmes, which target children below the age of 3 years.\nEarly childhood.\nEducation designed to support early development in preparation for participation in school and society. The programmes are designed for children below the age of 3. This is ISCED level 01. Preschools provide education from ages approximately three to seven, depending on the country when children enter primary education. The children now readily interact with their peers and the educator. These are also known as nursery schools and as kindergarten, except in the US, where the term \"kindergarten\" refers to the earliest levels of primary education. Kindergarten \"provides a child-centred, preschool curriculum for three- to seven-year-old children that aim[s] at unfolding the child's physical, intellectual, and moral nature with balanced emphasis on each of them.\" This is ISCED level 02.\nPrimary.\nThis is ISCED level 1. Primary (or elementary) education consists of the first four to seven years of formal, structured education. In general, primary education consists of six to eight years of schooling starting at the age of five to seven, although this varies between, and sometimes within, countries. Globally, in 2008, around 89% of children aged six to twelve were enrolled in primary education, and this proportion was rising. Under the Education For All programs driven by UNESCO, most countries have committed to achieving universal enrollment in primary education by 2015, and in many countries, it is compulsory. The division between primary and secondary education is somewhat arbitrary, but it generally occurs at about eleven or twelve years of age. Some education systems have separate middle schools, with the transition to the final stage of secondary education taking place at around the age of fifteen. Schools that provide primary education, are mostly referred to as \"primary schools \"or \"elementary schools\". Primary schools are often subdivided into infant schools and junior schools.\nIn India, for example, compulsory education spans over twelve years, with eight years of elementary education, five years of primary schooling and three years of upper primary schooling. Various states in the republic of India provide 12 years of compulsory school education based on a national curriculum framework designed by the National Council of Educational Research and Training.\nSecondary.\nThis covers the two ISCED levels, ISCED 2: Lower Secondary Education and ISCED 3: Upper Secondary Education.\nIn most contemporary educational systems of the world, secondary education comprises the formal education that occurs during adolescence. In the United States, Canada, and Australia, primary and secondary education together are sometimes referred to as K-12 education, and in New Zealand Year 1\u201313 is used. The purpose of secondary education can be to give common knowledge, to prepare for higher education, or to train directly in a profession.\nSecondary education in the United States did not emerge until 1910, with the rise of large corporations and advancing technology in factories, which required skilled workers. In order to meet this new job demand, high schools were created, with a curriculum focused on practical job skills that would better prepare students for white collar or skilled blue collar work. This proved beneficial for both employers and employees, since the improved human capital lowered costs for the employer, while skilled employees received higher wages.\nSecondary education has a longer history in Europe, where grammar schools or academies date from as early as the 6th century, in the form of public schools, fee-paying schools, or charitable educational foundations, which themselves date even further back.\nIt spans the period between the typically universal compulsory, primary education to the optional, selective tertiary, \"postsecondary\", or \"higher\" education of ISCED 5 and 6 (e.g. university), and the ISCED 4 Further education or vocational school.\nDepending on the system, schools for this period, or a part of it, may be called secondary or high schools, gymnasiums, lyceums, middle schools, colleges, or vocational schools. The exact meaning of any of these terms varies from one system to another. The exact boundary between primary and secondary education also varies from country to country and even within them but is generally around the seventh to the tenth year of schooling.\nLower.\nPrograms at ISCED level 2, lower secondary education are usually organized around a more subject-oriented curriculum; differing from primary education. Teachers typically have\npedagogical training in the specific subjects and, more often than at ISCED level 1, a class of\nstudents will have several teachers, each with specialized knowledge of the subjects they teach. Programmes at ISCED level 2, aim to lay the foundation for lifelong learning and human development upon introducing theoretical concepts across a broad range of subjects which can be developed in future stages. Some education systems may offer vocational education programs during ISCED level 2 providing skills relevant to employment.\nUpper.\nPrograms at ISCED level 3, or upper secondary education, are typically designed to complete the secondary education process. They lead to skills relevant to employment and the skill necessary to engage in tertiary courses. They offer students more varied, specialized and in-depth instruction. They are more differentiated, with range of options and learning streams.\nCommunity colleges offer another option at this transitional stage of education. They provide nonresidential junior college courses to people living in a particular area.\nTertiary.\nHigher education, also called tertiary, third stage, or postsecondary education, is the non-compulsory educational level that follows the completion of a school such as a high school or secondary school. Tertiary education is normally taken to include undergraduate and postgraduate education, as well as vocational education and training. Colleges and universities mainly provide tertiary education. Collectively, these are sometimes known as tertiary institutions. Individuals who complete tertiary education generally receive certificates, diplomas, or academic degrees.\nThe ISCED distinguishes 4 levels of tertiary education. ISCED 6 is equivalent to a first degree, ISCED 7 is equivalent to a masters or an advanced professional qualification and ISCED 8 is an advanced research qualification, usually concluding with the submission and defence of a substantive dissertation of publishable quality based on original research. The category ISCED 5 is reserved for short-cycle courses of requiring degree level study.\nHigher education typically involves work towards a degree-level or foundation degree qualification. In most developed countries, a high proportion of the population (up to 50%) now enter higher education at some time in their lives. Higher education is therefore very important to national economies, both as a significant industry in its own right and as a source of trained and educated personnel for the rest of the economy.\nUniversity education includes teaching, research, and social services activities, and it includes both the undergraduate level (sometimes referred to as tertiary education) and the graduate (or postgraduate) level (sometimes referred to as graduate school). Some universities are composed of several colleges.\nOne type of university education is a liberal arts education, which can be defined as a \"college or university curriculum aimed at imparting broad general knowledge and developing general intellectual capacities, in contrast to a professional, vocational, or technical curriculum.\" Although what is known today as liberal arts education began in Europe, the term \"liberal arts college\" is more commonly associated with institutions in the United States such as Williams College or Barnard College.\nVocational.\nVocational education is a form of education focused on direct and practical training for a specific trade or craft. Vocational education may come in the form of an apprenticeship or internship as well as institutions teaching courses such as carpentry, agriculture, engineering, medicine, architecture and the arts. Post 16 education, adult education and further education involve continued study, but a level no different from that found at upper secondary, and are grouped together as ISCED 4, post-secondary non-tertiary education.\nSpecial.\nIn the past, those who were disabled were often not eligible for public education. Children with disabilities were repeatedly denied an education by physicians or special tutors. These early physicians (people like Itard, Seguin, Howe, Gallaudet) set the foundation for special education today. They focused on individualized instruction and functional skills. In its early years, special education was only provided to people with severe disabilities, but more recently it has been opened to anyone who has experienced difficulty learning.\nUnconvential forms.\nAlternative.\nWhile considered \"alternative\" today, most alternative systems have existed since ancient times. After the public school system was widely developed beginning in the 19th century, some parents found reasons to be discontented with the new system. Alternative education developed in part as a reaction to perceived limitations and failings of traditional education. A broad range of educational approaches emerged, including alternative schools, self learning, homeschooling, and unschooling. Example alternative schools include Montessori schools, Waldorf schools (or Steiner schools), Friends schools, Sands School, Summerhill School, Walden's Path, The Peepal Grove School, Sudbury Valley School, Krishnamurti schools, and open classroom schools.\nCharter schools are another example of alternative education, which have in the recent years grown in numbers in the US and gained greater importance in its public education system.\nIn time, some ideas from these experiments and paradigm challenges may be adopted as the norm in education, just as Friedrich Fr\u00f6bel's approach to early childhood education in 19th-century Germany has been incorporated into contemporary kindergarten classrooms. Other influential writers and thinkers have included the Swiss humanitarian Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi; the American transcendentalists Amos Bronson Alcott, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Henry David Thoreau; the founders of progressive education, John Dewey and Francis Parker; and educational pioneers such as Maria Montessori and Rudolf Steiner, and more recently John Caldwell Holt, Paul Goodman, Frederick Mayer, George Dennison, and Ivan Illich.\nIndigenous.\nIndigenous education refers to the inclusion of indigenous knowledge, models, methods, and content within formal and non-formal educational systems. Often in a post-colonial context, the growing recognition and use of indigenous education methods can be a response to the erosion and loss of indigenous knowledge and language through the processes of colonialism. Furthermore, it can enable indigenous communities to \"reclaim and revalue their languages and cultures, and in so doing, improve the educational success of indigenous students.\"\nInformal learning.\nInformal learning is one of three forms of learning defined by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Informal learning occurs in a variety of places, such as at home, work, and through daily interactions and shared relationships among members of society. For many learners, this includes language acquisition, cultural norms, and manners.\nIn informal learning, there is often a reference person, a peer or expert, to guide the learner. If learners have a personal interest in what they are informally being taught, learners tend to expand their existing knowledge and conceive new ideas about the topic being learned. For example, a museum is traditionally considered an informal learning environment, as there is room for free choice, a diverse and potentially non-standardized range of topics, flexible structures, socially rich interaction, and no externally imposed assessments.\nWhile informal learning often takes place outside educational establishments and does not follow a specified curriculum, it can also occur within educational settings and even during formal learning situations. Educators can structure their lessons to directly utilize their students informal learning skills within the education setting.\nIn the late 19th century, education through play began to be recognized as making an important contribution to child development. In the early 20th century, the concept was broadened to include young adults but the emphasis was on physical activities. L.P. Jacks, also an early proponent of lifelong learning, described education through recreation: \"A master in the art of living draws no sharp distinction between his work and his play, his labour and his leisure, his mind and his body, his education and his recreation. He hardly knows which is which. He simply pursues his vision of excellence through whatever he is doing and leaves others to determine whether he is working or playing. To himself, he always seems to be doing both. Enough for him that he does it well.\" Education through recreation is the opportunity to learn in a seamless fashion through all of life's activities. The concept has been revived by the University of Western Ontario to teach anatomy to medical students.\nSelf-directed learning.\nAutodidacticism (also autodidactism) is self-directed learning. One may become an autodidact at nearly any point in one's life. Notable autodidacts include Abraham Lincoln (U.S. president), Srinivasa Ramanujan (mathematician), Michael Faraday (chemist and physicist), Charles Darwin (naturalist), Thomas Alva Edison (inventor), Tadao Ando (architect), George Bernard Shaw (playwright), Frank Zappa (composer, recording engineer, film director), and Leonardo da Vinci (engineer, scientist, mathematician).\nEvidence-based.\nEvidence-based education is the use of well designed scientific studies to determine which education methods work best. It consists of evidence-based teaching and evidence-based learning. Evidence-based learning methods such as spaced repetition can increase rate of learning. The evidence-based education movement has its roots in the larger movement towards evidence-based-practices.\nOpen learning and electronic technology.\nMany large university institutions are now starting to offer free or almost free full courses, through open education, such as Harvard, MIT and Berkeley teaming up to form edX. Other universities offering open education are prestigious private universities such as Stanford, Princeton, Duke, Johns Hopkins, the University of Pennsylvania, and Caltech, as well as notable public universities including Tsinghua, Peking, Edinburgh, University of Michigan, and University of Virginia.\nOpen education has been called the biggest change in the way people learn since the printing press. Despite favourable studies on effectiveness, many people may still desire to choose traditional campus education for social and cultural reasons.\nMany open universities are working to have the ability to offer students standardized testing and traditional degrees and credentials.\nThe conventional merit-system degree is currently not as common in open education as it is in campus universities, although some open universities do already offer conventional degrees such as the Open University in the United Kingdom. Presently, many of the major open education sources offer their own form of certificate.\nOut of 182 colleges surveyed in 2009 nearly half said tuition for online courses was higher than for campus-based ones.\nA 2010 meta-analysis found that online and blended educational approaches had better outcomes than methods that used solely face-to-face interaction.\nPublic schooling.\nThe education sector or education system is a group of institutions (ministries of education, local educational authorities, teacher training institutions, schools, universities, etc.) whose primary purpose is to provide education to children and young people in educational settings. It involves a wide range of people (curriculum developers, inspectors, school principals, teachers, school nurses, students, etc.). These institutions can vary according to different contexts.\nSchools deliver education, with support from the rest of the education system through various elements such as education policies and guidelines \u2013 to which school policies can refer \u2013 curricula and learning materials, as well as pre- and in-service teacher training programmes. The school environment \u2013 both physical (infrastructures) and psychological (school climate) \u2013 is also guided by school policies that should ensure the well-being of students when they are in school. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has found that schools tend to perform best when principals have full authority and responsibility for ensuring that students are proficient in core subjects upon graduation. They must also seek feedback from students for quality-assurance and improvement. Governments should limit themselves to monitoring student proficiency.\nThe education sector is fully integrated into society, through interactions with numerous stakeholders and other sectors. These include parents, local communities, religious leaders, NGOs, stakeholders involved in health, child protection, justice and law enforcement (police), media and political leadership.\nThe shape, methodologies, taught material \u2013 the curriculum \u2013 of formal education is decided by political decision makers along with federal agencies such as the state education agency in the United States.\nDevelopment goals.\nJoseph Chimombo pointed out education's role as a policy instrument, capable of instilling social change and economic advancement in developing countries by giving communities the opportunity to take control of their destinies. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted by the United Nations (UN) General Assembly in September 2015, calls for a new vision to address the environmental, social and economic concerns facing the world today. The Agenda includes 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including SDG 4 on education.\nSince 1909, the percentage of children in the developing world attending school has increased. Before then, a small minority of boys attended school. By the start of the twenty-first century, the majority of children in most regions of the world attended school.\nUniversal Primary Education was one of the eight international Millennium Development Goals, towards which progress has been made in the past decade, though barriers still remain. Securing charitable funding from prospective donors is one particularly persistent problem. Researchers at the Overseas Development Institute have indicated that the main obstacles to funding for education include conflicting donor priorities, an immature aid architecture, and a lack of evidence and advocacy for the issue. Additionally, Transparency International has identified corruption in the education sector as a major stumbling block to achieving Universal Primary Education in Africa. Furthermore, demand in the developing world for improved educational access is not as high as foreigners have expected. Indigenous governments are reluctant to take on the ongoing costs involved. There is also economic pressure from some parents, who prefer their children to earn money in the short term rather than work towards the long-term benefits of education.\nA study conducted by the UNESCO International Institute for Educational Planning indicates that stronger capacities in educational planning and management may have an important spill-over effect on the system as a whole. Sustainable capacity development requires complex interventions at the institutional, organizational and individual levels that could be based on some foundational principles:\nInternationalisation.\nNearly every country now has universal primary education.\nSimilarities \u2013 in systems or even in ideas \u2013 that schools share internationally have led to an increase in international student exchanges. The European Socrates-Erasmus Programme facilitates exchanges across European universities. The Soros Foundation provides many opportunities for students from central Asia and eastern Europe. Programs such as the International Baccalaureate have contributed to the internationalization of education. The global campus online, led by American universities, allows free access to class materials and lecture files recorded during the actual classes.\nThe Programme for International Student Assessment and the International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement objectively monitor and compare the proficiency of students from a wide range of different nations.\nThe internationalization of education is sometimes equated by critics with the westernization of education. These critics say that the internationalization of education leads to the erosion of local education systems and indigenous values and norms, which are replaced with Western systems and cultural and ideological values and orientation.\nTechnology in developing countries.\nTechnology plays an increasingly significant role in improving access to education for people living in impoverished areas and developing countries. However, lack of technological advancement is still causing barriers with regards to quality and access to education in developing countries. Charities like One Laptop per Child are dedicated to providing infrastructures through which the disadvantaged may access educational materials.\nThe OLPC foundation, a group out of MIT Media Lab and supported by several major corporations, has a stated mission to develop a $100 laptop for delivering educational software. The laptops were widely available as of 2008. They are sold at cost or given away based on donations.\nIn Africa, the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) has launched an \"e-school program\" to provide all 600,000 primary and high schools with computer equipment, learning materials and internet access within 10 years. An International Development Agency project called nabuur.com, started with the support of former American President Bill Clinton, uses the Internet to allow co-operation by individuals on issues of social development.\nIndia is developing technologies that will bypass land-based telephone and Internet infrastructure to deliver distance learning directly to its students. In 2004, the Indian Space Research Organisation launched EDUSAT, a communications satellite providing access to educational materials that can reach more of the country's population at a greatly reduced cost.\nFunding in developing countries.\nA survey of literature of the research into low-cost private schools (LCPS) found that over 5-year period to July 2013, debate around LCPSs to achieving Education for All (EFA) objectives was polarized and finding growing coverage in international policy. The polarization was due to disputes around whether the schools are affordable for the poor, reach disadvantaged groups, provide quality education, support or undermine equality, and are financially sustainable. The report examined the main challenges encountered by development organizations which support LCPSs. Surveys suggest these types of schools are expanding across Africa and Asia. This success is attributed to excess demand. These surveys found concern for:\nThe report showed some cases of successful voucher where there was an oversupply of quality private places and an efficient administrative authority and of subsidy programs. Evaluations of the effectiveness of international support to the sector are rare. Addressing regulatory ineffectiveness is a key challenge. Emerging approaches stress the importance of understanding the political economy of the market for LCPS, specifically how relationships of power and accountability between users, government, and private providers can produce better education outcomes for the poor.\nTheory.\nPsychology.\nEducational psychology is the study of how humans learn in educational settings, the effectiveness of educational interventions, the psychology of teaching, and the social psychology of schools as organizations. The terms \"educational psychology\" and \"school psychology\" are often used interchangeably. Educational psychology is concerned with the processes of educational attainment in the general population and in sub-populations such as gifted children and those with specific disabilities.\nEducational psychology can in part be understood through its relationship with other disciplines. It is informed primarily by psychology, bearing a relationship to that discipline analogous to the relationship between medicine and biology. Educational psychology, in turn, informs a wide range of specialties within educational studies, including instructional design, educational technology, curriculum development, organizational learning, special education and classroom management. Educational psychology both draws from and contributes to cognitive science and the learning sciences. In universities, departments of educational psychology are usually housed within faculties of education, possibly accounting for the lack of representation of educational psychology content in introductory psychology textbooks (Lucas, Blazek, &amp; Raley, 2006).\nIntelligence.\nIntelligence is an important factor in how the individual responds to education. Those who have higher scores of intelligence-metrics tend to perform better at school and go on to higher levels of education. This effect is also observable in the opposite direction, in that education increases measurable intelligence. Studies have shown that while educational attainment is important in predicting intelligence in later life, intelligence at 53 is more closely correlated to intelligence at 8 years old than to educational attainment.\nLearning modalities.\nThere has been much interest in learning modalities and styles over the last two decades. The most commonly employed learning modalities are:\nOther commonly employed modalities include musical, interpersonal, verbal, logical, and intrapersonal.\nDunn and Dunn focused on identifying relevant stimuli that may influence learning and manipulating the school environment, at about the same time as Joseph Renzulli recommended varying teaching strategies. Howard Gardner identified a wide range of modalities in his Multiple Intelligences theories. The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and Keirsey Temperament Sorter, based on the works of Jung, focus on understanding how people's personality affects the way they interact personally, and how this affects the way individuals respond to each other within the learning environment. The work of David Kolb and Anthony Gregorc's Type Delineator follows a similar but more simplified approach.\nSome theories propose that all individuals benefit from a variety of learning modalities, while others suggest that individuals may have preferred learning styles, learning more easily through visual or kinesthetic experiences. A consequence of the latter theory is that effective teaching should present a variety of teaching methods which cover all three learning modalities so that different students have equal opportunities to learn in a way that is effective for them. Guy Claxton has questioned the extent that learning styles such as Visual, Auditory and Kinesthetic(VAK) are helpful, particularly as they can have a tendency to label children and therefore restrict learning. Recent research has argued, \"there is no adequate evidence base to justify incorporating learning styles assessments into general educational practice.\"\nMind, brain, and education.\nEducational neuroscience is an emerging scientific field that brings together researchers in cognitive neuroscience, developmental cognitive neuroscience, educational psychology, educational technology, education theory and other related disciplines to explore the interactions between biological processes and education. Researchers in educational neuroscience investigate the neural mechanisms of reading, numerical cognition, attention, and their attendant difficulties including dyslexia, dyscalculia, and ADHD as they relate to education. Several academic institutions around the world are beginning to devote resources to the establishment of educational neuroscience research.\nPhilosophy.\nAs an academic field, philosophy of education is \"the philosophical study of education and its problems its central subject matter is education, and its methods are those of philosophy\". \"The philosophy of education may be either the philosophy of the process of education or the philosophy of the discipline of education. That is, it may be part of the discipline in the sense of being concerned with the aims, forms, methods, or results of the process of educating or being educated; or it may be metadisciplinary in the sense of being concerned with the concepts, aims, and methods of the discipline.\" As such, it is both part of the field of education and a field of applied philosophy, drawing from fields of metaphysics, epistemology, axiology and the philosophical approaches (speculative, prescriptive or analytic) to address questions in and about pedagogy, education policy, and curriculum, as well as the process of learning, to name a few. For example, it might study what constitutes upbringing and education, the values and norms revealed through upbringing and educational practices, the limits and legitimization of education as an academic discipline, and the relation between education theory and practice.\nPurpose.\nThere is no broad consensus as to what education's chief aim or aims are or should be. Different places, and at different times, have used educational systems for different purposes. The Prussian education system in the 19th century, for example, wanted to turn boys and girls into adults who would serve the state's political goals.\nSome authors stress its value to the individual, emphasizing its potential for positively influencing students' personal development, promoting autonomy, forming a cultural identity or establishing a career or occupation. Other authors emphasize education's contributions to societal purposes, including good citizenship, shaping students into productive members of society, thereby promoting society's general economic development, and preserving cultural values.\nThe purpose of education in a given time and place affects who is taught, what is taught, and how the education system behaves. For example, in the 21st century, many countries treat education as a positional good. In this competitive approach, people want their own students to get a better education than other students. This approach can lead to unfair treatment of some students, especially those from disadvantaged or marginalized groups. For example, in this system, a city's school system may draw school district boundaries so that nearly all the students in one school are from low-income families, and that nearly all the students in the neighboring schools come from more affluent families, even though concentrating low-income students in one school results in worse educational achievement for the entire school system.\nCurriculum.\nIn formal education, a curriculum is the set of courses and their content offered at a school or university. As an idea, curriculum stems from the Latin word for \"race course\", referring to the course of deeds and experiences through which children grow to become mature adults. A curriculum is prescriptive and is based on a more general syllabus which merely specifies what topics must be understood and to what level to achieve a particular grade or standard.\nAn academic discipline is a branch of knowledge which is formally taught, either at the university \u2013 or via some other such method. Each discipline usually has several sub-disciplines or branches, and distinguishing lines are often both arbitrary and ambiguous. Examples of broad areas of academic disciplines include the natural sciences, mathematics, computer science, social sciences, humanities and applied sciences.\nInstruction.\nInstruction is the facilitation of another's learning. Instructors in primary and secondary institutions are often called teachers, and they direct the education of students and might draw on many subjects like reading, writing, mathematics, science and history. Instructors in post-secondary institutions might be called teachers, instructors, or professors, depending on the type of institution; and they primarily teach only their specific discipline. Studies from the United States suggest that the quality of teachers is the single most important factor affecting student performance, and that countries which score highly on international tests have multiple policies in place to ensure that the teachers they employ are as effective as possible. With the passing of NCLB in the United States (No Child Left Behind), teachers must be highly qualified.\nEconomics.\nIt has been argued that high rates of education are essential for countries to be able to achieve high levels of economic growth. Empirical analyses tend to support the theoretical prediction that poor countries should grow faster than rich countries because they can adopt cutting-edge technologies already tried and tested by rich countries. However, technology transfer requires knowledgeable managers and engineers who are able to operate new machines or production practices borrowed from the leader in order to close the gap through imitation. Therefore, a country's ability to learn from the leader is a function of its stock of \"human capital\". Recent study of the determinants of aggregate economic growth have stressed the importance of fundamental economic institutions and the role of cognitive skills.\nAt the level of the individual, there is a large literature, generally related to the work of Jacob Mincer, on how earnings are related to the schooling and other human capital. This work has motivated many studies, but is also controversial. The chief controversies revolve around how to interpret the impact of schooling. Some students who have indicated a high potential for learning, by testing with a high intelligence quotient, may not achieve their full academic potential, due to financial difficulties.\nEconomists Samuel Bowles and Herbert Gintis argued in 1976 that there was a fundamental conflict in American schooling between the egalitarian goal of democratic participation and the inequalities implied by the continued profitability of capitalist production.\nDevelopment.\nThe world is changing at an ever quickening rate, which means that a lot of knowledge becomes obsolete and inaccurate more quickly. The emphasis is therefore shifting to teaching the skills of learning: to picking up new knowledge quickly and in as agile a way as possible. Finnish schools have begun to move away from the regular subject-focused curricula, introducing instead developments like phenomenon-based learning, where students study concepts like climate change instead. There are also active educational interventions to implement programs and paths specific to non-traditional students, such as first generation students.\nEducation is also becoming a commodity no longer reserved for children; adults need it too. Some governmental bodies, like the Finnish Innovation Fund Sitra in Finland, have proposed compulsory lifelong education.\nStudies found that automation is likely to eliminate nearly half the jobs in developed countries during roughly the next two decades. Automation is therefore considered to be a major factor in a \"race between education and technology\". Automation technologies and their application may render certain currently taught skills and knowledge redundant while increasing the need for other curricula \u2013 such as material related to the application of automation. It has been argued that formal education is \"teaching workers the wrong things, and that deep reform is essential to facilitate the development of digital knowledge and technical skills, as well as nonroutine cognitive and noncognitive (or \"soft\") skills\" and that the formal state-organized education system \u2013 which is built on the Industrial Revolution model and focuses on IQ and memorization is losing relevance. Furthermore, it has been argued that with contemporary education policy creativity is restricted, inquiry-based learning is not facilitated, education is not meeting the needs of knowledge economies and is largely not personalized to the students. Schools were found rarely teach in forms of \"learning by doing\", and many children above a certain age \"hate school\" in terms of the material and subjects being taught, with much of it being a \"waste of time\" that gets forgotten quickly and is useless in modern society. Moreover, the material currently being taught may not be taught in a highly time-efficient manner and analyzing educational issues over time and using relevant forms of student feedback in efficiency analysis were found to be important. Some research investigates how education can facilitate students' interest in topics \u2013 and jobs \u2013 that scientific research, data, economic players, financial markets, and other economic mechanisms consider important to contemporary and future human civilization and states.\nResearch and data indicate future environmental conditions will be \"far more dangerous than currently believed\", with a review concluding that the current challenges that humanity faces are enormous. The effective resolval of such challenges may require novel lesson plans tailored towards skills and knowledge found to be both required and reasonable to be taught at the respective age with the respective methodology despite novel technological computation and information retrieval technologies such as smartphones, mathematical software and the World Wide Web. Environmental education is not widely taught extensively or facilitated while being potentially important to the protection and generation of \u2013 often unquantified \u2013 economic value such as clean air that agents of the economy can breathe. Education is often considered to be a national investment which may not always optimize for cost-efficiency while optimizing only in terms of contemporary economic value metrics or evaluations such as of finance and GDP without consideration of economic values or priorizations beyond these tools such as minimized marine pollution and maximized climate change mitigation. Researchers found that there is a growing disconnect between humans and nature and that schools \"are not properly preparing students to become the scientists of tomorrow\".&lt;ref name=\"10.1126/science.aau3877\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; They also find that critical thought, social responsibility, health and safety are often neglected. According to UNESCO, \"for a country to meet the basic needs of its people, the teaching of science is a strategic imperative\".\nOne example of a skill not commonly taught in formal education systems around the world but increasingly critical to both the individuals' lives and modern society at large is digital media literacy \u2013 the ability to access, analyze, evaluate, create, and act using all forms of modern ICTs, with scientists calling for inclusion of it in curricula as well as for adult education.\nStudies have shown that active learning rarely applied in schools is highly efficacious. Studies found that massive open online courses offer a pathway to employment that currently bypasses conventional universities and their degree programs while often being more relevant to contemporary economic activities and the students' interests. Such online courses are not commonly part of formal education but are typically both completed and selected entirely on behalf of the student, sometimes with the support of peers over online forums. In contrast, blended learning merges online education with forms of face\u2010to\u2010face communication and traditional class-based education in classrooms, revealing itself to have the general capacity for increasingly relevant, resource-efficient and effective approaches to education. Deploying, using, and managing various tools or platforms for education typically imply an increase in economic investment. Expenses for education are often large with many calling for further increases. Potential policies for the development of international open source \u2013 and therefore noncommercial \u2013 educational software using latest technologies may minimize costs, hardware requirements, problem-resolval efforts and deployment-times while increasing robustness, security and functional features of the software.\nCOVID-19 pandemic.\nBeginning in early 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted education systems throughout the world, affecting nearly 1.6 billion learners in more than 190 countries. Closures of schools and other learning spaces have impacted 94 percent of the world's student population, up to 99 percent in low and lower-middle income countries. Many schools made alternative plans during the pandemic, leading to a variety of in-person, hybrid, and online-only plans, which led to challenges for many students, teachers, and families including children with learning disabilities and those learning in a language that is not their native one. As of September 30, 2020 there were 27 countries that had localized school closures. In the United States, an estimated 55.1 million students were forced to cease in-person instruction as of April 10, 2020. A switch to a virtual learning experience is particularly challenging for families that cannot afford the proper technology, such as laptops, printers, or a reliable Internet connection. When schools close, parents are often asked to facilitate the learning of children at home and can struggle to perform this task. This is especially true for parents with limited education and resources. Students who require special education found it difficult to progress through the curriculum without tools and support that they require. Polling suggests that schools that serve a majority of students of color are far less likely to have access to the technology needed for remote learning. Only 66% of Black households in the U.S. had home broadband service in 2019. Only 45% of Black Americans owned a desktop or laptop computer in 2015. Without access to the internet or a computer, Black parents are at a disadvantage in educating their children. The mental health of students has been greatly impacted due to the pandemic. It is estimated that three in ten participating in school at home have had their emotional and mental health negatively impacted. Similarly, the social lives of students have also been upended and this has been detrimental to the health of students worldwide which has also negatively impacted educational quality. This will be an issue for years to come. COVID-19 has shone a light on opportunity gaps and it will be up to educators and policymakers to direct the necessary resources to mitigating them in the coming years."}
{"id": "9253", "revid": "30792202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9253", "title": "Encyclopedia", "text": "An encyclopedia (American English), encyclop\u00e6dia, or encyclopaedia (British English) is a reference work or compendium providing summaries of knowledge either from all branches or from a particular field or discipline. Encyclopedias are divided into articles or entries that are often arranged alphabetically by article name and sometimes by thematic categories. Encyclopedia entries are longer and more detailed than those in most dictionaries. Generally speaking, unlike dictionary entries\u2014which focus on linguistic information about words, such as their etymology, meaning, pronunciation, use, and grammatical forms\u2014encyclopedia articles focus on factual information concerning the subject named in the article's title.\nEncyclopedias have existed for around 2,000 years and have evolved considerably during that time as regards to language (written in a major international or a vernacular language), size (few or many volumes), intent (presentation of a global or a limited range of knowledge), cultural perspective (authoritative, ideological, didactic, utilitarian), authorship (qualifications, style), readership (education level, background, interests, capabilities), and the technologies available for their production and distribution (hand-written manuscripts, small or large print runs, Internet). As a valued source of reliable information compiled by experts, printed versions found a prominent place in libraries, schools and other educational institutions.\nThe appearance of digital and open-source versions in the 21st century, such as Wikipedia, has vastly expanded the accessibility, authorship, readership, and variety of encyclopedia entries.\nEtymology.\nTwo Greek words misunderstood as one.\nThe word \"encyclopedia\" (\"encyclo\"|\"pedia\") comes from the Koine Greek , transliterated \"enkyklios paideia\", meaning \"general education\" from \"enkyklios\" (\u1f10\u03b3\u03ba\u03cd\u03ba\u03bb\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2), meaning \"circular, recurrent, required regularly, general\" and \"paideia\" (\u03c0\u03b1\u03b9\u03b4\u03b5\u03af\u03b1), meaning \"education, rearing of a child\"; together, the phrase literally translates as \"complete instruction\" or \"complete knowledge\". However, the two separate words were reduced to a single word due to a scribal error by copyists of a Latin manuscript edition of Quintillian in 1470. The copyists took this phrase to be a single Greek word, \"enkyklopaedia\", with the same meaning, and this spurious Greek word became the New Latin word \"encyclopaedia\", which in turn came into English. Because of this compounded word, fifteenth century readers and since have often, and incorrectly, thought that the Roman authors Quintillian and Pliny described an ancient genre.\nSixteenth century usage of the compounded word.\nIn the sixteenth century there was a level of ambiguity as to how to use this new word. As several titles illustrate, there was not a settled notion about its spelling nor its status as a noun. For example: Jacobus Philomusus's ' (1508); Johannes Aventinus's '; Joachimus Fortius Ringelbergius's ' (1538, 1541); Paul Skalich's ' (1559); Gregor Reisch's ' (1503, retitled Encyclopaedia in 1583); and Samuel Eisenmenger's ' (1585).\nThere have been two examples of the oldest vernacular use of the compounded word. In approximately 1490, Franciscus Puccius wrote a letter to Politianus thanking him for his \"Miscellanea\", calling it an encyclopedia. More commonly, Fran\u00e7ois Rabelais is cited for his use of the term in \"Pantagruel\" (1532).\nThe suffix \"-p(a)edia\" within portmanteau names.\nSome encyclop\u00e6dia projects have Portmanteau names, which include the suffix \"-p(a)edia\". The name Wikipedia, for example, is a portmanteau of the word \"wiki\", as in MediaWiki, and the word \"encyclopedia\".\nContemporary usage.\nIn American English, the word is most commonly spelled \"encyclopedia\", and in British English \"encyclop\u00e6dia\" or \"encyclopaedia\". \nCharacteristics.\nThe modern encyclopedia was developed from the dictionary in the 18th century. Historically, both encyclopedias and dictionaries have been researched and written by well-educated, well-informed content experts, but they are significantly different in structure. A dictionary is a linguistic work which primarily focuses on alphabetical listing of words and their definitions. Synonymous words and those related by the subject matter are to be found scattered around the dictionary, giving no obvious place for in-depth treatment. Thus, a dictionary typically provides limited information, analysis or background for the word defined. While it may offer a definition, it may leave the reader lacking in understanding the meaning, significance or limitations of a term, and how the term relates to a broader field of knowledge.\nTo address those needs, an encyclopedia article is typically not limited to simple definitions, and is not limited to defining an individual word, but provides a more extensive meaning for a \"subject or discipline\". In addition to defining and listing synonymous terms for the topic, the article is able to treat the topic's more extensive meaning in more depth and convey the most relevant accumulated knowledge on that subject. An encyclopedia article also often includes many maps and illustrations, as well as bibliography and statistics. An encyclopedia is, theoretically, not written in order to convince, although one of its goals is indeed to convince its reader of its own veracity.\nFour major elements define an encyclopedia: its subject matter, its scope, its method of organization, and its method of production:\nSome works entitled \"dictionaries\" are actually similar to encyclopedias, especially those concerned with a particular field (such as the \"Dictionary of the Middle Ages\", the \"Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships\", and \"Black's Law Dictionary\"). The \"Macquarie Dictionary,\" Australia's national dictionary, became an encyclopedic dictionary after its first edition in recognition of the use of proper nouns in common communication, and the words derived from such proper nouns.\nThere are some broad differences between encyclopedias and dictionaries. Most noticeably, encyclopedia articles are longer, fuller and more thorough than entries in most general-purpose dictionaries. There are differences in content as well. Generally speaking, dictionaries provide linguistic information about words themselves, while encyclopedias focus more on the thing for which those words stand. Thus, while dictionary entries are inextricably fixed to the word described, encyclopedia articles can be given a different entry name. As such, dictionary entries are not fully translatable into other languages, but encyclopedia articles can be.\nIn practice, however, the distinction is not concrete, as there is no clear-cut difference between factual, \"encyclopedic\" information and linguistic information such as appears in dictionaries. Thus encyclopedias may contain material that is also found in dictionaries, and vice versa. In particular, dictionary entries often contain factual information about the thing named by the word.\nHistory.\nEncyclopedias have progressed from written form in antiquity, to print in modern times. Today they can also be distributed and displayed electronically.\nAncient times.\nOne of the earliest encyclopedic works to have survived to modern times is the \"Naturalis Historiae\" of Pliny the Elder, a Roman statesman living in the first century AD. He compiled a work of 37 chapters covering natural history, architecture, medicine, geography, geology, and other aspects of the world around him. He stated in the preface that he had compiled 20,000 facts from 2000 works by over 200 authors, and added many others from his own experience. The work was published around AD 77\u201379, although Pliny probably never finished editing the work before his death in the eruption of Vesuvius in AD 79.\nMiddle Ages.\nIsidore of Seville, one of the greatest scholars of the early Middle Ages, is widely recognized for writing the first encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, the \"Etymologiae\" (\"The Etymologies\") or \"Origines\" (around 630), in which he compiled a sizable portion of the learning available at his time, both ancient and contemporary. The work has 448 chapters in 20 volumes, and is valuable because of the quotes and fragments of texts by other authors that would have been lost had he not collected them.\nThe most popular encyclopedia of the Carolingian Age was the \"De universo\" or \"De rerum naturis\" by Rabanus Maurus, written about 830; it was based on \"Etymologiae\".\nThe encyclopedia of Suda, a massive 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia, had 30 000 entries, many drawing from ancient sources that have since been lost, and often derived from medieval Christian compilers. The text was arranged alphabetically with some slight deviations from common vowel order and place in the Greek alphabet.\nThe early Muslim compilations of knowledge in the Middle Ages included many comprehensive works. Around year 960, the Brethren of Purity of Basra were engaged in their \"Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity\". Notable works include Abu Bakr al-Razi's encyclopedia of science, the Mutazilite Al-Kindi's prolific output of 270 books, and Ibn Sina's medical encyclopedia, which was a standard reference work for centuries. Also notable are works of universal history (or sociology) from Asharites, al-Tabri, al-Masudi, Tabari's \"History of the Prophets and Kings\", Ibn Rustah, al-Athir, and Ibn Khaldun, whose \"Muqadimmah\" contains cautions regarding trust in written records that remain wholly applicable today.\nThe enormous encyclopedic work in China of the \"Four Great Books of Song\", compiled by the 11th century during the early Song dynasty (960\u20131279), was a massive literary undertaking for the time. The last encyclopedia of the four, the \"Prime Tortoise of the Record Bureau\", amounted to 9.4\u00a0million Chinese characters in 1000 written volumes. The 'period of the encyclopedists' spanned from the tenth to seventeenth centuries, during which the government of China employed hundreds of scholars to assemble massive encyclopedias. The largest of which is the Yongle Encyclopedia; it was completed in 1408 and consisted of almost 23,000 folio volumes in manuscript form, the largest encyclopedia in history, until surpassed by Wikipedia in 2007.\nIn late medieval Europe, several authors had the ambition of compiling the sum of human knowledge in a certain field or overall, for example Bartholomew of England, Vincent of Beauvais, Radulfus Ardens, Sydrac, Brunetto Latini, Giovanni da Sangiminiano, Pierre Bersuire. Some were women, like Hildegard of Bingen and Herrad of Landsberg. The most successful of those publications were the \"Speculum Maius (Great Mirror)\" of Vincent of Beauvais and the \"De proprietatibus rerum (On the Properties of Things)\" by Bartholomew of England. The latter was translated (or adapted) into French, Proven\u00e7al, Italian, English, Flemish, Anglo-Norman, Spanish, and German during the Middle Ages. Both were written in the middle of the 13th century. No medieval encyclopedia bore the title \"Encyclopaedia\" \u2013 they were often called \"On nature (De natura, De naturis rerum)\", \"Mirror (Speculum maius, Speculum universale)\", \"Treasure (Tr\u00e9sor)\". The first encyclopedic work to adopt a single alphabetical order for entries across a variety of topics was the fourteenth-century \"Omne Bonum\", compiled by James le Palmer.\nRenaissance.\nMedieval encyclopedias were all hand-copied and thus available mostly to wealthy patrons or monastic men of learning; they were expensive, and usually written for those extending knowledge rather than those using it.\nIn 1493 Nuremberg Chronicle was produced, containing hundreds of illustrations, of historical figures, events and geographical places. Written as an encyclopedic chronicle, it remains one of the best-documented early printed books\u2014an incunabulum\u2014and one of the first to successfully integrate illustrations and text. Illustrations depicted many never before illustrated major cities in Europe and the Near East. 645 original woodcuts were used for the illustrations.\nDuring the Renaissance, the creation of printing allowed a wider diffusion of encyclopedias and every scholar could have his or her own copy. The \"\" by Giorgio Valla was posthumously printed in 1501 by Aldo Manuzio in Venice. This work followed the traditional scheme of liberal arts. However, Valla added the translation of ancient Greek works on mathematics (firstly by Archimedes), newly discovered and translated. The \"Margarita Philosophica\" by Gregor Reisch, printed in 1503, was a complete encyclopedia explaining the seven liberal arts.\nThe term \"encyclopaedia\" was coined by 16th-century humanists who misread copies of their texts of Pliny and Quintilian, and combined the two Greek words \"enkyklios paedia\" into one word, \u03ad\u03b3\u03ba\u03c5\u03ba\u03bb\u03bf\u03c0\u03b1\u03b9\u03b4\u03b5\u03af\u03b1. The phrase \"enkyklios paedia\" (\u1f10\u03b3\u03ba\u03cd\u03ba\u03bb\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \u03c0\u03b1\u03b9\u03b4\u03b5\u03af\u03b1) was used by Plutarch and the Latin word encyclopaedia came from him.\nThe first work titled in this way was the \"Encyclopedia orbisque doctrinarum, hoc est omnium artium, scientiarum, ipsius philosophiae index ac divisio\" written by Johannes Aventinus in 1517.\nThe English physician and philosopher, Sir Thomas Browne used the word 'encyclopaedia' in 1646 in the preface to the reader to define his \"Pseudodoxia Epidemica\", a major work of the 17th-century scientific revolution. Browne structured his encyclopaedia upon the time-honoured scheme of the Renaissance, the so-called 'scale of creation' which ascends through the mineral, vegetable, animal, human, planetary, and cosmological worlds. \"Pseudodoxia Epidemica\" was a European best-seller, translated into French, Dutch, and German as well as Latin it went through no fewer than five editions, each revised and augmented, the last edition appearing in 1672.\nFinancial, commercial, legal, and intellectual factors changed the size of encyclopedias. During the Renaissance, middle classes had more time to read and encyclopedias helped them to learn more. Publishers wanted to increase their output so some countries like Germany started selling books missing alphabetical sections, to publish faster. Also, publishers could not afford all the resources by themselves, so multiple publishers would come together with their resources to create better encyclopedias. When publishing at the same rate became financially impossible, they turned to subscriptions and serial publications. This was risky for publishers because they had to find people who would pay all upfront or make payments. When this worked, capital would rise and there would be a steady income for encyclopedias. Later, rivalry grew, causing copyright to occur due to weak underdeveloped laws. Some publishers would copy another publisher's work to produce an encyclopedia faster and cheaper so consumers did not have to pay a lot and they would sell more. Encyclopedias made it to where middle-class citizens could basically have a small library in their own house. Europeans were becoming more curious about their society around them causing them to revolt against their government.\nTraditional encyclopedias.\nThe beginnings of the modern idea of the general-purpose, widely distributed printed encyclopedia precede the 18th century encyclopedists. However, Chambers' \"Cyclopaedia, or Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences\" (1728), and the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" of Denis Diderot (1750) and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1751 onwards), as well as \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" (1768) and the \"Conversations-Lexikon\", were the first to realize the form we would recognize today, with a comprehensive scope of topics, discussed in depth and organized in an accessible, systematic method. Chambers, in 1728, followed the earlier lead of John Harris's \"Lexicon Technicum\" of 1704 and later editions (see also below); this work was by its title and content \"A Universal English Dictionary of Arts and Sciences: Explaining not only the Terms of Art, but the Arts Themselves\".\nPopular and affordable encyclopedias such as \"Harmsworth's Universal Encyclopaedia\" and the \"Children's Encyclopaedia\" appeared in the early 1920s.\nIn the United States, the 1950s and 1960s saw the introduction of several large popular encyclopedias, often sold on installment plans. The best known of these were \"World Book\" and \"Funk and Wagnalls\". As many as 90% were sold door to door. Jack Lynch says in his book \"You Could Look It Up\" that encyclopedia salespeople were so common that they became the butt of jokes. He describes their sales pitch saying, \"They were selling not books but a lifestyle, a future, a promise of social mobility.\" A 1961 \"World Book\" ad said, \"You are holding your family\u2019s future in your hands right now,\" while showing a feminine hand holding an order form.\nThe second half of the 20th century also saw the proliferation of specialized encyclopedias that compiled topics in specific fields, mainly to support specific industries and professionals. This trend has continued. Encyclopedias of at least one volume in size now exist for most if not all academic disciplines, including such narrow topics such as bioethics.\nRise of digital and online encyclopedias.\nBy the late 20th century, encyclopedias were being published on CD-ROMs for use with personal computers. Microsoft's \"Encarta\", published between 1993 and 2009, was a landmark example as it had no printed equivalent. Articles were supplemented with both video and audio files as well as numerous high-quality images.\nDigital technologies and online crowdsourcing allowed encyclopedias to break away from traditional limitations in both breadth and depth of topics covered. Wikipedia, a crowd-sourced, multilingual, open licence, free online encyclopedia supported by the non-profit Wikimedia Foundation and open source MediaWiki software opened in 2001. Unlike commercial online encyclopedias such as \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" Online, which are written by experts, Wikipedia is collaboratively created and maintained by volunteer editors, organized by collaboratively agreed guidelines and user-roles. Most contributors use pseudonyms and stay anonymous. Content is therefore reviewed, checked, kept or removed based on its own intrinsic value and external sources supporting it.\nTraditional encyclopedias' reliability, on their side, stand upon authorship and associated professional expertise. Many academics, teachers, and journalists rejected and continue to reject open, crowd sourced encyclopedias, especially Wikipedia, as a reliable source of information, and Wikipedia is itself not a reliable source according to its own standards because of its openly editable and anonymous crowdsourcing model. A study by \"Nature\" in 2005 found that Wikipedia's science articles were roughly comparable in accuracy to those of \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", containing the same number of serious errors and about 1/3 more minor factual inaccuracies, but that Wikipedia's writing tended to be confusing and less readable. \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" rejected the study's conclusions, deeming the study fatally flawed. As of February 2014, Wikipedia had 18\u00a0billion page views and nearly 500\u00a0million unique visitors each month. Critics argue Wikipedia exhibits systemic bias.\nThere are several much smaller, usually more specialized, encyclopedias on various themes, sometimes dedicated to a specific geographic region or time period. One example is the \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\".\nLargest encyclopedias.\nAs of the early 2020s, the largest encyclopedias are the Chinese Baidu Baike (16\u00a0million articles) and Hudong Baike (13\u00a0million), followed by Wikipedias for English (6\u00a0million), German (+2\u00a0million) and French (+2\u00a0million), all of which are wholly online. More than a dozen other Wikipedias have 1\u00a0million articles or more, of variable quality and length. Measuring an encyclopedia's size by its articles is an ambiguous method since the online Chinese encyclopedias cited above allow multiple articles on the same topic, while Wikipedias accept only one single common article per topic but allow automated creation of nearly empty articles."}
{"id": "9256", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9256", "title": "Enigma machine", "text": "The Enigma machine is a cipher device developed and used in the early- to mid-20th century to protect commercial, diplomatic, and military communication. It was employed extensively by Nazi Germany during World War II, in all branches of the German military. The Germans believed, erroneously, that use of the Enigma machine enabled them to communicate securely and thus enjoy a huge advantage in World War II. The Enigma machine was considered to be so secure that even the most top-secret messages were enciphered on its electrical circuits.\nEnigma has an electromechanical rotor mechanism that scrambles the 26 letters of the alphabet. In typical use, one person enters text on the Enigma's keyboard and another person writes down which of 26 lights above the keyboard lights up at each key press. If plain text is entered, the lit-up letters are the encoded ciphertext. Entering ciphertext transforms it back into readable plaintext. The rotor mechanism changes the electrical connections between the keys and the lights with each keypress. The security of the system depends on a set of machine settings that were generally changed daily during the war, based on secret key lists distributed in advance, and on other settings that were changed for each message. The receiving station has to know and use the exact settings employed by the transmitting station to successfully decrypt a message.\nWhile Nazi Germany introduced a series of improvements to Enigma over the years, and these hampered decryption efforts to varying degrees, they did not prevent Poland from cracking the machine prior to the war, enabling the Allies to exploit Enigma-enciphered messages as a major source of intelligence. Many commentators say the flow of Ultra communications intelligence from the decryption of Enigma, Lorenz, and other ciphers, shortened the war substantially, and might even have altered its outcome.\nHistory.\nThe Enigma machine was invented by the German engineer Arthur Scherbius at the end of World War I. This was unknown until 2003 when a paper by Karl de Leeuw was found that described in detail Arthur Scherbius' changes. The German firm Scherbius &amp; Ritter, co-founded by Arthur Scherbius, patented ideas for a cipher machine in 1918 and began marketing the finished product under the brand name \"Enigma\" in 1923, initially targeted at commercial markets. The name is said to be from the \"Enigma Variations\" of English composer Edward Elgar. Early models were used commercially from the early 1920s, and adopted by military and government services of several countries, most notably Nazi Germany before and during World War II.\nSeveral different Enigma models were produced, but the German military models, having a plugboard, were the most complex. Japanese and Italian models were also in use. With its adoption (in slightly modified form) by the German Navy in 1926 and the German Army and Air Force soon after, the name \"Enigma\" became widely known in military circles. Pre-war German military planning emphasized fast, mobile forces and tactics, later known as blitzkrieg, which depend on radio communication for command and coordination. Since adversaries would likely intercept radio signals, messages had to be protected with secure encipherment. Compact and easily portable, the Enigma machine filled that need.\nBreaking Enigma.\nAround December 1932, Marian Rejewski, a Polish mathematician and cryptanalyst, while working at the Polish Cipher Bureau, used the theory of permutations and flaws in the German military message encipherment procedures to break the message keys of the plugboard Enigma machine. Rejewski achieved this result without knowledge of the wiring of the machine, so the result did not allow the Poles to decrypt actual messages. The French spy Hans-Thilo Schmidt obtained access to German cipher materials that included the daily keys used in September and October 1932. Those keys included the plugboard settings. The French passed the material to the Poles, and Rejewski used some of that material and the message traffic in September and October to solve for the unknown rotor wiring. Consequently, the Polish mathematicians were able to build their own Enigma machines, which were called Enigma doubles. Rejewski was aided by cryptanalysts Jerzy R\u00f3\u017cycki and Henryk Zygalski, both of whom had been recruited with Rejewski from Pozna\u0144 University. The Polish Cipher Bureau developed techniques to defeat the plugboard and find all components of the daily key, which enabled the Cipher Bureau to read German Enigma messages starting from January 1933. Over time, the German cryptographic procedures improved, and the Cipher Bureau developed techniques and designed mechanical devices to continue reading Enigma traffic. As part of that effort, the Poles exploited quirks of the rotors, compiled catalogues, built a cyclometer to help make a catalogue with 100,000 entries, invented and produced Zygalski sheets and built the electro-mechanical cryptologic \"bomba\" to search for rotor settings. In 1938, the Germans added complexity to the Enigma machines, leading to a situation that became too expensive for the Poles to counter. The Poles had six such \"bomby\" (plural of \"bomba\"), but when the Germans added two more rotors, ten times as many \"bomby\" were then needed, and the Poles did not have the resources. \u201cThere was no exact pattern in it which made it especially difficult to break.\"\nOn 26 and 27 July 1939, in Pyry near Warsaw, the Poles initiated French and British military intelligence representatives into their Enigma-decryption techniques and equipment, including Zygalski sheets and the cryptologic bomb, and promised each delegation a Polish-reconstructed Enigma. The demonstration represented a vital basis for the later British continuation and effort.\nIn September 1939, British Military Mission 4, which included Colin Gubbins and Vera Atkins, went to Poland to evacuate code-breakers Gwido Langer, Marian Rejewski, Jerzy R\u00f3\u017cycki and Henryk Zygalski from the country with their replica Enigma machines. The Poles were taken across the border into Atkins' native Romania, at the time a neutral country where some of them were interned. Atkins arranged for their release and onward travel to Western Europe to advise the French and British, who at the time were still unable to decrypt German messages.\nGordon Welchman, who became head of Hut 6 at Bletchley Park, has written: \"Hut 6 Ultra would never have gotten off the ground if we had not learned from the Poles, in the nick of time, the details both of the German military version of the commercial Enigma machine, and of the operating procedures that were in use.\"\nDuring the war, British cryptologists decrypted a vast number of messages enciphered on Enigma. The intelligence gleaned from this source, codenamed \"Ultra\" by the British, was a substantial aid to the Allied war effort.\nThough Enigma had some cryptographic weaknesses, in practice it was German procedural flaws, operator mistakes, failure to systematically introduce changes in encipherment procedures, and Allied capture of key tables and hardware that, during the war, enabled Allied cryptologists to succeed and \"turned the tide\" in the Allies' favour.\nDesign.\nLike other rotor machines, the Enigma machine is a combination of mechanical and electrical subsystems. The mechanical subsystem consists of a keyboard; a set of rotating disks called \"rotors\" arranged adjacently along a spindle; one of various stepping components to turn at least one rotor with each key press, and a series of lamps, one for each letter. These design features are the reason that the Enigma machine was originally referred to as the rotor-based cipher machine during its intellectual inception in 1915.\nElectrical pathway.\nAn electrical pathway is a route for current to travel. By manipulating this phenomenon the Enigma machine was able to scramble messages. The mechanical parts act by forming a varying electrical circuit. When a key is pressed, one or more rotors rotate on the spindle. On the sides of the rotors are a series of electrical contacts that, after rotation, line up with contacts on the other rotors or fixed wiring on either end of the spindle. When the rotors are properly aligned, each key on the keyboard is connected to a unique electrical pathway through the series of contacts and internal wiring. Current, typically from a battery, flows through the pressed key, into the newly configured set of circuits and back out again, ultimately lighting one display lamp, which shows the output letter. For example, when encrypting a message starting \"ANX...\", the operator would first press the \"A\" key, and the \"Z\" lamp might light, so \"Z\" would be the first letter of the ciphertext. The operator would next press \"N\", and then \"X\" in the same fashion, and so on.\nCurrent flows from the battery (1) through a depressed bi-directional keyboard switch (2) to the plugboard (3). Next, it passes through the (unused in this instance, so shown closed) plug \"A\" (3) via the entry wheel (4), through the wiring of the three (Wehrmacht Enigma) or four (\"Kriegsmarine\" M4 and \"Abwehr\" variants) installed rotors (5), and enters the reflector (6). The reflector returns the current, via an entirely different path, back through the rotors (5) and entry wheel (4), proceeding through plug \"S\" (7) connected with a cable (8) to plug \"D\", and another bi-directional switch (9) to light the appropriate lamp.\nThe repeated changes of electrical path through an Enigma scrambler implement a polyalphabetic substitution cipher that provides Enigma's security. The diagram on the right shows how the electrical pathway changes with each key depression, which causes rotation of at least the right-hand rotor. Current passes into the set of rotors, into and back out of the reflector, and out through the rotors again. The greyed-out lines are other possible paths within each rotor; these are hard-wired from one side of each rotor to the other. The letter \"A\" encrypts differently with consecutive key presses, first to \"G\", and then to \"C\". This is because the right-hand rotor steps (rotates one position) on each key press, sending the signal on a completely different route. Eventually other rotors step with a key press.\nRotors.\nThe rotors (alternatively \"wheels\" or \"drums\", \"Walzen\" in German) form the heart of an Enigma machine. Each rotor is a disc approximately in diameter made from Ebonite or Bakelite with 26 brass, spring-loaded, electrical contact pins arranged in a circle on one face, with the other face housing 26 corresponding electrical contacts in the form of circular plates. The pins and contacts represent the alphabet\u00a0\u2014 typically the 26 letters A\u2013Z, as will be assumed for the rest of this description. When the rotors are mounted side by side on the spindle, the pins of one rotor rest against the plate contacts of the neighbouring rotor, forming an electrical connection. Inside the body of the rotor, 26 wires connect each pin on one side to a contact on the other in a complex pattern. Most of the rotors are identified by Roman numerals, and each issued copy of rotor I, for instance, is wired identically to all others. The same is true for the special thin beta and gamma rotors used in the M4 naval variant.\nBy itself, a rotor performs only a very simple type of encryption, a simple substitution cipher. For example, the pin corresponding to the letter \"E\" might be wired to the contact for letter \"T\" on the opposite face, and so on. Enigma's security comes from using several rotors in series (usually three or four) and the regular stepping movement of the rotors, thus implementing a polyalphabetic substitution cipher.\nEach rotor can be set to one of 26 possible starting positions when placed in an Enigma machine. After insertion, a rotor can be turned to the correct position by hand, using the grooved finger-wheel which protrudes from the internal Enigma cover when closed. In order for the operator to know the rotor's position, each has an \"alphabet tyre\" (or letter ring) attached to the outside of the rotor disc, with 26 characters (typically letters); one of these is visible through the window for that slot in the cover, thus indicating the rotational position of the rotor. In early models, the alphabet ring was fixed to the rotor disc. A later improvement was the ability to adjust the alphabet ring relative to the rotor disc. The position of the ring was known as the \"Ringstellung\" (\"ring setting\"), and that setting was a part of the initial setup needed prior to an operating session. In modern terms it was a part of the initialization vector.\nEach rotor contains one or more notches that control rotor stepping. In the military variants, the notches are located on the alphabet ring.\nThe Army and Air Force Enigmas were used with several rotors, initially three. On 15 December 1938, this changed to five, from which three were chosen for a given session. Rotors were marked with Roman numerals to distinguish them: I, II, III, IV and V, all with single notches located at different points on the alphabet ring. This variation was probably intended as a security measure, but ultimately allowed the Polish Clock Method and British Banburismus attacks.\nThe Naval version of the \"Wehrmacht\" Enigma had always been issued with more rotors than the other services: At first six, then seven, and finally eight. The additional rotors were marked VI, VII and VIII, all with different wiring, and had two notches, resulting in more frequent turnover. The four-rotor Naval Enigma (M4) machine accommodated an extra rotor in the same space as the three-rotor version. This was accomplished by replacing the original reflector with a thinner one and by adding a thin fourth rotor. That fourth rotor was one of two types, \"Beta\" or \"Gamma\", and never stepped, but could be manually set to any of 26 positions. One of the 26 made the machine perform identically to the three-rotor machine.\nStepping.\nTo avoid merely implementing a simple (solvable) substitution cipher, every key press caused one or more rotors to step by one twenty-sixth of a full rotation, before the electrical connections were made. This changed the substitution alphabet used for encryption, ensuring that the cryptographic substitution was different at each new rotor position, producing a more formidable polyalphabetic substitution cipher. The stepping mechanism varied slightly from model to model. The right-hand rotor stepped once with each keystroke, and other rotors stepped less frequently.\nTurnover.\nThe advancement of a rotor other than the left-hand one was called a \"turnover\" by the British. This was achieved by a ratchet and pawl mechanism. Each rotor had a ratchet with 26 teeth and every time a key was pressed, the set of spring-loaded pawls moved forward in unison, trying to engage with a ratchet. The alphabet ring of the rotor to the right normally prevented this. As this ring rotated with its rotor, a notch machined into it would eventually align itself with the pawl, allowing it to engage with the ratchet, and advance the rotor on its left. The right-hand pawl, having no rotor and ring to its right, stepped its rotor with every key depression. For a single-notch rotor in the right-hand position, the middle rotor stepped once for every 26 steps of the right-hand rotor. Similarly for rotors two and three. For a two-notch rotor, the rotor to its left would turn over twice for each rotation.\nThe first five rotors to be introduced (I\u2013V) contained one notch each, while the additional naval rotors VI, VII and VIII each had two notches. The position of the notch on each rotor was determined by the letter ring which could be adjusted in relation to the core containing the interconnections. The points on the rings at which they caused the next wheel to move were as follows.\nThe design also included a feature known as \"double-stepping\". This occurred when each pawl aligned with both the ratchet of its rotor and the rotating notched ring of the neighbouring rotor. If a pawl engaged with a ratchet through alignment with a notch, as it moved forward it pushed against both the ratchet and the notch, advancing both rotors. In a three-rotor machine, double-stepping affected rotor two only. If, in moving forward, the ratchet of rotor three was engaged, rotor two would move again on the subsequent keystroke, resulting in two consecutive steps. Rotor two also pushes rotor one forward after 26 steps, but since rotor one moves forward with every keystroke anyway, there is no double-stepping. This double-stepping caused the rotors to deviate from odometer-style regular motion.\nWith three wheels and only single notches in the first and second wheels, the machine had a period of 26\u00d725\u00d726\u00a0= 16,900 (not 26\u00d726\u00d726, because of double-stepping). Historically, messages were limited to a few hundred letters, and so there was no chance of repeating any combined rotor position during a single session, denying cryptanalysts valuable clues.\nTo make room for the Naval fourth rotors, the reflector was made much thinner. The fourth rotor fitted into the space made available. No other changes were made, which eased the changeover. Since there were only three pawls, the fourth rotor never stepped, but could be manually set into one of 26 possible positions.\nA device that was designed, but not implemented before the war's end, was the \"L\u00fcckenf\u00fcllerwalze\" (gap-fill wheel) that implemented irregular stepping. It allowed field configuration of notches in all 26 positions. If the number of notches was a relative prime of 26 and the number of notches were different for each wheel, the stepping would be more unpredictable. Like the Umkehrwalze-D it also allowed the internal wiring to be reconfigured.\nEntry wheel.\nThe current entry wheel (\"Eintrittswalze\" in German), or entry stator, connects the plugboard to the rotor assembly. If the plugboard is not present, the entry wheel instead connects the keyboard and lampboard to the rotor assembly. While the exact wiring used is of comparatively little importance to security, it proved an obstacle to Rejewski's progress during his study of the rotor wirings. The commercial Enigma connects the keys in the order of their sequence on a QWERTZ keyboard: \"Q\"\u2192\"A\", \"W\"\u2192\"B\", \"E\"\u2192\"C\" and so on. The military Enigma connects them in straight alphabetical order: \"A\"\u2192\"A\", \"B\"\u2192\"B\", \"C\"\u2192\"C\", and so on. It took inspired guesswork for Rejewski to penetrate the modification.\nReflector.\nWith the exception of models \"A\" and \"B\", the last rotor came before a 'reflector' (German: \"Umkehrwalze\", meaning 'reversal rotor'), a patented feature unique to Enigma among the period's various rotor machines. The reflector connected outputs of the last rotor in pairs, redirecting current back through the rotors by a different route. The reflector ensured that Enigma would be self-reciprocal; thus, with two identically configured machines, a message could be encrypted on one and decrypted on the other, without the need for a bulky mechanism to switch between encryption and decryption modes. The reflector allowed a more compact design, but it also gave Enigma the property that no letter ever encrypted to itself. This was a severe cryptological flaw that was subsequently exploited by codebreakers.\nIn Model 'C', the reflector could be inserted in one of two different positions. In Model 'D', the reflector could be set in 26 possible positions, although it did not move during encryption. In the \"Abwehr\" Enigma, the reflector stepped during encryption in a manner similar to the other wheels.\nIn the German Army and Air Force Enigma, the reflector was fixed and did not rotate; there were four versions. The original version was marked 'A', and was replaced by \"Umkehrwalze B\" on 1 November 1937. A third version, \"Umkehrwalze C\" was used briefly in 1940, possibly by mistake, and was solved by Hut 6. The fourth version, first observed on 2 January 1944, had a rewireable reflector, called \"Umkehrwalze D\", nick-named Uncle Dick by the British, allowing the Enigma operator to alter the connections as part of the key settings.\nPlugboard.\nThe plugboard (\"Steckerbrett\" in German) permitted variable wiring that could be reconfigured by the operator (visible on the front panel of Figure 1; some of the patch cords can be seen in the lid). It was introduced on German Army versions in 1930, and was soon adopted by the \"Reichsmarine\" (German Navy). The plugboard contributed more cryptographic strength than an extra rotor. Enigma without a plugboard (known as \"unsteckered Enigma\") could be solved relatively straightforwardly using hand methods; these techniques were generally defeated by the plugboard, driving Allied cryptanalysts to develop special machines to solve it.\nA cable placed onto the plugboard connected letters in pairs; for example, \"E\" and \"Q\" might be a steckered pair. The effect was to swap those letters before and after the main rotor scrambling unit. For example, when an operator pressed \"E\", the signal was diverted to \"Q\" before entering the rotors. Up to 13 steckered pairs might be used at one time, although only 10 were normally used.\nCurrent flowed from the keyboard through the plugboard, and proceeded to the entry-rotor or \"Eintrittswalze\". Each letter on the plugboard had two jacks. Inserting a plug disconnected the upper jack (from the keyboard) and the lower jack (to the entry-rotor) of that letter. The plug at the other end of the crosswired cable was inserted into another letter's jacks, thus switching the connections of the two letters.\nAccessories.\nOther features made various Enigma machines more secure or more convenient.\n\"Schreibmax\".\nSome M4 Enigmas used the \"Schreibmax\", a small printer that could print the 26 letters on a narrow paper ribbon. This eliminated the need for a second operator to read the lamps and transcribe the letters. The \"Schreibmax\" was placed on top of the Enigma machine and was connected to the lamp panel. To install the printer, the lamp cover and light bulbs had to be removed. It improved both convenience and operational security; the printer could be installed remotely such that the signal officer operating the machine no longer had to see the decrypted plaintext.\n\"Fernleseger\u00e4t\".\nAnother accessory was the remote lamp panel \"Fernleseger\u00e4t\". For machines equipped with the extra panel, the wooden case of the Enigma was wider and could store the extra panel. A lamp panel version could be connected afterwards, but that required, as with the \"Schreibmax\", that the lamp panel and light bulbs be removed. The remote panel made it possible for a person to read the decrypted plaintext without the operator seeing it.\n\"Uhr\".\nIn 1944, the \"Luftwaffe\" introduced a plugboard switch, called the \"Uhr\" (clock), a small box containing a switch with 40 positions. It replaced the standard plugs. After connecting the plugs, as determined in the daily key sheet, the operator turned the switch into one of the 40 positions, each producing a different combination of plug wiring. Most of these plug connections were, unlike the default plugs, not pair-wise. In one switch position, the \"Uhr\" did not swap letters, but simply emulated the 13 stecker wires with plugs.\nMathematical analysis.\nThe Enigma transformation for each letter can be specified mathematically as a product of permutations. Assuming a three-rotor German Army/Air Force Enigma, let denote the plugboard transformation, denote that of the reflector, and , , denote those of the left, middle and right rotors respectively. Then the encryption can be expressed as\nAfter each key press, the rotors turn, changing the transformation. For example, if the right-hand rotor is rotated positions, the transformation becomes\nwhere is the cyclic permutation mapping A to B, B to C, and so forth. Similarly, the middle and left-hand rotors can be represented as and rotations of and . The encryption transformation can then be described as\nCombining three rotors from a set of five, each of the 3 rotor settings with 26 positions, and the plugboard with ten pairs of letters connected, the military Enigma has 158,962,555,217,826,360,000 different settings (nearly 159 quintillion or about 67 bits).\nNote that (5x4x3) x (26^3) x [26! / (6! x 10! x 2^10)] = 158,962,555,217,826,360,000 \u2248 267.1\nOperation.\nBasic operation.\nA German Enigma operator would be given a plaintext message to encrypt. After setting up his machine, he would type the message on the Enigma keyboard. For each letter pressed, one lamp lit indicating a different letter according to a pseudo-random substitution determined by the electrical pathways inside the machine. The letter indicated by the lamp would be recorded, typically by a second operator, as the cyphertext letter. The action of pressing a key also moved one or more rotors so that the next key press used a different electrical pathway, and thus a different substitution would occur even if the same plaintext letter were entered again. For each key press there was rotation of at least the right hand rotor and less often the other two, resulting in a different substitution alphabet being used for every letter in the message. This process continued until the message was completed. The cyphertext recorded by the second operator would then be transmitted, usually by radio in Morse code, to an operator of another Enigma machine. This operator would type in the cyphertext and\u00a0\u2014 as long as all the settings of the deciphering machine were identical to those of the enciphering machine\u00a0\u2014 for every key press the reverse substitution would occur and the plaintext message would emerge.\nDetails.\nIn use, the Enigma required a list of daily key settings and auxiliary documents. In German military practice, communications were divided into separate networks, each using different settings. These communication nets were termed \"keys\" at Bletchley Park, and were assigned code names, such as \"Red\", \"Chaffinch\", and \"Shark\". Each unit operating in a network was given the same settings list for its Enigma, valid for a period of time. The procedures for German Naval Enigma were more elaborate and more secure than those in other services and employed auxiliary codebooks. Navy codebooks were printed in red, water-soluble ink on pink paper so that they could easily be destroyed if they were endangered or if the vessel was sunk.\nAn Enigma machine's setting (its cryptographic key in modern terms; \"Schl\u00fcssel\" in German) specified each operator-adjustable aspect of the machine:\nFor a message to be correctly encrypted and decrypted, both sender and receiver had to configure their Enigma in the same way; rotor selection and order, ring positions, plugboard connections and starting rotor positions must be identical. Except for the starting positions, these settings were established beforehand, distributed in key lists and changed daily. For example, the settings for the 18th day of the month in the German Luftwaffe Enigma key list number 649 (see image) were as follows:\nEnigma was designed to be secure even if the rotor wiring was known to an opponent, although in practice considerable effort protected the wiring configuration. If the wiring is secret, the total number of possible configurations has been calculated to be around (approximately 380 bits); with known wiring and other operational constraints, this is reduced to around (76 bits). Because of the large number of possibilities, users of Enigma were confident of its security; it was not then feasible for an adversary to even begin to try a brute-force attack.\nIndicator.\nMost of the key was kept constant for a set time period, typically a day. A different initial rotor position was used for each message, a concept similar to an initialisation vector in modern cryptography. The reason is that encrypting many messages with identical or near-identical settings (termed in cryptanalysis as being \"in depth\"), would enable an attack using a statistical procedure such as Friedman's Index of coincidence. The starting position for the rotors was transmitted just before the ciphertext, usually after having been enciphered. The exact method used was termed the \"indicator procedure\". Design weakness and operator sloppiness in these indicator procedures were two of the main weaknesses that made cracking Enigma possible.\nOne of the earliest \"indicator procedures\" for the Enigma was cryptographically flawed and allowed Polish cryptanalysts to make the initial breaks into the plugboard Enigma. The procedure had the operator set his machine in accordance with the secret settings that all operators on the net shared. The settings included an initial position for the rotors (the \"Grundstellung\"), say, \"AOH\". The operator turned his rotors until \"AOH\" was visible through the rotor windows. At that point, the operator chose his own arbitrary starting position for the message he would send. An operator might select \"EIN\", and that became the \"message setting\" for that encryption session. The operator then typed \"EIN\" into the machine twice, this producing the encrypted indicator, for example \"XHTLOA\". This was then transmitted, at which point the operator would turn the rotors to his message settings, \"EIN\" in this example, and then type the plaintext of the message.\nAt the receiving end, the operator set the machine to the initial settings (\"AOH\") and typed in the first six letters of the message (\"XHTLOA\"). In this example, \"EINEIN\" emerged on the lamps, so the operator would learn the \"message setting\" that the sender used to encrypt this message. The receiving operator would set his rotors to \"EIN\", type in the rest of the ciphertext, and get the deciphered message.\nThis indicator scheme had two weaknesses. First, the use of a global initial position (\"Grundstellung\") meant all message keys used the same polyalphabetic substitution. In later indicator procedures, the operator selected his initial position for encrypting the indicator and sent that initial position in the clear. The second problem was the repetition of the indicator, which was a serious security flaw. The message setting was encoded twice, resulting in a relation between first and fourth, second and fifth, and third and sixth character. These security flaws enabled the Polish Cipher Bureau to break into the pre-war Enigma system as early as 1932. The early indicator procedure was subsequently described by German cryptanalysts as the \"faulty indicator technique\".\nDuring World War II, codebooks were only used each day to set up the rotors, their ring settings and the plugboard. For each message, the operator selected a random start position, let's say \"WZA\", and a random message key, perhaps \"SXT\". He moved the rotors to the \"WZA\" start position and encoded the message key \"SXT\". Assume the result was \"UHL\". He then set up the message key, \"SXT\", as the start position and encrypted the message. Next, he transmitted the start position, \"WZA\", the encoded message key, \"UHL\", and then the ciphertext. The receiver set up the start position according to the first trigram, \"WZA\", and decoded the second trigram, \"UHL\", to obtain the \"SXT\" message setting. Next, he used this \"SXT\" message setting as the start position to decrypt the message. This way, each ground setting was different and the new procedure avoided the security flaw of double encoded message settings.\nThis procedure was used by \"Wehrmacht\" and \"Luftwaffe\" only. The \"Kriegsmarine\" procedures on sending messages with the Enigma were far more complex and elaborate. Prior to encryption the message was encoded using the \"Kurzsignalheft\" code book. The \"Kurzsignalheft\" contained tables to convert sentences into four-letter groups. A great many choices were included, for example, logistic matters such as refuelling and rendezvous with supply ships, positions and grid lists, harbour names, countries, weapons, weather conditions, enemy positions and ships, date and time tables. Another codebook contained the \"Kenngruppen\" and \"Spruchschl\u00fcssel\": the key identification and message key.\nAdditional details.\nThe Army Enigma machine used only the 26 alphabet characters. Punctuation was replaced with rare character combinations. A space was omitted or replaced with an X. The X was generally used as full-stop.\nSome punctuation marks were different in other parts of the armed forces. The \"Wehrmacht\" replaced a comma with ZZ and the question mark with FRAGE or FRAQ.\nThe \"Kriegsmarine\" replaced the comma with Y and the question mark with UD. The combination CH, as in \"\"Acht\" (eight) or \"Richtung\"\" (direction), was replaced with Q (AQT, RIQTUNG). Two, three and four zeros were replaced with CENTA, MILLE and MYRIA.\nThe \"Wehrmacht\" and the \"Luftwaffe\" transmitted messages in groups of five characters.\nThe \"Kriegsmarine\", using the four rotor Enigma, had four-character groups. Frequently used names or words were varied as much as possible. Words like \"Minensuchboot\" (minesweeper) could be written as MINENSUCHBOOT, MINBOOT, MMMBOOT or MMM354. To make cryptanalysis harder, messages were limited to 250 characters. Longer messages were divided into several parts, each using a different message key.\nExample encoding process.\nThe character substitutions by the Enigma machine as a whole can be expressed as a string of letters with each position occupied by the character that will replace the character at the corresponding position in the alphabet. For example, a given machine configuration that encoded A to L, B to U, C to S, ..., and Z to J could be represented compactly as\n LUSHQOXDMZNAIKFREPCYBWVGTJ\nand the encoding of a particular character by that configuration could be represented by highlighting the encoded character as in\n D &gt; LUS(H)QOXDMZNAIKFREPCYBWVGTJ\nSince the operation of an Enigma machine encoding a message is a series of such configurations, each associated with a single character being encoded, a sequence of such representations can be used to represent the operation of the machine as it encodes a message. For example, the process of encoding the first sentence of the main body of the famous \"D\u00f6nitz message\" to\n RBBF PMHP HGCZ XTDY GAHG UFXG EWKB LKGJ\ncan be represented as\n 0001 F &gt; KGWNT(R)BLQPAHYDVJIFXEZOCSMU CDTK 25 15 16 26\n 0002 O &gt; UORYTQSLWXZHNM(B)VFCGEAPIJDK CDTL 25 15 16 01\n 0003 L &gt; HLNRSKJAMGF(B)ICUQPDEYOZXWTV CDTM 25 15 16 02\n 0004 G &gt; KPTXIG(F)MESAUHYQBOVJCLRZDNW CDUN 25 15 17 03\n 0005 E &gt; XDYB(P)WOSMUZRIQGENLHVJTFACK CDUO 25 15 17 04\n 0006 N &gt; DLIAJUOVCEXBN(M)GQPWZYFHRKTS CDUP 25 15 17 05\n 0007 D &gt; LUS(H)QOXDMZNAIKFREPCYBWVGTJ CDUQ 25 15 17 06\n 0008 E &gt; JKGO(P)TCIHABRNMDEYLZFXWVUQS CDUR 25 15 17 07\n 0009 S &gt; GCBUZRASYXVMLPQNOF(H)WDKTJIE CDUS 25 15 17 08\n 0010 I &gt; XPJUOWIY(G)CVRTQEBNLZMDKFAHS CDUT 25 15 17 09\n 0011 S &gt; DISAUYOMBPNTHKGJRQ(C)LEZXWFV CDUU 25 15 17 10\n 0012 T &gt; FJLVQAKXNBGCPIRMEOY(Z)WDUHST CDUV 25 15 17 11\n 0013 S &gt; KTJUQONPZCAMLGFHEW(X)BDYRSVI CDUW 25 15 17 12\n 0014 O &gt; ZQXUVGFNWRLKPH(T)MBJYODEICSA CDUX 25 15 17 13\n 0015 F &gt; XJWFR(D)ZSQBLKTVPOIEHMYNCAUG CDUY 25 15 17 14\n 0016 O &gt; FSKTJARXPECNUL(Y)IZGBDMWVHOQ CDUZ 25 15 17 15\n 0017 R &gt; CEAKBMRYUVDNFLTXW(G)ZOIJQPHS CDVA 25 15 18 16\n 0018 T &gt; TLJRVQHGUCXBZYSWFDO(A)IEPKNM CDVB 25 15 18 17\n 0019 B &gt; Y(H)LPGTEBKWICSVUDRQMFONJZAX CDVC 25 15 18 18\n 0020 E &gt; KRUL(G)JEWNFADVIPOYBXZCMHSQT CDVD 25 15 18 19\n 0021 K &gt; RCBPQMVZXY(U)OFSLDEANWKGTIJH CDVE 25 15 18 20\n 0022 A &gt; (F)CBJQAWTVDYNXLUSEZPHOIGMKR CDVF 25 15 18 21\n 0023 N &gt; VFTQSBPORUZWY(X)HGDIECJALNMK CDVG 25 15 18 22\n 0024 N &gt; JSRHFENDUAZYQ(G)XTMCBPIWVOLK CDVH 25 15 18 23\n 0025 T &gt; RCBUTXVZJINQPKWMLAY(E)DGOFSH CDVI 25 15 18 24\n 0026 Z &gt; URFXNCMYLVPIGESKTBOQAJZDH(W) CDVJ 25 15 18 25\n 0027 U &gt; JIOZFEWMBAUSHPCNRQLV(K)TGYXD CDVK 25 15 18 26\n 0028 G &gt; ZGVRKO(B)XLNEIWJFUSDQYPCMHTA CDVL 25 15 18 01\n 0029 E &gt; RMJV(L)YQZKCIEBONUGAWXPDSTFH CDVM 25 15 18 02\n 0030 B &gt; G(K)QRFEANZPBMLHVJCDUXSOYTWI CDWN 25 15 19 03\n 0031 E &gt; YMZT(G)VEKQOHPBSJLIUNDRFXWAC CDWO 25 15 19 04\n 0032 N &gt; PDSBTIUQFNOVW(J)KAHZCEGLMYXR CDWP 25 15 19 05\nwhere the letters following each mapping are the letters that appear at the windows at that stage (the only state changes visible to the operator) and the numbers show the underlying physical position of each rotor.\nThe character mappings for a given configuration of the machine are in turn the result of a series of such mappings applied by each pass through a component of the machine: the encoding of a character resulting from the application of a given component's mapping serves as the input to the mapping of the subsequent component. For example, the 4th step in the encoding above can be expanded to show each of these stages using the same representation of mappings and highlighting for the encoded character:\n G &gt; ABCDEF(G)HIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ\n\u00a0 P EFMQAB(G)UINKXCJORDPZTHWVLYS \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 AE.BF.CM.DQ.HU.JN.LX.PR.SZ.VW\n\u00a0 1 OFRJVM(A)ZHQNBXPYKCULGSWETDI\u00a0 N\u00a0 03\u00a0 VIII\n\u00a0 2 (N)UKCHVSMDGTZQFYEWPIALOXRJB\u00a0 U\u00a0 17\u00a0 VI\n\u00a0 3 XJMIYVCARQOWH(L)NDSUFKGBEPZT\u00a0 D\u00a0 15\u00a0 V\n\u00a0 4 QUNGALXEPKZ(Y)RDSOFTVCMBIHWJ\u00a0 C\u00a0 25\u00a0 \u03b2\n\u00a0 R RDOBJNTKVEHMLFCWZAXGYIPS(U)Q \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 c\n\u00a0 4 EVTNHQDXWZJFUCPIAMOR(B)SYGLK \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 \u03b2\n\u00a0 3 H(V)GPWSUMDBTNCOKXJIQZRFLAEY \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 V\n\u00a0 2 TZDIPNJESYCUHAVRMXGKB(F)QWOL \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 VI\n\u00a0 1 GLQYW(B)TIZDPSFKANJCUXREVMOH \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 VIII\n\u00a0 P E(F)MQABGUINKXCJORDPZTHWVLYS \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0 AE.BF.CM.DQ.HU.JN.LX.PR.SZ.VW\n F &lt; KPTXIG(F)MESAUHYQBOVJCLRZDNW\nHere the encoding begins trivially with the first \"mapping\" representing the keyboard (which has no effect), followed by the plugboard, configured as AE.BF.CM.DQ.HU.JN.LX.PR.SZ.VW which has no effect on 'G', followed by the VIII rotor in the 03 position, which maps G to A, then the VI rotor in the 17 position, which maps A to N, ..., and finally the plugboard again, which maps B to F, producing the overall mapping indicated at the final step: G to F.\nNote that this model has 4 rotors (lines 1 through 4) and that the reflector (line R) also permutes (garbles) letters.\nModels.\nThe Enigma family included multiple designs. The earliest were commercial models dating from the early 1920s. Starting in the mid-1920s, the German military began to use Enigma, making a number of security-related changes. Various nations either adopted or adapted the design for their own cipher machines.\nAn estimated 100,000 Enigma machines were constructed. After the end of World War II, the Allies sold captured Enigma machines, still widely considered secure, to developing countries.\nCommercial Enigma.\nOn 23 February 1918, Arthur Scherbius applied for a patent for a ciphering machine that used rotors. Scherbius and E. Richard Ritter founded the firm of Scherbius &amp; Ritter. They approached the German Navy and Foreign Office with their design, but neither agency was interested. Scherbius &amp; Ritter then assigned the patent rights to Gewerkschaft Securitas, who founded the \"Chiffriermaschinen Aktien-Gesellschaft\" (Cipher Machines Stock Corporation) on 9 July 1923; Scherbius and Ritter were on the board of directors.\nEnigma A (1923).\nChiffriermaschinen AG began advertising a rotor machine, \"Enigma model A\", which was exhibited at the Congress of the International Postal Union in 1924. The machine was heavy and bulky, incorporating a typewriter. It measured 65\u00d745\u00d738\u00a0cm and weighed about .\nEnigma B (1924).\nIn 1924 Enigma \"model B\" was introduced, and was of a similar construction. While bearing the Enigma name, both models \"A\" and \"B\" were quite unlike later versions: They differed in physical size and shape, but also cryptographically, in that they lacked the reflector. This model of Enigma machine was referred to as the Glowlamp Enigma or \"Gl\u00fchlampenmaschine\" since it produced its output on a lamp panel rather than paper. This method of output was much more reliable and cost effective. Hence this machine was 1/8th the price of its predecessor.\nEnigma C (1926).\nThe reflector, suggested by Scherbius' colleague Willi Korn, was introduced in \"Enigma C\" (1926).\n\"Model C\" was the third model of the so-called \u2033glowlamp Enigmas\u2033 (after A and B) and it again lacked a typewriter.\nEnigma D (1927).\nThe \"Enigma C\" quickly gave way to \"Enigma D\" (1927). This version was widely used, with shipments to Sweden, the Netherlands, United Kingdom, Japan, Italy, Spain, United States and Poland. In 1927 Hugh Foss at the British Government Code and Cypher School was able to show that commercial Enigma machines could be broken, provided suitable cribs were available. Soon, the Enigma D would pioneer the use of a standard keyboard layout to be used in German computing. This layout was referred to as \"QWERTZ\" and is very similar to the standard American keyboard format of today.\n\"Navy Cipher D\".\nOther countries used Enigma machines. The Italian Navy adopted the commercial Enigma as \"Navy Cipher D\". The Spanish also used commercial Enigma machines during their Civil War. British codebreakers succeeded in breaking these machines, which lacked a plugboard. Enigma machines were also used by diplomatic services.\nEnigma H (1929).\nThere was also a large, eight-rotor printing model, the \"Enigma H\", called \"Enigma II\" by the \"Reichswehr\". In 1933 the Polish Cipher Bureau detected that it was in use for high-level military communication, but it was soon withdrawn, as it was unreliable and jammed frequently.\nEnigma K.\nThe Swiss used a version of Enigma called \"Model K\" or \"Swiss K\" for military and diplomatic use, which was very similar to commercial Enigma D. The machine's code was cracked by Poland, France, the United Kingdom and the United States; the latter code-named it INDIGO. An \"Enigma T\" model, code-named \"Tirpitz\", was used by Japan.\nTypex.\nOnce the British figured out Enigma's principle of operation, they fixed the problem with it and created their own, the Typex, which the Germans believed to be unsolvable.\nMilitary Enigma.\nFunkschl\u00fcssel C.\nThe Reichsmarine was the first military branch to adopt Enigma. This version, named \"Funkschl\u00fcssel C\" (\"Radio cipher C\"), had been put into production by 1925 and was introduced into service in 1926.\nThe keyboard and lampboard contained 29 letters\u00a0\u2014 A-Z, \u00c4, \u00d6 and \u00dc\u00a0\u2014 that were arranged alphabetically, as opposed to the QWERTZUI ordering. The rotors had 28 contacts, with the letter \"X\" wired to bypass the rotors unencrypted. Three rotors were chosen from a set of five and the reflector could be inserted in one of four different positions, denoted \u03b1, \u03b2, \u03b3 and \u03b4. The machine was revised slightly in July 1933.\nEnigma G (1928\u20131930).\nBy 15 July 1928, the German Army (\"Reichswehr\") had introduced their own exclusive version of the Enigma machine, the \"Enigma G\".\nThe \"Abwehr\" used the \"Enigma G\" (the \"Abwehr\" Enigma). This Enigma variant was a four-wheel unsteckered machine with multiple notches on the rotors. This model was equipped with a counter that incremented upon each key press, and so is also known as the \"counter machine\" or the \"Z\u00e4hlwerk\" Enigma.\nWehrmacht Enigma I (1930\u20131938).\nEnigma machine G was modified to the \"Enigma I\" by June 1930. Enigma I is also known as the \"Wehrmacht\", or \"Services\" Enigma, and was used extensively by German military services and other government organisations (such as the railways) before and during World War II.\nThe major difference between \"Enigma I\" (German Army version from 1930), and commercial Enigma models was the addition of a plugboard to swap pairs of letters, greatly increasing cryptographic strength.\nOther differences included the use of a fixed reflector and the relocation of the stepping notches from the rotor body to the movable letter rings. The machine measured and weighed around .\nIn August 1935, the Air Force introduced the Wehrmacht Enigma for their communications.\nM3 (1934).\nBy 1930, the Reichswehr had suggested that the Navy adopt their machine, citing the benefits of increased security (with the plugboard) and easier interservice communications. The Reichsmarine eventually agreed and in 1934 brought into service the Navy version of the Army Enigma, designated \"Funkschl\u00fcssel\" ' or \"M3\". While the Army used only three rotors at that time, the Navy specified a choice of three from a possible five.\nTwo extra rotors (1938).\nIn December 1938, the Army issued two extra rotors so that the three rotors were chosen from a set of five. In 1938, the Navy added two more rotors, and then another in 1939 to allow a choice of three rotors from a set of eight.\nM4 (1942).\nA four-rotor Enigma was introduced by the Navy for U-boat traffic on 1 February 1942, called \"M4\" (the network was known as \"Triton\", or \"Shark\" to the Allies). The extra rotor was fitted in the same space by splitting the reflector into a combination of a thin reflector and a thin fourth rotor.\nSurviving machines.\nThe effort to break the Enigma was not disclosed until the 1970s. Since then, interest in the Enigma machine has grown. Enigmas are on public display in museums around the world, and several are in the hands of private collectors and computer history enthusiasts.\nThe \"Deutsches Museum\" in Munich has both the three- and four-rotor German military variants, as well as several civilian versions. Enigma machines are exhibited at the National Codes Centre in Bletchley Park, the Government Communications Headquarters, the Science Museum in London, Discovery Park of America in Tennessee, the Polish Army Museum in Warsaw, the Swedish Army Museum (\"Arm\u00e9museum\") in Stockholm, the Military Museum of A Coru\u00f1a in Spain, the Nordland Red Cross War Memorial Museum in Narvik, Norway, The Artillery, Engineers and Signals Museum in H\u00e4meenlinna, Finland the Technical University of Denmark in Lyngby, Denmark, in Skanderborg Bunkerne at Skanderborg, Denmark, and at the Australian War Memorial and in the foyer of the Australian Signals Directorate, both in Canberra, Australia. The Jozef Pilsudski Institute in London exhibits a rare Polish Enigma double assembled in France in 1940.\nIn the United States, Enigma machines can be seen at the Computer History Museum in Mountain View, California, and at the National Security Agency's National Cryptologic Museum in Fort Meade, Maryland, where visitors can try their hand at enciphering and deciphering messages. Two machines that were acquired after the capture of during World War II are on display alongside the submarine at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago, Illinois. A three-rotor Enigma is on display at Discovery Park of America in Union City, Tennessee. A four-rotor device is on display in the ANZUS Corridor of the Pentagon on the second floor, A ring, between corridors 9 and 10. This machine is on loan from Australia. The United States Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs has a machine on display in the Computer Science Department. There is also a machine located at The National WWII Museum in New Orleans. The International Museum of World War II near Boston has seven Enigma machines on display, including a U-Boat four-rotor model, one of three surviving examples of an Enigma machine with a printer, one of fewer than ten surviving ten-rotor code machines, an example blown up by a retreating German Army unit, and two three-rotor Enigmas that visitors can operate to encode and decode messages. Computer Museum of America in Roswell, Georgia has a three-rotor model with two additional rotors. The machine is fully restored and CMoA has the original paperwork for the purchase on 7 March 1936 by the German Army. The National Museum of Computing also contains surviving Enigma machines in Bletchley, England.\nIn Canada, a Swiss Army issue Enigma-K, is in Calgary, Alberta. It is on permanent display at the Naval Museum of Alberta inside the Military Museums of Calgary. A four-rotor Enigma machine is on display at the Military Communications and Electronics Museum at Canadian Forces Base (CFB) Kingston in Kingston, Ontario.\nOccasionally, Enigma machines are sold at auction; prices have in recent years ranged from US$40,000 to US$547,500 in 2017. Replicas are available in various forms, including an exact reconstructed copy of the Naval M4 model, an Enigma implemented in electronics (Enigma-E), various simulators and paper-and-scissors analogues.\nA rare \"Abwehr\" Enigma machine, designated G312, was stolen from the Bletchley Park museum on 1 April 2000. In September, a man identifying himself as \"The Master\" sent a note demanding \u00a325,000 and threatening to destroy the machine if the ransom was not paid. In early October 2000, Bletchley Park officials announced that they would pay the ransom, but the stated deadline passed with no word from the blackmailer. Shortly afterward, the machine was sent anonymously to BBC journalist Jeremy Paxman, missing three rotors.\nIn November 2000, an antiques dealer named Dennis Yates was arrested after telephoning \"The Sunday Times\" to arrange the return of the missing parts. The Enigma machine was returned to Bletchley Park after the incident. In October 2001, Yates was sentenced to ten months in prison and served three months.\nIn October 2008, the Spanish daily newspaper \"El Pa\u00eds\" reported that 28 Enigma machines had been discovered by chance in an attic of Army headquarters in Madrid. These four-rotor commercial machines had helped Franco's Nationalists win the Spanish Civil War, because, though the British cryptologist Alfred Dilwyn Knox in 1937 broke the cipher generated by Franco's Enigma machines, this was not disclosed to the Republicans, who failed to break the cipher. The Nationalist government continued using its 50 Enigmas into the 1950s. Some machines have gone on display in Spanish military museums, including one at the National Museum of Science and Technology (MUNCYT) in La Coru\u00f1a. Two have been given to Britain's GCHQ.\nThe Bulgarian military used Enigma machines with a Cyrillic keyboard; one is on display in the National Museum of Military History in Sofia.\nOn 3 December 2020, German divers working on behalf of the World Wide Fund for Nature discovered a destroyed Enigma machine in Flensburg Firth (part of the Baltic Sea) which is believed to be from a scuttled U-Boat. This Enigma machine will be restored by and be the property of the Archaeology Museum of Schleswig Holstein.\nDerivatives.\nThe Enigma was influential in the field of cipher machine design, spinning off other rotor machines. The British Typex was originally derived from the Enigma patents; Typex even includes features from the patent descriptions that were omitted from the actual Enigma machine. The British paid no royalties for the use of the patents, to protect secrecy. The Typex implementation is not the same as that found in German or other Axis versions.\nA Japanese Enigma clone was codenamed GREEN by American cryptographers. Little used, it contained four rotors mounted vertically. In the United States, cryptologist William Friedman designed the M-325, a machine logically similar, although not in construction.\nA unique rotor machine was constructed in 2002 by Netherlands-based Tatjana van Vark. This device makes use of 40-point rotors, allowing letters, numbers and some punctuation to be used; each rotor contains 509 parts.\nMachines like the SIGABA, NEMA, Typex and so forth, are deliberately not considered to be Enigma derivatives as their internal ciphering functions are not mathematically identical to the Enigma transform.\nSeveral software implementations exist, but not all exactly match Enigma behaviour. The most commonly used software derivative (that is not compliant with any hardware implementation of the Enigma) is at EnigmaCo.de. Many Java applet Enigmas only accept single letter entry, complicating use even if the applet is Enigma compliant. Technically, Enigma@home is the largest scale deployment of a software Enigma, but the decoding software does not implement encipherment making it a derivative (as all original machines could cipher and decipher).\nA user-friendly three-rotor simulator, where users can select rotors, use the plugboard and define new settings for the rotors and reflectors is available. The output appears in separate windows which can be independently made \"invisible\" to hide decryption. Another includes an \"autotyping\" function which takes plaintext from a clipboard and converts it to cyphertext (or vice versa) at one of four speeds. The \"very fast\" option produces 26 characters in less than one second."}
{"id": "9257", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9257", "title": "Enzyme", "text": "Enzymes () are proteins that act as biological catalysts (biocatalysts). Catalysts accelerate chemical reactions. The molecules upon which enzymes may act are called substrates, and the enzyme converts the substrates into different molecules known as products. Almost all metabolic processes in the cell need enzyme catalysis in order to occur at rates fast enough to sustain life. Metabolic pathways depend upon enzymes to catalyze individual steps. The study of enzymes is called \"enzymology\" and a new field of pseudoenzyme analysis has recently grown up, recognising that during evolution, some enzymes have lost the ability to carry out biological catalysis, which is often reflected in their amino acid sequences and unusual 'pseudocatalytic' properties.\nEnzymes are known to catalyze more than 5,000 biochemical reaction types. Other biocatalysts are catalytic RNA molecules, called ribozymes. Enzymes' specificity comes from their unique three-dimensional structures.\nLike all catalysts, enzymes increase the reaction rate by lowering its activation energy. Some enzymes can make their conversion of substrate to product occur many millions of times faster. An extreme example is orotidine 5'-phosphate decarboxylase, which allows a reaction that would otherwise take millions of years to occur in milliseconds. Chemically, enzymes are like any catalyst and are not consumed in chemical reactions, nor do they alter the equilibrium of a reaction. Enzymes differ from most other catalysts by being much more specific. Enzyme activity can be affected by other molecules: inhibitors are molecules that decrease enzyme activity, and activators are molecules that increase activity. Many therapeutic drugs and poisons are enzyme inhibitors. An enzyme's activity decreases markedly outside its optimal temperature and pH, and many enzymes are (permanently) denatured when exposed to excessive heat, losing their structure and catalytic properties.\nSome enzymes are used commercially, for example, in the synthesis of antibiotics. Some household products use enzymes to speed up chemical reactions: enzymes in biological washing powders break down protein, starch or fat stains on clothes, and enzymes in meat tenderizer break down proteins into smaller molecules, making the meat easier to chew.\nEtymology and history.\nBy the late 17th and early 18th centuries, the digestion of meat by stomach secretions and the conversion of starch to sugars by plant extracts and saliva were known but the mechanisms by which these occurred had not been identified.\nFrench chemist Anselme Payen was the first to discover an enzyme, diastase, in 1833. A few decades later, when studying the fermentation of sugar to alcohol by yeast, Louis Pasteur concluded that this fermentation was caused by a vital force contained within the yeast cells called \"ferments\", which were thought to function only within living organisms. He wrote that \"alcoholic fermentation is an act correlated with the life and organization of the yeast cells, not with the death or putrefaction of the cells.\"\nIn 1877, German physiologist Wilhelm K\u00fchne (1837\u20131900) first used the term \"enzyme\", which comes from Greek \u1f14\u03bd\u03b6\u03c5\u03bc\u03bf\u03bd, \"leavened\" or \"in yeast\", to describe this process. The word \"enzyme\" was used later to refer to nonliving substances such as pepsin, and the word \"ferment\" was used to refer to chemical activity produced by living organisms.\nEduard Buchner submitted his first paper on the study of yeast extracts in 1897. In a series of experiments at the University of Berlin, he found that sugar was fermented by yeast extracts even when there were no living yeast cells in the mixture. He named the enzyme that brought about the fermentation of sucrose \"zymase\". In 1907, he received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for \"his discovery of cell-free fermentation\". Following Buchner's example, enzymes are usually named according to the reaction they carry out: the suffix \"-ase\" is combined with the name of the substrate (e.g., lactase is the enzyme that cleaves lactose) or to the type of reaction (e.g., DNA polymerase forms DNA polymers).\nThe biochemical identity of enzymes was still unknown in the early 1900s. Many scientists observed that enzymatic activity was associated with proteins, but others (such as Nobel laureate Richard Willst\u00e4tter) argued that proteins were merely carriers for the true enzymes and that proteins \"per se\" were incapable of catalysis. In 1926, James B. Sumner showed that the enzyme urease was a pure protein and crystallized it; he did likewise for the enzyme catalase in 1937. The conclusion that pure proteins can be enzymes was definitively demonstrated by John Howard Northrop and Wendell Meredith Stanley, who worked on the digestive enzymes pepsin (1930), trypsin and chymotrypsin. These three scientists were awarded the 1946 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.\nThe discovery that enzymes could be crystallized eventually allowed their structures to be solved by x-ray crystallography. This was first done for lysozyme, an enzyme found in tears, saliva and egg whites that digests the coating of some bacteria; the structure was solved by a group led by David Chilton Phillips and published in 1965. This high-resolution structure of lysozyme marked the beginning of the field of structural biology and the effort to understand how enzymes work at an atomic level of detail.\nClassification and nomenclature.\nEnzymes can be classified by two main criteria: either amino acid sequence similarity (and thus evolutionary relationship) or enzymatic activity.\nEnzyme activity. An enzyme's name is often derived from its substrate or the chemical reaction it catalyzes, with the word ending in \"-ase\". Examples are lactase, alcohol dehydrogenase and DNA polymerase. Different enzymes that catalyze the same chemical reaction are called isozymes.\nThe International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology have developed a nomenclature for enzymes, the EC numbers (for \"Enzyme Commission\"). Each enzyme is described by \"EC\" followed by a sequence of four numbers which represent the hierarchy of enzymatic activity (from very general to very specific). That is, the first number broadly classifies the enzyme based on its mechanism while the other digits add more and more specificity.\nThe top-level classification is:\nThese sections are subdivided by other features such as the substrate, products, and chemical mechanism. An enzyme is fully specified by four numerical designations. For example, hexokinase (EC 2.7.1.1) is a transferase (EC 2) that adds a phosphate group (EC 2.7) to a hexose sugar, a molecule containing an alcohol group (EC 2.7.1).\nSequence similarity. EC categories do not reflect sequence similarity. For instance, two ligases of the same EC number that catalyze exactly the same reaction can have completely different sequences. Independent of their function, enzymes, like any other proteins, have been classified by their sequence similarity into numerous families. These families have been documented in dozens of different protein and protein family databases such as Pfam.\nStructure.\nEnzymes are generally globular proteins, acting alone or in larger complexes. The sequence of the amino acids specifies the structure which in turn determines the catalytic activity of the enzyme. Although structure determines function, a novel enzymatic activity cannot yet be predicted from structure alone. Enzyme structures unfold (denature) when heated or exposed to chemical denaturants and this disruption to the structure typically causes a loss of activity. Enzyme denaturation is normally linked to temperatures above a species' normal level; as a result, enzymes from bacteria living in volcanic environments such as hot springs are prized by industrial users for their ability to function at high temperatures, allowing enzyme-catalysed reactions to be operated at a very high rate.\nEnzymes are usually much larger than their substrates. Sizes range from just 62 amino acid residues, for the monomer of 4-oxalocrotonate tautomerase, to over 2,500 residues in the animal fatty acid synthase. Only a small portion of their structure (around 2\u20134 amino acids) is directly involved in catalysis: the catalytic site. This catalytic site is located next to one or more binding sites where residues orient the substrates. The catalytic site and binding site together compose the enzyme's active site. The remaining majority of the enzyme structure serves to maintain the precise orientation and dynamics of the active site.\nIn some enzymes, no amino acids are directly involved in catalysis; instead, the enzyme contains sites to bind and orient catalytic cofactors. Enzyme structures may also contain allosteric sites where the binding of a small molecule causes a conformational change that increases or decreases activity.\nA small number of RNA-based biological catalysts called ribozymes exist, which again can act alone or in complex with proteins. The most common of these is the ribosome which is a complex of protein and catalytic RNA components.\nMechanism.\nSubstrate binding.\nEnzymes must bind their substrates before they can catalyse any chemical reaction. Enzymes are usually very specific as to what substrates they bind and then the chemical reaction catalysed. Specificity is achieved by binding pockets with complementary shape, charge and hydrophilic/hydrophobic characteristics to the substrates. Enzymes can therefore distinguish between very similar substrate molecules to be chemoselective, regioselective and stereospecific.\nSome of the enzymes showing the highest specificity and accuracy are involved in the copying and expression of the genome. Some of these enzymes have \"proof-reading\" mechanisms. Here, an enzyme such as DNA polymerase catalyzes a reaction in a first step and then checks that the product is correct in a second step. This two-step process results in average error rates of less than 1 error in 100\u00a0million reactions in high-fidelity mammalian polymerases. Similar proofreading mechanisms are also found in RNA polymerase, aminoacyl tRNA synthetases and ribosomes.\nConversely, some enzymes display enzyme promiscuity, having broad specificity and acting on a range of different physiologically relevant substrates. Many enzymes possess small side activities which arose fortuitously (i.e. neutrally), which may be the starting point for the evolutionary selection of a new function.\n\"Lock and key\" model.\nTo explain the observed specificity of enzymes, in 1894 Emil Fischer proposed that both the enzyme and the substrate possess specific complementary geometric shapes that fit exactly into one another. This is often referred to as \"the lock and key\" model. This early model explains enzyme specificity, but fails to explain the stabilization of the transition state that enzymes achieve.\nInduced fit model.\nIn 1958, Daniel Koshland suggested a modification to the lock and key model: since enzymes are rather flexible structures, the active site is continuously reshaped by interactions with the substrate as the substrate interacts with the enzyme. As a result, the substrate does not simply bind to a rigid active site; the amino acid side-chains that make up the active site are molded into the precise positions that enable the enzyme to perform its catalytic function. In some cases, such as glycosidases, the substrate molecule also changes shape slightly as it enters the active site. The active site continues to change until the substrate is completely bound, at which point the final shape and charge distribution is determined.\nInduced fit may enhance the fidelity of molecular recognition in the presence of competition and noise via the conformational proofreading mechanism.\nCatalysis.\nEnzymes can accelerate reactions in several ways, all of which lower the activation energy (\u0394G\u2021, Gibbs free energy)\nEnzymes may use several of these mechanisms simultaneously. For example, proteases such as trypsin perform covalent catalysis using a catalytic triad, stabilise charge build-up on the transition states using an oxyanion hole, complete hydrolysis using an oriented water substrate.\nDynamics.\nEnzymes are not rigid, static structures; instead they have complex internal dynamic motions \u2013 that is, movements of parts of the enzyme's structure such as individual amino acid residues, groups of residues forming a protein loop or unit of secondary structure, or even an entire protein domain. These motions give rise to a conformational ensemble of slightly different structures that interconvert with one another at equilibrium. Different states within this ensemble may be associated with different aspects of an enzyme's function. For example, different conformations of the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase are associated with the substrate binding, catalysis, cofactor release, and product release steps of the catalytic cycle, consistent with catalytic resonance theory.\nSubstrate presentation.\nSubstrate presentation is a process where the enzyme is sequestered away from its substrate. Enzymes can be sequestered to the plasma membrane away from a substrate in the nucleus or cytosol. Or within the membrane, an enzyme can be sequestered into lipid rafts away from its substrate in the disordered region. When the enzyme is released it mixes with its substrate. Alternatively, the enzyme can be sequestered near its substrate to activate the enzyme. For example, the enzyme can be soluble and upon activation bind to a lipid in the plasma membrane and then act upon molecules in the plasma membrane.\nAllosteric modulation.\nAllosteric sites are pockets on the enzyme, distinct from the active site, that bind to molecules in the cellular environment. These molecules then cause a change in the conformation or dynamics of the enzyme that is transduced to the active site and thus affects the reaction rate of the enzyme. In this way, allosteric interactions can either inhibit or activate enzymes. Allosteric interactions with metabolites upstream or downstream in an enzyme's metabolic pathway cause feedback regulation, altering the activity of the enzyme according to the flux through the rest of the pathway.\nCofactors.\nSome enzymes do not need additional components to show full activity. Others require non-protein molecules called cofactors to be bound for activity. Cofactors can be either inorganic (e.g., metal ions and iron-sulfur clusters) or organic compounds (e.g., flavin and heme). These cofactors serve many purposes; for instance, metal ions can help in stabilizing nucleophilic species within the active site. Organic cofactors can be either coenzymes, which are released from the enzyme's active site during the reaction, or prosthetic groups, which are tightly bound to an enzyme. Organic prosthetic groups can be covalently bound (e.g., biotin in enzymes such as pyruvate carboxylase).\nAn example of an enzyme that contains a cofactor is carbonic anhydrase, which uses a zinc cofactor bound as part of its active site. These tightly bound ions or molecules are usually found in the active site and are involved in catalysis. For example, flavin and heme cofactors are often involved in redox reactions.\nEnzymes that require a cofactor but do not have one bound are called \"apoenzymes\" or \"apoproteins\". An enzyme together with the cofactor(s) required for activity is called a \"holoenzyme\" (or haloenzyme). The term \"holoenzyme\" can also be applied to enzymes that contain multiple protein subunits, such as the DNA polymerases; here the holoenzyme is the complete complex containing all the subunits needed for activity.\nCoenzymes.\nCoenzymes are small organic molecules that can be loosely or tightly bound to an enzyme. Coenzymes transport chemical groups from one enzyme to another. Examples include NADH, NADPH and adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Some coenzymes, such as flavin mononucleotide (FMN), flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP), and tetrahydrofolate (THF), are derived from vitamins. These coenzymes cannot be synthesized by the body \"de novo\" and closely related compounds (vitamins) must be acquired from the diet. The chemical groups carried include: \nSince coenzymes are chemically changed as a consequence of enzyme action, it is useful to consider coenzymes to be a special class of substrates, or second substrates, which are common to many different enzymes. For example, about 1000 enzymes are known to use the coenzyme NADH.\nCoenzymes are usually continuously regenerated and their concentrations maintained at a steady level inside the cell. For example, NADPH is regenerated through the pentose phosphate pathway and \"S\"-adenosylmethionine by methionine adenosyltransferase. This continuous regeneration means that small amounts of coenzymes can be used very intensively. For example, the human body turns over its own weight in ATP each day.\nThermodynamics.\nAs with all catalysts, enzymes do not alter the position of the chemical equilibrium of the reaction. In the presence of an enzyme, the reaction runs in the same direction as it would without the enzyme, just more quickly. For example, carbonic anhydrase catalyzes its reaction in either direction depending on the concentration of its reactants:\nThe rate of a reaction is dependent on the activation energy needed to form the transition state which then decays into products. Enzymes increase reaction rates by lowering the energy of the transition state. First, binding forms a low energy enzyme-substrate complex (ES). Second, the enzyme stabilises the transition state such that it requires less energy to achieve compared to the uncatalyzed reaction (ES\u2021). Finally the enzyme-product complex (EP) dissociates to release the products.\nEnzymes can couple two or more reactions, so that a thermodynamically favorable reaction can be used to \"drive\" a thermodynamically unfavourable one so that the combined energy of the products is lower than the substrates. For example, the hydrolysis of ATP is often used to drive other chemical reactions.\nKinetics.\nEnzyme kinetics is the investigation of how enzymes bind substrates and turn them into products. The rate data used in kinetic analyses are commonly obtained from enzyme assays. In 1913 Leonor Michaelis and Maud Leonora Menten proposed a quantitative theory of enzyme kinetics, which is referred to as Michaelis\u2013Menten kinetics. The major contribution of Michaelis and Menten was to think of enzyme reactions in two stages. In the first, the substrate binds reversibly to the enzyme, forming the enzyme-substrate complex. This is sometimes called the Michaelis\u2013Menten complex in their honor. The enzyme then catalyzes the chemical step in the reaction and releases the product. This work was further developed by G. E. Briggs and J. B. S. Haldane, who derived kinetic equations that are still widely used today.\nEnzyme rates depend on solution conditions and substrate concentration. To find the maximum speed of an enzymatic reaction, the substrate concentration is increased until a constant rate of product formation is seen. This is shown in the saturation curve on the right. Saturation happens because, as substrate concentration increases, more and more of the free enzyme is converted into the substrate-bound ES complex. At the maximum reaction rate (\"V\"max) of the enzyme, all the enzyme active sites are bound to substrate, and the amount of ES complex is the same as the total amount of enzyme.\n\"V\"max is only one of several important kinetic parameters. The amount of substrate needed to achieve a given rate of reaction is also important. This is given by the Michaelis\u2013Menten constant (\"K\"m), which is the substrate concentration required for an enzyme to reach one-half its maximum reaction rate; generally, each enzyme has a characteristic \"K\"M for a given substrate. Another useful constant is \"k\"cat, also called the \"turnover number\", which is the number of substrate molecules handled by one active site per second.\nThe efficiency of an enzyme can be expressed in terms of \"k\"cat/\"K\"m. This is also called the specificity constant and incorporates the rate constants for all steps in the reaction up to and including the first irreversible step. Because the specificity constant reflects both affinity and catalytic ability, it is useful for comparing different enzymes against each other, or the same enzyme with different substrates. The theoretical maximum for the specificity constant is called the diffusion limit and is about 108 to 109 (M\u22121 s\u22121). At this point every collision of the enzyme with its substrate will result in catalysis, and the rate of product formation is not limited by the reaction rate but by the diffusion rate. Enzymes with this property are called \"catalytically perfect\" or \"kinetically perfect\". Example of such enzymes are triose-phosphate isomerase, carbonic anhydrase, acetylcholinesterase, catalase, fumarase, \u03b2-lactamase, and superoxide dismutase. The turnover of such enzymes can reach several million reactions per second. But most enzymes are far from perfect: the average values of formula_1 and formula_2 are about formula_3 and formula_4, respectively.\nMichaelis\u2013Menten kinetics relies on the law of mass action, which is derived from the assumptions of free diffusion and thermodynamically driven random collision. Many biochemical or cellular processes deviate significantly from these conditions, because of macromolecular crowding and constrained molecular movement. More recent, complex extensions of the model attempt to correct for these effects.\nInhibition.\nEnzyme reaction rates can be decreased by various types of enzyme inhibitors.\nTypes of inhibition.\nCompetitive.\nA competitive inhibitor and substrate cannot bind to the enzyme at the same time. Often competitive inhibitors strongly resemble the real substrate of the enzyme. For example, the drug methotrexate is a competitive inhibitor of the enzyme dihydrofolate reductase, which catalyzes the reduction of dihydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate. The similarity between the structures of dihydrofolate and this drug are shown in the accompanying figure. This type of inhibition can be overcome with high substrate concentration. In some cases, the inhibitor can bind to a site other than the binding-site of the usual substrate and exert an allosteric effect to change the shape of the usual binding-site.\nNon-competitive.\nA non-competitive inhibitor binds to a site other than where the substrate binds. The substrate still binds with its usual affinity and hence Km remains the same. However the inhibitor reduces the catalytic efficiency of the enzyme so that Vmax is reduced. In contrast to competitive inhibition, non-competitive inhibition cannot be overcome with high substrate concentration.\nUncompetitive.\nAn uncompetitive inhibitor cannot bind to the free enzyme, only to the enzyme-substrate complex; hence, these types of inhibitors are most effective at high substrate concentration. In the presence of the inhibitor, the enzyme-substrate complex is inactive. This type of inhibition is rare.\nMixed.\nA mixed inhibitor binds to an allosteric site and the binding of the substrate and the inhibitor affect each other. The enzyme's function is reduced but not eliminated when bound to the inhibitor. This type of inhibitor does not follow the Michaelis\u2013Menten equation.\nIrreversible.\nAn irreversible inhibitor permanently inactivates the enzyme, usually by forming a covalent bond to the protein. Penicillin and aspirin are common drugs that act in this manner.\nFunctions of inhibitors.\nIn many organisms, inhibitors may act as part of a feedback mechanism. If an enzyme produces too much of one substance in the organism, that substance may act as an inhibitor for the enzyme at the beginning of the pathway that produces it, causing production of the substance to slow down or stop when there is sufficient amount. This is a form of negative feedback. Major metabolic pathways such as the citric acid cycle make use of this mechanism.\nSince inhibitors modulate the function of enzymes they are often used as drugs. Many such drugs are reversible competitive inhibitors that resemble the enzyme's native substrate, similar to methotrexate above; other well-known examples include statins used to treat high cholesterol, and protease inhibitors used to treat retroviral infections such as HIV. A common example of an irreversible inhibitor that is used as a drug is aspirin, which inhibits the COX-1 and COX-2 enzymes that produce the inflammation messenger prostaglandin. Other enzyme inhibitors are poisons. For example, the poison cyanide is an irreversible enzyme inhibitor that combines with the copper and iron in the active site of the enzyme cytochrome c oxidase and blocks cellular respiration.\nFactors affecting enzyme activity.\nAs enzymes are made up of proteins, their actions are sensitive to change in many physio chemical factors such as pH, temperature, substrate concentration, etc.\nThe following table shows pH optima for various enzymes.\nBiological function.\nEnzymes serve a wide variety of functions inside living organisms. They are indispensable for signal transduction and cell regulation, often via kinases and phosphatases. They also generate movement, with myosin hydrolyzing ATP to generate muscle contraction, and also transport cargo around the cell as part of the cytoskeleton. Other ATPases in the cell membrane are ion pumps involved in active transport. Enzymes are also involved in more exotic functions, such as luciferase generating light in fireflies. Viruses can also contain enzymes for infecting cells, such as the HIV integrase and reverse transcriptase, or for viral release from cells, like the influenza virus neuraminidase.\nAn important function of enzymes is in the digestive systems of animals. Enzymes such as amylases and proteases break down large molecules (starch or proteins, respectively) into smaller ones, so they can be absorbed by the intestines. Starch molecules, for example, are too large to be absorbed from the intestine, but enzymes hydrolyze the starch chains into smaller molecules such as maltose and eventually glucose, which can then be absorbed. Different enzymes digest different food substances. In ruminants, which have herbivorous diets, microorganisms in the gut produce another enzyme, cellulase, to break down the cellulose cell walls of plant fiber.\nMetabolism.\nSeveral enzymes can work together in a specific order, creating metabolic pathways. In a metabolic pathway, one enzyme takes the product of another enzyme as a substrate. After the catalytic reaction, the product is then passed on to another enzyme. Sometimes more than one enzyme can catalyze the same reaction in parallel; this can allow more complex regulation: with, for example, a low constant activity provided by one enzyme but an inducible high activity from a second enzyme.\nEnzymes determine what steps occur in these pathways. Without enzymes, metabolism would neither progress through the same steps and could not be regulated to serve the needs of the cell. Most central metabolic pathways are regulated at a few key steps, typically through enzymes whose activity involves the hydrolysis of ATP. Because this reaction releases so much energy, other reactions that are thermodynamically unfavorable can be coupled to ATP hydrolysis, driving the overall series of linked metabolic reactions.\nControl of activity.\nThere are five main ways that enzyme activity is controlled in the cell.\nRegulation.\nEnzymes can be either activated or inhibited by other molecules. For example, the end product(s) of a metabolic pathway are often inhibitors for one of the first enzymes of the pathway (usually the first irreversible step, called committed step), thus regulating the amount of end product made by the pathways. Such a regulatory mechanism is called a negative feedback mechanism, because the amount of the end product produced is regulated by its own concentration. Negative feedback mechanism can effectively adjust the rate of synthesis of intermediate metabolites according to the demands of the cells. This helps with effective allocations of materials and energy economy, and it prevents the excess manufacture of end products. Like other homeostatic devices, the control of enzymatic action helps to maintain a stable internal environment in living organisms.\nPost-translational modification.\nExamples of post-translational modification include phosphorylation, myristoylation and glycosylation. For example, in the response to insulin, the phosphorylation of multiple enzymes, including glycogen synthase, helps control the synthesis or degradation of glycogen and allows the cell to respond to changes in blood sugar. Another example of post-translational modification is the cleavage of the polypeptide chain. Chymotrypsin, a digestive protease, is produced in inactive form as chymotrypsinogen in the pancreas and transported in this form to the stomach where it is activated. This stops the enzyme from digesting the pancreas or other tissues before it enters the gut. This type of inactive precursor to an enzyme is known as a zymogen or proenzyme.\nQuantity.\nEnzyme production (transcription and translation of enzyme genes) can be enhanced or diminished by a cell in response to changes in the cell's environment. This form of gene regulation is called enzyme induction. For example, bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics such as penicillin because enzymes called beta-lactamases are induced that hydrolyse the crucial beta-lactam ring within the penicillin molecule. Another example comes from enzymes in the liver called cytochrome P450 oxidases, which are important in drug metabolism. Induction or inhibition of these enzymes can cause drug interactions. Enzyme levels can also be regulated by changing the rate of enzyme degradation. The opposite of enzyme induction is enzyme repression.\nSubcellular distribution.\nEnzymes can be compartmentalized, with different metabolic pathways occurring in different cellular compartments. For example, fatty acids are synthesized by one set of enzymes in the cytosol, endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi and used by a different set of enzymes as a source of energy in the mitochondrion, through \u03b2-oxidation. In addition, trafficking of the enzyme to different compartments may change the degree of protonation (e.g., the neutral cytoplasm and the acidic lysosome) or oxidative state (e.g., oxidizing periplasm or reducing cytoplasm) which in turn affects enzyme activity. In contrast to partitioning into membrane bound organelles, enzyme subcellular localisation may also be altered through polymerisation of enzymes into macromolecular cytoplasmic filaments.\nOrgan specialization.\nIn multicellular eukaryotes, cells in different organs and tissues have different patterns of gene expression and therefore have different sets of enzymes (known as isozymes) available for metabolic reactions. This provides a mechanism for regulating the overall metabolism of the organism. For example, hexokinase, the first enzyme in the glycolysis pathway, has a specialized form called glucokinase expressed in the liver and pancreas that has a lower affinity for glucose yet is more sensitive to glucose concentration. This enzyme is involved in sensing blood sugar and regulating insulin production.\nInvolvement in disease.\nSince the tight control of enzyme activity is essential for homeostasis, any malfunction (mutation, overproduction, underproduction or deletion) of a single critical enzyme can lead to a genetic disease. The malfunction of just one type of enzyme out of the thousands of types present in the human body can be fatal. An example of a fatal genetic disease due to enzyme insufficiency is Tay\u2013Sachs disease, in which patients lack the enzyme hexosaminidase.\nOne example of enzyme deficiency is the most common type of phenylketonuria. Many different single amino acid mutations in the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase, which catalyzes the first step in the degradation of phenylalanine, result in build-up of phenylalanine and related products. Some mutations are in the active site, directly disrupting binding and catalysis, but many are far from the active site and reduce activity by destabilising the protein structure, or affecting correct oligomerisation. This can lead to intellectual disability if the disease is untreated. Another example is pseudocholinesterase deficiency, in which the body's ability to break down choline ester drugs is impaired. \nOral administration of enzymes can be used to treat some functional enzyme deficiencies, such as pancreatic insufficiency and lactose intolerance.\nAnother way enzyme malfunctions can cause disease comes from germline mutations in genes coding for DNA repair enzymes. Defects in these enzymes cause cancer because cells are less able to repair mutations in their genomes. This causes a slow accumulation of mutations and results in the development of cancers. An example of such a hereditary cancer syndrome is xeroderma pigmentosum, which causes the development of skin cancers in response to even minimal exposure to ultraviolet light.\nEvolution.\nSimilar to any other protein, enzymes change over time through mutations and sequence divergence. Given their central role in metabolism, enzyme evolution plays a critical role in adaptation. A key question is therefore whether and how enzymes can change their enzymatic activities alongside. It is generally accepted that many new enzyme activities have evolved through gene duplication and mutation of the duplicate copies although evolution can also happen without duplication. One example of an enzyme that has changed its activity is the ancestor of methionyl amino peptidase (MAP) and creatine amidinohydrolase (creatinase) which are clearly homologous but catalyze very different reactions (MAP removes the amino-terminal methionine in new proteins while creatinase hydrolyses creatine to sarcosine and urea). In addition, MAP is metal-ion dependent while creatinase is not, hence this property was also lost over time. Small changes of enzymatic activity are extremely common among enzymes. In particular, substrate binding specificity (see above) can easily and quickly change with single amino acid changes in their substrate binding pockets. This is frequently seen in the main enzyme classes such as kinases.\nArtificial (in vitro) evolution is now commonly used to modify enzyme activity or specificity for industrial applications (see below).\nIndustrial applications.\nEnzymes are used in the chemical industry and other industrial applications when extremely specific catalysts are required. Enzymes in general are limited in the number of reactions they have evolved to catalyze and also by their lack of stability in organic solvents and at high temperatures. As a consequence, protein engineering is an active area of research and involves attempts to create new enzymes with novel properties, either through rational design or \"in vitro\" evolution. These efforts have begun to be successful, and a few enzymes have now been designed \"from scratch\" to catalyze reactions that do not occur in nature."}
{"id": "9258", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9258", "title": "Ethics", "text": "Ethics or moral philosophy is a branch of philosophy that \"involves systematizing, defending, and recommending concepts of right and wrong behavior\". The field of ethics, along with aesthetics, concerns matters of value; these fields comprise the branch of philosophy called axiology.\nEthics seeks to resolve questions of human morality by defining concepts such as good and evil, right and wrong, virtue and vice, justice and crime. As a field of intellectual inquiry, moral philosophy is related to the fields of moral psychology, descriptive ethics, and value theory.\nThree major areas of study within ethics recognized today are:\nDefining ethics.\nThe English word \"ethics\" is derived from the Ancient Greek word \"\u0113thik\u00f3s\" (), meaning \"relating to one's character\", which itself comes from the root word \"\u00eathos\" () meaning \"character, moral nature\". This word was transferred into Latin as \"ethica\" and then into French as \"\u00e9thique\", from which it was transferred into English.\nRushworth Kidder states that \"standard definitions of \"ethics\" have typically included such phrases as 'the science of the ideal human character' or 'the science of moral duty'. Richard William Paul and Linda Elder define ethics as \"a set of concepts and principles that guide us in determining what behavior helps or harms sentient creatures\". The \"Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy\" states that the word \"ethics\" is \"commonly used interchangeably with 'morality'\u00a0... and sometimes it is used more narrowly to mean the moral principles of a particular tradition, group or individual.\" Paul and Elder state that most people confuse ethics with behaving in accordance with social conventions, religious beliefs, the law, and don't treat ethics as a stand-alone concept.\nThe word \"ethics\" in English refers to several things. It can refer to philosophical ethics or moral philosophy\u2014a project that attempts to use reason to answer various kinds of ethical questions. As the English moral philosopher Bernard Williams writes, attempting to explain moral philosophy: \"What makes an inquiry a philosophical one is reflective generality and a style of argument that claims to be rationally persuasive.\" Williams describes the content of this area of inquiry as addressing the very broad question, \"how one should live\". Ethics can also refer to a common human ability to think about ethical problems that is not particular to philosophy. As bioethicist Larry Churchill has written: \"Ethics, understood as the capacity to think critically about moral values and direct our actions in terms of such values, is a generic human capacity.\" Ethics can also be used to describe a particular person's own idiosyncratic principles or habits. For example: \"Joe has strange ethics.\"\nMeta-ethics.\nMeta-ethics is the branch of philosophical ethics that asks how we understand, know about, and what we mean when we talk about what is right and what is wrong. An ethical question pertaining to a particular practical situation\u2014such as, \"Should I eat this particular piece of chocolate cake?\"\u2014cannot be a meta-ethical question (rather, this is an applied ethical question). A meta-ethical question is abstract and relates to a wide range of more specific practical questions. For example, \"Is it ever possible to have a secure knowledge of what is right and wrong?\" is a meta-ethical question.\nMeta-ethics has always accompanied philosophical ethics. For example, Aristotle implies that less precise knowledge is possible in ethics than in other spheres of inquiry, and he regards ethical knowledge as depending upon habit and acculturation in a way that makes it distinctive from other kinds of knowledge. Meta-ethics is also important in G.E. Moore's \"Principia Ethica\" from 1903. In it he first wrote about what he called \"the naturalistic fallacy\". Moore was seen to reject naturalism in ethics, in his open-question argument. This made thinkers look again at second order questions about ethics. Earlier, the Scottish philosopher David Hume had put forward a similar view on the difference between facts and values.\nStudies of how we know in ethics divide into cognitivism and non-cognitivism; these, respectively, take descriptive and non-descriptive approaches to moral goodness or value. Non-cognitivism is the view that when we judge something as morally right or wrong, this is neither true nor false. We may, for example, be only expressing our emotional feelings about these things. Cognitivism can then be seen as the claim that when we talk about right and wrong, we are talking about matters of fact.\nThe ontology of ethics is about value-bearing things or properties, that is, the kind of things or stuff referred to by ethical propositions. Non-descriptivists and non-cognitivists believe that ethics does not need a specific ontology since ethical propositions do not refer. This is known as an anti-realist position. Realists, on the other hand, must explain what kind of entities, properties or states are relevant for ethics, how they have value, and why they guide and motivate our actions.\nMoral skepticism.\nMoral skepticism (or moral scepticism) is a class of metaethical theories in which all members entail that no one has any moral knowledge. Many moral skeptics also make the stronger, modal claim that moral knowledge is impossible. Moral skepticism is particularly against moral realism which holds the view that there are knowable and objective moral truths.\nSome proponents of moral skepticism include Pyrrho, Aenesidemus, Sextus Empiricus, David Hume, Max Stirner, Friedrich Nietzsche, and J.L. Mackie.\nMoral skepticism is divided into three sub-classes:\nAll of these three theories share the same conclusions, which are as follows:\nHowever, each method arrives at (a) and (b) by different routes.\nMoral error theory holds that we do not know that any moral claim is true because\nEpistemological moral skepticism is a subclass of theory, the members of which include Pyrrhonian moral skepticism and dogmatic moral skepticism. All members of epistemological moral skepticism share two things: first, they acknowledge that we are unjustified in believing any moral claim, and second, they are agnostic on whether (i) is true (i.e. on whether all moral claims are false).\nNoncognitivism holds that we can never know that any moral claim is true because moral claims are \"incapable\" of being true or false (they are not truth-apt). Instead, moral claims are imperatives (e.g. \"Don't steal babies!\"), expressions of emotion (e.g. \"stealing babies: Boo!\"), or expressions of \"pro-attitudes\" (\"I do not believe that babies should be stolen.\")\nNormative ethics.\nNormative ethics is the study of ethical action. It is the branch of ethics that investigates the set of questions that arise when considering how one ought to act, morally speaking. Normative ethics is distinct from meta-ethics because normative ethics examines standards for the rightness and wrongness of actions, while meta-ethics studies the meaning of moral language and the metaphysics of moral facts. Normative ethics is also distinct from descriptive ethics, as the latter is an empirical investigation of people's moral beliefs. To put it another way, descriptive ethics would be concerned with determining what proportion of people believe that killing is always wrong, while normative ethics is concerned with whether it is correct to hold such a belief. Hence, normative ethics is sometimes called prescriptive rather than descriptive. However, on certain versions of the meta-ethical view called moral realism, moral facts are both descriptive and prescriptive at the same time.\nTraditionally, normative ethics (also known as moral theory) was the study of what makes actions right and wrong. These theories offered an overarching moral principle one could appeal to in resolving difficult moral decisions.\nAt the turn of the 20th century, moral theories became more complex and were no longer concerned solely with rightness and wrongness, but were interested in many different kinds of moral status. During the middle of the century, the study of normative ethics declined as meta-ethics grew in prominence. This focus on meta-ethics was in part caused by an intense linguistic focus in analytic philosophy and by the popularity of logical positivism.\nVirtue ethics.\nVirtue ethics describes the character of a moral agent as a driving force for ethical behavior, and it is used to describe the ethics of early Greek philosophers such as Socrates and Aristotle, and ancient Indian philosophers such as Valluvar. Socrates (469\u2013399 BC) was one of the first Greek philosophers to encourage both scholars and the common citizen to turn their attention from the outside world to the condition of humankind. In this view, knowledge bearing on human life was placed highest, while all other knowledge was secondary. Self-knowledge was considered necessary for success and inherently an essential good. A self-aware person will act completely within his capabilities to his pinnacle, while an ignorant person will flounder and encounter difficulty. To Socrates, a person must become aware of every fact (and its context) relevant to his existence, if he wishes to attain self-knowledge. He posited that people will naturally do what is good if they know what is right. Evil or bad actions are the results of ignorance. If a criminal was truly aware of the intellectual and spiritual consequences of his or her actions, he or she would neither commit nor even consider committing those actions. Any person who knows what is truly right will automatically do it, according to Socrates. While he correlated knowledge with virtue, he similarly equated virtue with joy. The truly wise man will know what is right, do what is good, and therefore be happy.\nAristotle (384\u2013323\u00a0BC) posited an ethical system that may be termed \"virtuous\". In Aristotle's view, when a person acts in accordance with virtue this person will do good and be content. Unhappiness and frustration are caused by doing wrong, leading to failed goals and a poor life. Therefore, it is imperative for people to act in accordance with virtue, which is only attainable by the practice of the virtues in order to be content and complete. Happiness was held to be the ultimate goal. All other things, such as civic life or wealth, were only made worthwhile and of benefit when employed in the practice of the virtues. The practice of the virtues is the surest path to happiness. Aristotle asserted that the soul of man had three natures: body (physical/metabolism), animal (emotional/appetite), and rational (mental/conceptual). Physical nature can be assuaged through exercise and care; emotional nature through indulgence of instinct and urges; and mental nature through human reason and developed potential. Rational development was considered the most important, as essential to philosophical self-awareness, and as uniquely human. Moderation was encouraged, with the extremes seen as degraded and immoral. For example, courage is the moderate virtue between the extremes of cowardice and recklessness. Man should not simply live, but live well with conduct governed by virtue. This is regarded as difficult, as virtue denotes doing the right thing, in the right way, at the right time, for the right reason.\nValluvar (before 5th century CE) keeps virtue, or \"a\u1e5fam\" (dharma) as he calls it, as the cornerstone throughout the writing of the Kural literature. While religious scriptures generally consider \"a\u1e5fam\" as divine in nature, Valluvar describes it as a way of life rather than any spiritual observance, a way of harmonious living that leads to universal happiness. Contrary to what other contemporary works say, Valluvar holds that \"a\u1e5fam\" is common for all, irrespective of whether the person is a bearer of palanquin or the rider in it. Valluvar considered justice as a facet of \"a\u1e5fam.\" While ancient Greek philosophers such as Plato, Aristotle, and their descendants opined that justice cannot be defined and that it was a divine mystery, Valluvar positively suggested that a divine origin is not required to define the concept of justice. In the words of V. R. Nedunchezhiyan, justice according to Valluvar \"dwells in the minds of those who have knowledge of the standard of right and wrong; so too deceit dwells in the minds which breed fraud.\"\nStoicism.\nThe Stoic philosopher Epictetus posited that the greatest good was contentment and serenity. Peace of mind, or \"apatheia\", was of the highest value; self-mastery over one's desires and emotions leads to spiritual peace. The \"unconquerable will\" is central to this philosophy. The individual's will should be independent and inviolate. Allowing a person to disturb the mental equilibrium is, in essence, offering yourself in slavery. If a person is free to anger you at will, you have no control over your internal world, and therefore no freedom. Freedom from material attachments is also necessary. If a thing breaks, the person should not be upset, but realize it was a thing that could break. Similarly, if someone should die, those close to them should hold to their serenity because the loved one was made of flesh and blood destined to death. Stoic philosophy says to accept things that cannot be changed, resigning oneself to the existence and enduring in a rational fashion. Death is not feared. People do not \"lose\" their life, but instead \"return\", for they are returning to God (who initially gave what the person is as a person). Epictetus said difficult problems in life should not be avoided, but rather embraced. They are spiritual exercises needed for the health of the spirit, just as physical exercise is required for the health of the body. He also stated that sex and sexual desire are to be avoided as the greatest threat to the integrity and equilibrium of a man's mind. Abstinence is highly desirable. Epictetus said remaining abstinent in the face of temptation was a victory for which a man could be proud.\nContemporary virtue ethics.\nModern virtue ethics was popularized during the late 20th century in large part due to a revival of Aristotelianism, and as a response to G.E.M. Anscombe's \"Modern Moral Philosophy\". Anscombe argues that consequentialist and deontological ethics are only feasible as universal theories if the two schools ground themselves in divine law. As a deeply devoted Christian herself, Anscombe proposed that either those who do not give ethical credence to notions of divine law take up virtue ethics, which does not necessitate universal laws as agents themselves are investigated for virtue or vice and held up to \"universal standards\", or that those who wish to be utilitarian or consequentialist ground their theories in religious conviction. Alasdair MacIntyre, who wrote the book \"After Virtue\", was a key contributor and proponent of modern virtue ethics, although some claim that MacIntyre supports a relativistic account of virtue based on cultural norms, not objective standards. Martha Nussbaum, a contemporary virtue ethicist, objects to MacIntyre's relativism, among that of others, and responds to relativist objections to form an objective account in her work \"Non-Relative Virtues: An Aristotelian Approach\". However, Nussbaum's accusation of relativism appears to be a misreading. In \"Whose Justice, Whose Rationality?\", MacIntyre's ambition of taking a rational path beyond relativism was quite clear when he stated \"rival claims made by different traditions [\u2026] are to be evaluated [\u2026] without relativism\" (p.\u00a0354) because indeed \"rational debate between and rational choice among rival traditions is possible\u201d (p.\u00a0352). \"Complete Conduct Principles for the 21st Century\" blended the Eastern virtue ethics and the Western virtue ethics, with some modifications to suit the 21st Century, and formed a part of contemporary virtue ethics.\nMortimer J. Adler described Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics as a \"unique book in the Western tradition of moral philosophy, the only ethics that is sound, practical, and undogmatic.\"\nOne major trend in contemporary virtue ethics is the Modern Stoicism movement.\nIntuitive ethics.\nEthical intuitionism (also called moral intuitionism) is a family of views in moral epistemology (and, on some definitions, metaphysics). At minimum, ethical intuitionism is the thesis that our intuitive awareness of value, or intuitive knowledge of evaluative facts, forms the foundation of our ethical knowledge.\nThe view is at its core a foundationalism about moral knowledge: it is the view that some moral truths can be known non-inferentially (i.e., known without one needing to infer them from other truths one believes). Such an epistemological view implies that there are moral beliefs with propositional contents; so it implies cognitivism. As such, ethical intuitionism is to be contrasted with coherentist approaches to moral epistemology, such as those that depend on reflective equilibrium.\nThroughout the philosophical literature, the term \"ethical intuitionism\" is frequently used with significant variation in its sense. This article's focus on foundationalism reflects the core commitments of contemporary self-identified ethical intuitionists.\nSufficiently broadly defined, ethical intuitionism can be taken to encompass cognitivist forms of moral sense theory. It is usually furthermore taken as essential to ethical intuitionism that there be self-evident or \"a priori\" moral knowledge; this counts against considering moral sense theory to be a species of intuitionism. (see the Rational intuition versus moral sense section of this article for further discussion).\nEthical intuitionism was first clearly shown in use by the philosopher Francis Hutcheson. Later ethical intuitionists of influence and note include Henry Sidgwick, G.E. Moore, Harold Arthur Prichard, C.S. Lewis and, most influentially, Robert Audi.\nObjections to ethical intuitionism include whether or not there are objective moral values- an assumption which the ethical system is based upon- the question of why many disagree over ethics if they are absolute, and whether Occam's razor cancels such a theory out entirely.\nHedonism.\nHedonism posits that the principal ethic is maximizing pleasure and minimizing pain. There are several schools of Hedonist thought ranging from those advocating the indulgence of even momentary desires to those teaching a pursuit of spiritual bliss. In their consideration of consequences, they range from those advocating self-gratification regardless of the pain and expense to others, to those stating that the most ethical pursuit maximizes pleasure and happiness for the most people.\nCyrenaic hedonism.\nFounded by Aristippus of Cyrene, Cyrenaics supported immediate gratification or pleasure. \"Eat, drink and be merry, for tomorrow we die.\" Even fleeting desires should be indulged, for fear the opportunity should be forever lost. There was little to no concern with the future, the present dominating in the pursuit of immediate pleasure. Cyrenaic hedonism encouraged the pursuit of enjoyment and indulgence without hesitation, believing pleasure to be the only good.\nEpicureanism.\nEpicurean ethics is a hedonist form of virtue ethics. Epicurus \"...presented a sustained argument that pleasure, correctly understood, will coincide with virtue.\" He rejected the extremism of the Cyrenaics, believing some pleasures and indulgences to be detrimental to human beings. Epicureans observed that indiscriminate indulgence sometimes resulted in negative consequences. Some experiences were therefore rejected out of hand, and some unpleasant experiences endured in the present to ensure a better life in the future. To Epicurus, the \"summum bonum\", or greatest good, was prudence, exercised through moderation and caution. Excessive indulgence can be destructive to pleasure and can even lead to pain. For example, eating one food too often makes a person lose a taste for it. Eating too much food at once leads to discomfort and ill-health. Pain and fear were to be avoided. Living was essentially good, barring pain and illness. Death was not to be feared. Fear was considered the source of most unhappiness. Conquering the fear of death would naturally lead to a happier life. Epicurus reasoned if there were an afterlife and immortality, the fear of death was irrational. If there was no life after death, then the person would not be alive to suffer, fear, or worry; he would be non-existent in death. It is irrational to fret over circumstances that do not exist, such as one's state of death in the absence of an afterlife.\nState consequentialism.\nState consequentialism, also known as Mohist consequentialism, is an ethical theory that evaluates the moral worth of an action based on how much it contributes to the basic goods of a state. The \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" describes Mohist consequentialism, dating back to the 5th century BC, as \"a remarkably sophisticated version based on a plurality of intrinsic goods taken as constitutive of human welfare\". Unlike utilitarianism, which views pleasure as a moral good, \"the basic goods in Mohist consequentialist thinking are\u00a0... order, material wealth, and increase in population\". During Mozi's era, war and famines were common, and population growth was seen as a moral necessity for a harmonious society. The \"material wealth\" of Mohist consequentialism refers to basic needs like shelter and clothing, and the \"order\" of Mohist consequentialism refers to Mozi's stance against warfare and violence, which he viewed as pointless and a threat to social stability.\nStanford sinologist David Shepherd Nivison, in \"The Cambridge History of Ancient China\", writes that the moral goods of Mohism \"are interrelated: more basic wealth, then more reproduction; more people, then more production and wealth\u00a0... if people have plenty, they would be good, filial, kind, and so on unproblematically.\" The Mohists believed that morality is based on \"promoting the benefit of all under heaven and eliminating harm to all under heaven\". In contrast to Bentham's views, state consequentialism is not utilitarian because it is not hedonistic or individualistic. The importance of outcomes that are good for the community outweighs the importance of individual pleasure and pain.\nConsequentialism.\nConsequentialism refers to moral theories that hold the consequences of a particular action form the basis for any valid moral judgment about that action (or create a structure for judgment, see rule consequentialism). Thus, from a consequentialist standpoint, morally right action is one that produces a good outcome, or consequence. This view is often expressed as the aphorism \"The ends justify the means\".\nThe term \"consequentialism\" was coined by G.E.M. Anscombe in her essay \"Modern Moral Philosophy\" in 1958, to describe what she saw as the central error of certain moral theories, such as those propounded by Mill and Sidgwick. Since then, the term has become common in English-language ethical theory.\nThe defining feature of consequentialist moral theories is the weight given to the consequences in evaluating the rightness and wrongness of actions. In consequentialist theories, the consequences of an action or rule generally outweigh other considerations. Apart from this basic outline, there is little else that can be unequivocally said about consequentialism as such. However, there are some questions that many consequentialist theories address:\nOne way to divide various consequentialisms is by the many types of consequences that are taken to matter most, that is, which consequences count as good states of affairs. According to utilitarianism, a good action is one that results in an increase and positive effect, and the best action is one that results in that effect for the greatest number. Closely related is eudaimonic consequentialism, according to which a full, flourishing life, which may or may not be the same as enjoying a great deal of pleasure, is the ultimate aim. Similarly, one might adopt an aesthetic consequentialism, in which the ultimate aim is to produce beauty. However, one might fix on non-psychological goods as the relevant effect. Thus, one might pursue an increase in material equality or political liberty instead of something like the more ephemeral \"pleasure\". Other theories adopt a package of several goods, all to be promoted equally. Whether a particular consequentialist theory focuses on a single good or many, conflicts and tensions between different good states of affairs are to be expected and must be adjudicated.\nUtilitarianism.\nUtilitarianism is an ethical theory that argues the proper course of action is one that maximizes a positive effect, such as \"happiness\", \"welfare\", or the ability to live according to personal preferences. Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill are influential proponents of this school of thought. In \"A Fragment on Government\" Bentham says 'it is the greatest happiness of the greatest number that is the measure of right and wrong' and describes this as a fundamental axiom. In \"An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation\" he talks of 'the principle of utility' but later prefers \"the greatest happiness principle\".\nUtilitarianism is the paradigmatic example of a consequentialist moral theory. This form of utilitarianism holds that the morally correct action is the one that produces the best outcome for all people affected by the action. John Stuart Mill, in his exposition of utilitarianism, proposed a hierarchy of pleasures, meaning that the pursuit of certain kinds of pleasure is more highly valued than the pursuit of other pleasures. Other noteworthy proponents of utilitarianism are neuroscientist Sam Harris, author of \"The Moral Landscape\", and moral philosopher Peter Singer, author of, amongst other works, \"Practical Ethics\".\nThe major division within utilitarianism is between \"act utilitarianism\" and \"rule utilitarianism\". In act utilitarianism, the principle of utility applies directly to each alternative act in a situation of choice. The right act is the one that brings about the best results (or the least amount of bad results). In rule utilitarianism, the principle of utility determines the validity of rules of conduct (moral principles). A rule like promise-keeping is established by looking at the consequences of a world in which people break promises at will and a world in which promises are binding. Right and wrong are the following or breaking of rules that are sanctioned by their utilitarian value. A proposed \"middle ground\" between these two types is Two-level utilitarianism, where rules are applied in ordinary circumstances, but with an allowance to choose actions outside of such rules when unusual situations call for it.\nDeontology.\nDeontological ethics or deontology (from Greek , \"deon\", \"obligation, duty\"; and , \"-logia\") is an approach to ethics that determines goodness or rightness from examining acts, or the rules and duties that the person doing the act strove to fulfill. This is in contrast to consequentialism, in which rightness is based on the consequences of an act, and not the act by itself. Under deontology, an act may be considered right even if it produces a bad consequence, if it follows the \"rule\" or moral law. According to the deontological view, people have a \"duty\" to act in ways that are deemed inherently good (\"truth-telling\" for example), or follow an objectively obligatory rule (as in rule utilitarianism).\nKantianism.\nImmanuel Kant's theory of ethics is considered deontological for several different reasons. First, Kant argues that to act in the morally right way, people must act from duty (\"Pflicht\"). Second, Kant argued that it was not the consequences of actions that make them right or wrong but the motives of the person who carries out the action.\nKant's argument that to act in the morally right way one must act purely from duty begins with an argument that the highest good must be both good in itself and good without qualification. Something is \"good in itself\" when it is intrinsically good, and \"good without qualification\", when the addition of that thing never makes a situation ethically worse. Kant then argues that those things that are usually thought to be good, such as intelligence, perseverance and pleasure, fail to be either intrinsically good or good without qualification. Pleasure, for example, appears not to be good without qualification, because when people take pleasure in watching someone suffer, this seems to make the situation ethically worse. He concludes that there is only one thing that is truly good:\nKant then argues that the consequences of an act of willing cannot be used to determine that the person has a good will; good consequences could arise by accident from an action that was motivated by a desire to cause harm to an innocent person, and bad consequences could arise from an action that was well-motivated. Instead, he claims, a person has goodwill when he 'acts out of respect for the moral law'. People 'act out of respect for the moral law' when they act in some way \"because\" they have a duty to do so. So, the only thing that is truly good in itself is goodwill, and goodwill is only good when the willer chooses to do something because it is that person's duty, i.e. out of \"respect\" for the law. He defines respect as \"the concept of a worth which thwarts my self-love\".\nKant's three significant formulations of the categorical imperative are:\nKant argued that the only absolutely good thing is a good will, and so the single determining factor of whether an action is morally right is the will, or motive of the person doing it. If they are acting on a bad maxim, e.g. \"I will lie\", then their action is wrong, even if some good consequences come of it.\nIn his essay, \"On a Supposed Right to Lie Because of Philanthropic Concerns\", arguing against the position of \nBenjamin Constant, \"Des r\u00e9actions politiques\", Kant states that \"Hence a lie defined merely as an intentionally untruthful declaration to another man does not require the additional condition that it must do harm to another, as jurists require in their definition (\"mendacium est falsiloquium in praeiudicium alterius\"). For a lie always harms another; if not some human being, then it nevertheless does harm to humanity in general, inasmuch as it vitiates the very source of right [\"Rechtsquelle\"] ... All practical principles of right must contain rigorous truth ... This is because such exceptions would destroy the universality on account of which alone they bear the name of principles.\"\nDivine command theory.\nAlthough not all deontologists are religious, some belief in the 'divine command theory', which is actually a cluster of related theories which essentially state that an action is right if God has decreed that it is right. According to Ralph Cudworth, an English philosopher, William of Ockham, Ren\u00e9 Descartes, and eighteenth-century Calvinists all accepted various versions of this moral theory, as they all held that moral obligations arise from God's commands. The Divine Command Theory is a form of deontology because, according to it, the rightness of any action depends upon that action being performed because it is a duty, not because of any good consequences arising from that action. If God commands people not to work on Sabbath, then people act rightly if they do not work on Sabbath \"because God has commanded that they do not do so\". If they do not work on Sabbath because they are lazy, then their action is not truly speaking \"right\", even though the actual physical action performed is the same. If God commands not to covet a neighbour's goods, this theory holds that it would be immoral to do so, even if coveting provides the beneficial outcome of a drive to succeed or do well.\nOne thing that clearly distinguishes Kantian deontologism from divine command deontology is that Kantianism maintains that man, as a rational being, makes the moral law universal, whereas divine command maintains that God makes the moral law universal.\nDiscourse ethics.\nGerman philosopher J\u00fcrgen Habermas has proposed a theory of discourse ethics that he claims is a descendant of Kantian ethics. He proposes that action should be based on communication between those involved, in which their interests and intentions are discussed so they can be understood by all. Rejecting any form of coercion or manipulation, Habermas believes that agreement between the parties is crucial for a moral decision to be reached. Like Kantian ethics, discourse ethics is a cognitive ethical theory, in that it supposes that truth and falsity can be attributed to ethical propositions. It also formulates a rule by which ethical actions can be determined and proposes that ethical actions should be universalisable, in a similar way to Kant's ethics.\nHabermas argues that his ethical theory is an improvement on Kant's ethics. He rejects the dualistic framework of Kant's ethics. Kant distinguished between the phenomena world, which can be sensed and experienced by humans, and the noumena, or spiritual world, which is inaccessible to humans. This dichotomy was necessary for Kant because it could explain the autonomy of a human agent: although a human is bound in the phenomenal world, their actions are free in the intelligible world. For Habermas, morality arises from discourse, which is made necessary by their rationality and needs, rather than their freedom.\nPragmatic ethics.\nAssociated with the pragmatists, Charles Sanders Peirce, William James, and especially John Dewey, pragmatic ethics holds that moral correctness evolves similarly to scientific knowledge: socially over the course of many lifetimes. Thus, we should prioritize social reform over attempts to account for consequences, individual virtue or duty (although these may be worthwhile attempts, if social reform is provided for).\nEthics of care.\nCare ethics contrasts with more well-known ethical models, such as consequentialist theories (e.g. utilitarianism) and deontological theories (e.g., Kantian ethics) in that it seeks to incorporate traditionally feminized virtues and values that\u2014proponents of care ethics contend\u2014are absent in such traditional models of ethics. These values include the importance of empathetic relationships and compassion.\nCare-focused feminism is a branch of feminist thought, informed primarily by ethics of care as developed by Carol Gilligan and Nel Noddings. This body of theory is critical of how caring is socially assigned to women, and consequently devalued. They write, \"Care-focused feminists regard women's capacity for care as a human strength,\" that should be taught to and expected of men as well as women. Noddings proposes that ethical caring has the potential to be a more concrete evaluative model of moral dilemma than an ethic of justice. Noddings\u2019 care-focused feminism requires practical application of relational ethics, predicated on an ethic of care.\nRole ethics.\nRole ethics is an ethical theory based on family roles. Unlike virtue ethics, role ethics is not individualistic. Morality is derived from a person's relationship with their community. Confucian ethics is an example of role ethics though this is not straightforwardly uncontested. Confucian roles center around the concept of filial piety or \"xiao\", a respect for family members. According to Roger T. Ames and Henry Rosemont, \"Confucian normativity is defined by living one's family roles to maximum effect.\" Morality is determined through a person's fulfillment of a role, such as that of a parent or a child. Confucian roles are not rational, and originate through the \"xin\", or human emotions.\nAnarchist ethics.\nAnarchist ethics is an ethical theory based on the studies of anarchist thinkers. The biggest contributor to the anarchist ethics is the Russian zoologist, geographer, economist, and political activist Peter Kropotkin.\nStarting from the premise that the goal of ethical philosophy should be to help humans adapt and thrive in evolutionary terms, Kropotkin's ethical framework uses biology and anthropology as a basis \u2013 in order to scientifically establish what will best enable a given social order to thrive biologically and socially \u2013 and advocates certain behavioural practices to enhance humanity's capacity for freedom and well-being, namely practices which emphasise solidarity, equality, and justice.\nKropotkin argues that ethics itself is evolutionary, and is inherited as a sort of a social instinct through cultural history, and by so, he rejects any religious and transcendental explanation of morality. The origin of ethical feeling in both animals and humans can be found, he claims, in the natural fact of \"sociality\" (mutualistic symbiosis), which humans can then combine with the instinct for justice (i.e. equality) and then with the practice of reason to construct a non-supernatural and anarchistic system of ethics. Kropotkin suggests that the principle of equality at the core of anarchism is the same as the Golden rule: This principle of treating others as one wishes to be treated oneself, what is it but the very same principle as equality, the fundamental principle of anarchism? And how can any one manage to believe himself an anarchist unless he practices it? We do not wish to be ruled. And by this very fact, do we not declare that we ourselves wish to rule nobody? We do not wish to be deceived, we wish always to be told nothing but the truth. And by this very fact, do we not declare that we ourselves do not wish to deceive anybody, that we promise to always tell the truth, nothing but the truth, the whole truth? We do not wish to have the fruits of our labor stolen from us. And by that very fact, do we not declare that we respect the fruits of others' labor? By what right indeed can we demand that we should be treated in one fashion, reserving it to ourselves to treat others in a fashion entirely different? Our sense of equality revolts at such an idea.\nPostmodern ethics.\nThe 20th century saw a remarkable expansion and evolution of critical theory, following on earlier Marxist Theory efforts to locate individuals within larger structural frameworks of ideology and action.\nAntihumanists such as Louis Althusser, Michel Foucault and structuralists such as Roland Barthes challenged the possibilities of individual agency and the coherence of the notion of the 'individual' itself. This was on the basis that personal identity was, in the most part, a social construction. As critical theory developed in the later 20th century, post-structuralism sought to problematize human relationships to knowledge and 'objective' reality. Jacques Derrida argued that access to meaning and the 'real' was always deferred, and sought to demonstrate via recourse to the linguistic realm that \"there is no outside-text/non-text\" (\"il n'y a pas de hors-texte\" is often mistranslated as \"there is nothing outside the text\"); at the same time, Jean Baudrillard theorised that signs and symbols or simulacra mask reality (and eventually the absence of reality itself), particularly in the consumer world.\nPost-structuralism and postmodernism argue that ethics must study the complex and relational conditions of actions. A simple alignment of ideas of right and particular acts is not possible. There will always be an ethical remainder that cannot be taken into account or often even recognized. Such theorists find narrative (or, following Nietzsche and Foucault, genealogy) to be a helpful tool for understanding ethics because narrative is always about particular lived experiences in all their complexity rather than the assignment of an idea or norm to separate and individual actions.\nZygmunt Bauman says postmodernity is best described as modernity without illusion, the illusion being the belief that humanity can be repaired by some ethic principle. Postmodernity can be seen in this light as accepting the messy nature of humanity as unchangeable. In this postmodern world, the means to act collectively and globally to solve large-scale problems have been all but discredited, dismantled or lost. Problems can be handled only locally and each on its own. All problem-handling means building a mini-order at the expense of order elsewhere, and at the cost of rising global disorder as well as depleting the shrinking supplies of resources which make ordering possible. He considers Emmanuel Levinas's ethics as postmodern. Unlike the modern ethical philosophy which leaves the Other on the outside of the self as an ambivalent presence, Levinas's philosophy readmits her as a neighbor and as a crucial character in the process through which the moral self comes into its own.\nDavid Couzens Hoy states that Emmanuel Levinas's writings on the face of the Other and Derrida's meditations on the relevance of death to ethics are signs of the \"ethical turn\" in Continental philosophy that occurred in the 1980s and 1990s. Hoy describes post-critique ethics as the \"obligations that present themselves as necessarily to be fulfilled but are neither forced on one or are enforceable\" (2004, p.\u00a0103).\nHoy's post-critique model uses the term \"ethical resistance\". Examples of this would be an individual's resistance to consumerism in a retreat to a simpler but perhaps harder lifestyle, or an individual's resistance to a terminal illness. Hoy describes Levinas's account as \"not the attempt to use power against itself, or to mobilize sectors of the population to exert their political power; the ethical resistance is instead the resistance of the powerless\"(2004, p.\u00a08).\nHoy concludes that\nApplied ethics.\nApplied ethics is a discipline of philosophy that attempts to apply ethical theory to real-life situations. The discipline has many specialized fields, such as engineering ethics, bioethics, geoethics, public service ethics and business ethics.\nSpecific questions.\nApplied ethics is used in some aspects of determining public policy, as well as by individuals facing difficult decisions. The sort of questions addressed by applied ethics include: \"Is getting an abortion immoral?\"; \"Is euthanasia immoral?\"; \"Is affirmative action right or wrong?\"; \"What are human rights, and how do we determine them?\"; \"Do animals have rights as well?\"; and \"Do individuals have the right of self-determination?\"\nA more specific question could be: \"If someone else can make better out of his/her life than I can, is it then moral to sacrifice myself for them if needed?\" Without these questions, there is no clear fulcrum on which to balance law, politics, and the practice of arbitration\u2014in fact, no common assumptions of all participants\u2014so the ability to formulate the questions are prior to rights balancing. But not all questions studied in applied ethics concern public policy. For example, making ethical judgments regarding questions such as, \"Is lying always wrong?\" and, \"If not, when is it permissible?\" is prior to any etiquette.\nPeople, in general, are more comfortable with dichotomies (two opposites). However, in ethics, the issues are most often multifaceted and the best-proposed actions address many different areas concurrently. In ethical decisions, the answer is almost never a \"yes or no\" or a \"right or wrong\" statement. Many buttons are pushed so that the overall condition is improved and not to the benefit of any particular faction.\nAnd it has not only been shown that people consider the character of the moral agent (i.e. a principle implied in virtue ethics), the deed of the action (i.e. a principle implied in deontology), and the consequences of the action (i.e. a principle implied in utilitarianism) when formulating moral judgments, but moreover that the effect of each of these three components depends on the value of each component.\nParticular fields of application.\nBioethics.\nBioethics is the study of controversial ethics brought about by advances in biology and medicine. Bioethicists are concerned with the ethical questions that arise in the relationships among life sciences, biotechnology, medicine, politics, law, and philosophy. It also includes the study of the more commonplace questions of values (\"the ethics of the ordinary\") that arise in primary care and other branches of medicine.\nBioethics also needs to address emerging biotechnologies that affect basic biology and future humans. These developments include cloning, gene therapy, human genetic engineering, astroethics and life in space, and manipulation of basic biology through altered DNA, RNA and proteins, e.g. \"three parent baby, where baby is born from genetically modified embryos, would have DNA from a mother, a father and from a female donor. Correspondingly, new bioethics also need to address life at its core. For example, biotic ethics value organic gene/protein life itself and seek to propagate it. With such life-centered principles, ethics may secure a cosmological future for life.\nBusiness ethics.\nBusiness ethics (also corporate ethics) is a form of applied ethics or professional ethics that examines ethical principles and moral or ethical problems that arise in a business environment, including fields like medical ethics. Business ethics represents the practices that any individual or group exhibits within an organization that can negatively or positively affect the businesses core values. It applies to all aspects of business conduct and is relevant to the conduct of individuals and entire organizations.\nBusiness ethics has both normative and descriptive dimensions. As a corporate practice and a career specialization, the field is primarily normative. Academics attempting to understand business behavior employ descriptive methods. The range and quantity of business ethical issues reflect the interaction of profit-maximizing behavior with non-economic concerns. Interest in business ethics accelerated dramatically during the 1980s and 1990s, both within major corporations and within academia. For example, today most major corporations promote their commitment to non-economic values under headings such as ethics codes and social responsibility charters. Adam Smith said, \"People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices.\" Governments use laws and regulations to point business behavior in what they perceive to be beneficial directions. Ethics implicitly regulates areas and details of behavior that lie beyond governmental control. The emergence of large corporations with limited relationships and sensitivity to the communities in which they operate accelerated the development of formal ethics regimes. Business ethics also relates to unethical activities of interorganizational relationships, such as strategic alliances, buyer-supplier relationships, or joint ventures. Such unethical practices include, for instance, opportunistic behaviors, contract violations, and deceitful practices. Some corporations have tried to burnish their ethical image by creating whistle-blower protections, such as anonymity. In the case of Citi, they call this the Ethics Hotline. Though it is unclear whether firms such as Citi take offences reported to these hotlines seriously or not.\nMachine ethics.\nIn \"Moral Machines: Teaching Robots Right from Wrong\", Wendell Wallach and Colin Allen conclude that issues in machine ethics will likely drive advancement in understanding of human ethics by forcing us to address gaps in modern normative theory and by providing a platform for experimental investigation. The effort to actually program a machine or artificial agent to behave as though instilled with a sense of ethics requires new specificity in our normative theories, especially regarding aspects customarily considered common-sense. For example, machines, unlike humans, can support a wide selection of learning algorithms, and controversy has arisen over the relative ethical merits of these options. This may reopen classic debates of normative ethics framed in new (highly technical) terms.\nMilitary ethics.\nMilitary ethics are concerned with questions regarding the application of force and the ethos of the soldier and are often understood as applied professional ethics. Just war theory is generally seen to set the background terms of military ethics. However individual countries and traditions have different fields of attention.\nMilitary ethics involves multiple subareas, including the following among others:\nPolitical ethics.\nPolitical ethics (also known as political morality or public ethics) is the practice of making moral judgements about political action and political agents.\nPublic sector ethics.\nPublic sector ethics is a set of principles that guide public officials in their service to their constituents, including their decision-making on behalf of their constituents. Fundamental to the concept of public sector ethics is the notion that decisions and actions are based on what best serves the public's interests, as opposed to the official's personal interests (including financial interests) or self-serving political interests.\nPublication ethics.\nPublication ethics is the set of principles that guide the writing and publishing process for all professional publications. To follow these principles, authors must verify that the publication does not contain plagiarism or publication bias. As a way to avoid misconduct in research these principles can also apply to experiments that are referenced or analyzed in publications by ensuring the data is recorded honestly and accurately.\nPlagiarism is the failure to give credit to another author's work or ideas, when it is used in the publication. It is the obligation of the editor of the journal to ensure the article does not contain any plagiarism before it is published. If a publication that has already been published is proven to contain plagiarism, the editor of the journal can retract the article.\nPublication bias occurs when the publication is one-sided or \"prejudiced against results\". In best practice, an author should try to include information from all parties involved, or affected by the topic. If an author is prejudiced against certain results, than it can \"lead to erroneous conclusions being drawn\".\nMisconduct in research can occur when an experimenter falsifies results. Falsely recorded information occurs when the researcher \"fakes\" information or data, which was not used when conducting the actual experiment. By faking the data, the researcher can alter the results from the experiment to better fit the hypothesis they originally predicted. When conducting medical research, it is important to honor the healthcare rights of a patient by protecting their anonymity in the publication.\n\"Respect for autonomy\" is the principle that decision-making should allow individuals to be autonomous; they should be able to make decisions that apply to their own lives. This means that individuals should have control of their lives.\n\"Justice\" is the principle that decision-makers must focus on actions that are fair to those affected. Ethical decisions need to be consistent with the ethical theory. There are cases where the management has made decisions that seem to be unfair to the employees, shareholders, and other stakeholders (Solomon, 1992, pp49). Such decisions are unethical.\nRelational ethics.\nRelational ethics are related to an ethics of care. They are used in qualitative research, especially ethnography and autoethnography. Researchers who employ relational ethics value and respect the connection between themselves and the people they study, and \"...between researchers and the communities in which they live and work.\" (Ellis, 2007, p.\u00a04). Relational ethics also help researchers understand difficult issues such as conducting research on intimate others that have died and developing friendships with their participants. Relational ethics in close personal relationships form a central concept of contextual therapy.\nEthics of nanotechnologies.\nEthics of nanotechnology is the study of the ethical issues emerging from advances in nanotechnology.\nEthics of quantification.\nEthics of quantification is the study of the ethical issues associated to different forms of visible or invisible forms of quantification.\nAnimal ethics.\nAnimal ethics is a term used in academia to describe human-animal relationships and how animals ought to be treated. The subject matter includes animal rights, animal welfare, animal law, speciesism, animal cognition, wildlife conservation, the moral status of nonhuman animals, the concept of nonhuman personhood, human exceptionalism, the history of animal use, and theories of justice.\nEthics of technology.\nEthics of technology is a sub-field of ethics addressing the ethical questions specific to the Technology Age. Some prominent works of philosopher Hans Jonas are devoted to ethics of technology. The subject has also been explored, following the work of Mario Bunge, under the term technoethics.\nMoral psychology.\nMoral psychology is a field of study that began as an issue in philosophy and that is now properly considered part of the discipline of psychology. Some use the term \"moral psychology\" relatively narrowly to refer to the study of moral development. However, others tend to use the term more broadly to include any topics at the intersection of ethics and psychology (and philosophy of mind). Such topics are ones that involve the mind and are relevant to moral issues. Some of the main topics of the field are moral responsibility, moral development, moral character (especially as related to virtue ethics), altruism, psychological egoism, moral luck, and moral disagreement.\nEvolutionary ethics.\nEvolutionary ethics concerns approaches to ethics (morality) based on the role of evolution in shaping human psychology and behavior. Such approaches may be based in scientific fields such as evolutionary psychology or sociobiology, with a focus on understanding and explaining observed ethical preferences and choices.\nDescriptive ethics.\nDescriptive ethics is on the less philosophical end of the spectrum since it seeks to gather particular information about how people live and draw general conclusions based on observed patterns. Abstract and theoretical questions that are more clearly philosophical\u2014such as, \"Is ethical knowledge possible?\"\u2014are not central to descriptive ethics. Descriptive ethics offers a value-free approach to ethics, which defines it as a social science rather than a humanity. Its examination of ethics doesn't start with a preconceived theory but rather investigates observations of actual choices made by moral agents in practice. Some philosophers rely on descriptive ethics and choices made and unchallenged by a society or culture to derive categories, which typically vary by context. This can lead to situational ethics and situated ethics. These philosophers often view aesthetics, etiquette, and arbitration as more fundamental, percolating \"bottom up\" to imply the existence of, rather than explicitly prescribe, theories of value or of conduct. The study of descriptive ethics may include examinations of the following:"}
{"id": "9259", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9259", "title": "Equivalence relation", "text": "In mathematics, an equivalence relation is a binary relation that is reflexive, symmetric and transitive. The relation \"is equal to\" is the canonical example of an equivalence relation.\nEach equivalence relation provides a partition of the underlying set into disjoint equivalence classes. Two elements of the given set are equivalent to each other, if and only if they belong to the same equivalence class.\nNotation.\nVarious notations are used in the literature to denote that two elements and of a set are equivalent with respect to an equivalence relation ; the most common are \" and \", which are used when is implicit, and variations of \", \", or \"formula_1\" to specify explicitly. Non-equivalence may be written \"\" or \"formula_2\".\nDefinition.\nA binary relation ~ on a set \"X\" is said to be an equivalence relation, if and only if it is reflexive, symmetric and transitive. That is, for all \"a\", \"b\" and \"c\" in \"X\":\n\"X\" together with the relation ~ is called a setoid. The equivalence class of formula_3 under ~, denoted formula_4, is defined as formula_5.\nExamples.\nSimple example.\nLet the set formula_6 have the equivalence relation formula_7. The following sets are equivalence classes of this relation:\nThe set of all equivalence classes for this relation is formula_9. This set is a partition of the set formula_6.\nEquivalence relations.\nThe following relations are all equivalence relations:\nWell-definedness under an equivalence relation.\nIf ~ is an equivalence relation on \"X\", and \"P\"(\"x\") is a property of elements of \"X\", such that whenever \"x\" ~ \"y\", \"P\"(\"x\") is true if \"P\"(\"y\") is true, then the property \"P\" is said to be well-defined or a \"class invariant\" under the relation ~.\nA frequent particular case occurs when \"f\" is a function from \"X\" to another set \"Y\"; if \"x\"1 ~ \"x\"2 implies \"f\"(\"x\"1) = \"f\"(\"x\"2) then \"f\" is said to be a \"morphism\" for ~, a \"class invariant under\" ~, or simply \"invariant under\" ~. This occurs, e.g. in the character theory of finite groups. The latter case with the function \"f\" can be expressed by a commutative triangle. See also invariant. Some authors use \"compatible with ~\" or just \"respects ~\" instead of \"invariant under ~\".\nMore generally, a function may map equivalent arguments (under an equivalence relation ~A) to equivalent values (under an equivalence relation ~B). Such a function is known as a morphism from ~A to ~B.\nEquivalence class, quotient set, partition.\nLet formula_13. Some definitions:\nEquivalence class.\nA subset \"Y\" of \"X\" such that \"a\" ~ \"b\" holds for all \"a\" and \"b\" in \"Y\", and never for \"a\" in \"Y\" and \"b\" outside \"Y\", is called an equivalence class of \"X\" by ~. Let formula_14 denote the equivalence class to which \"a\" belongs. All elements of \"X\" equivalent to each other are also elements of the same equivalence class.\nQuotient set.\nThe set of all equivalence classes of \"X\" by ~, denoted formula_15, is the quotient set of \"X\" by ~. If \"X\" is a topological space, there is a natural way of transforming \"X\"/~ into a topological space; see quotient space for the details.\nProjection.\nThe projection of ~ is the function formula_16 defined by formula_17 which maps elements of \"X\" into their respective equivalence classes by ~.\nEquivalence kernel.\nThe equivalence kernel of a function \"f\" is the equivalence relation ~ defined by formula_18. The equivalence kernel of an injection is the identity relation.\nPartition.\nA partition of \"X\" is a set \"P\" of nonempty subsets of \"X\", such that every element of \"X\" is an element of a single element of \"P\". Each element of \"P\" is a \"cell\" of the partition. Moreover, the elements of \"P\" are pairwise disjoint and their union is \"X\".\nCounting partitions.\nLet \"X\" be a finite set with \"n\" elements. Since every equivalence relation over \"X\" corresponds to a partition of \"X\", and vice versa, the number of equivalence relations on \"X\" equals the number of distinct partitions of \"X\", which is the \"n\"th Bell number \"Bn\":\nFundamental theorem of equivalence relations.\nA key result links equivalence relations and partitions:\nIn both cases, the cells of the partition of \"X\" are the equivalence classes of \"X\" by ~. Since each element of \"X\" belongs to a unique cell of any partition of \"X\", and since each cell of the partition is identical to an equivalence class of \"X\" by ~, each element of \"X\" belongs to a unique equivalence class of \"X\" by ~. Thus there is a natural bijection between the set of all equivalence relations on \"X\" and the set of all partitions of \"X\".\nComparing equivalence relations.\nIf ~ and \u2248 are two equivalence relations on the same set \"S\", and \"a\"~\"b\" implies \"a\"\u2248\"b\" for all \"a\",\"b\" \u2208 \"S\", then \u2248 is said to be a coarser relation than ~, and ~ is a finer relation than \u2248. Equivalently,\nThe equality equivalence relation is the finest equivalence relation on any set, while the universal relation, which relates all pairs of elements, is the coarsest.\nThe relation \"~ is finer than \u2248\" on the collection of all equivalence relations on a fixed set is itself a partial order relation, which makes the collection a geometric lattice.\nAlgebraic structure.\nMuch of mathematics is grounded in the study of equivalences, and order relations. Lattice theory captures the mathematical structure of order relations. Even though equivalence relations are as ubiquitous in mathematics as order relations, the algebraic structure of equivalences is not as well known as that of orders. The former structure draws primarily on group theory and, to a lesser extent, on the theory of lattices, categories, and groupoids.\nGroup theory.\nJust as order relations are grounded in ordered sets, sets closed under pairwise supremum and infimum, equivalence relations are grounded in partitioned sets, which are sets closed under bijections that preserve partition structure. Since all such bijections map an equivalence class onto itself, such bijections are also known as permutations. Hence permutation groups (also known as transformation groups) and the related notion of orbit shed light on the mathematical structure of equivalence relations.\nLet '~' denote an equivalence relation over some nonempty set \"A\", called the universe or underlying set. Let \"G\" denote the set of bijective functions over \"A\" that preserve the partition structure of \"A\": \u2200\"x\" \u2208 \"A\" \u2200\"g\" \u2208 \"G\" (\"g\"(\"x\") \u2208 [\"x\"]). Then the following three connected theorems hold:\nIn sum, given an equivalence relation ~ over \"A\", there exists a transformation group \"G\" over \"A\" whose orbits are the equivalence classes of \"A\" under ~.\nThis transformation group characterisation of equivalence relations differs fundamentally from the way lattices characterize order relations. The arguments of the lattice theory operations meet and join are elements of some universe \"A\". Meanwhile, the arguments of the transformation group operations composition and inverse are elements of a set of bijections, \"A\" \u2192 \"A\".\nMoving to groups in general, let \"H\" be a subgroup of some group \"G\". Let ~ be an equivalence relation on \"G\", such that \"a\" ~ \"b\" \u2194 (\"ab\"\u22121 \u2208 \"H\"). The equivalence classes of ~\u2014also called the orbits of the action of \"H\" on \"G\"\u2014are the right cosets of \"H\" in \"G\". Interchanging \"a\" and \"b\" yields the left cosets.\nRelated thinking can be found in Rosen (2008: chpt. 10).\nCategories and groupoids.\nLet \"G\" be a set and let \"~\" denote an equivalence relation over \"G\". Then we can form a groupoid representing this equivalence relation as follows. The objects are the elements of \"G\", and for any two elements \"x\" and \"y\" of \"G\", there exists a unique morphism from \"x\" to \"y\" if and only if \"x\"~\"y\".\nThe advantages of regarding an equivalence relation as a special case of a groupoid include:\nLattices.\nThe equivalence relations on any set \"X\", when ordered by set inclusion, form a complete lattice, called Con \"X\" by convention. The canonical map ker: \"X\"^\"X\" \u2192 Con \"X\", relates the monoid \"X\"^\"X\" of all functions on \"X\" and Con \"X\". ker is surjective but not injective. Less formally, the equivalence relation ker on \"X\", takes each function \"f\": \"X\"\u2192\"X\" to its kernel ker \"f\". Likewise, ker(ker) is an equivalence relation on \"X\"^\"X\".\nEquivalence relations and mathematical logic.\nEquivalence relations are a ready source of examples or counterexamples. For example, an equivalence relation with exactly two infinite equivalence classes is an easy example of a theory which is \u03c9-categorical, but not categorical for any larger cardinal number.\nAn implication of model theory is that the properties defining a relation can be proved independent of each other (and hence necessary parts of the definition) if and only if, for each property, examples can be found of relations not satisfying the given property while satisfying all the other properties. Hence the three defining properties of equivalence relations can be proved mutually independent by the following three examples:\nProperties definable in first-order logic that an equivalence relation may or may not possess include:\nEuclidean relations.\nEuclid's \"The Elements\" includes the following \"Common Notion 1\":\nNowadays, the property described by Common Notion 1 is called Euclidean (replacing \"equal\" by \"are in relation with\"). By \"relation\" is meant a binary relation, in which \"aRb\" is generally distinct from \"bRa\". A Euclidean relation thus comes in two forms:\nThe following theorem connects Euclidean relations and equivalence relations:\nwith an analogous proof for a right-Euclidean relation. Hence an equivalence relation is a relation that is \"Euclidean\" and \"reflexive\". \"The Elements\" mentions neither symmetry nor reflexivity, and Euclid probably would have deemed the reflexivity of equality too obvious to warrant explicit mention."}
{"id": "9260", "revid": "2051880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9260", "title": "Equivalence class", "text": "In mathematics, when the elements of some set have a notion of equivalence (formalized as an equivalence relation) defined on them, then one may naturally split the set into equivalence classes. These equivalence classes are constructed so that elements and belong to the same equivalence class if, and only if, they are equivalent.\nFormally, given a set and an equivalence relation on , the \"equivalence class\" of an element in , denoted by formula_1, is the set\nof elements which are equivalent to . It may be proven, from the defining properties of equivalence relations, that the equivalence classes form a partition of . This partition\u2014the set of equivalence classes\u2014is sometimes called the quotient set or the quotient space of by , and is denoted by .\nWhen the set has some structure (such as a group operation or a topology) and the equivalence relation is compatible with this structure, the quotient set often inherits a similar structure from its parent set. Examples include quotient spaces in linear algebra, quotient spaces in topology, quotient groups, homogeneous spaces, quotient rings, quotient monoids, and quotient categories.\nNotation and formal definition.\nAn equivalence relation on a set is a binary relation on satisfying the three properties:\nThe equivalence class of an element is denoted or , and is defined as the set formula_3 of elements that are related to by\u00a0. The word \"class\" in the term \"equivalence class\" does not refer to classes as defined in set theory, however equivalence classes do often turn out to be proper classes.\nThe set of all equivalence classes in with respect to an equivalence relation is denoted as , and is called modulo (or the quotient set of by ). The surjective map formula_4 from onto , which maps each element to its equivalence class, is called the canonical surjection, or the canonical projection map.\nWhen an element is chosen (often implicitly) in each equivalence class, this defines an injective map called a \"section\". If this section is denoted by , one has for every equivalence class . The element is called a representative of . Any element of a class may be chosen as a representative of the class, by choosing the section appropriately.\nSometimes, there is a section that is more \"natural\" than the other ones. In this case, the representatives are called \"canonical representatives\". For example, in modular arithmetic, consider the equivalence relation on the integers defined as follows: if is a multiple of a given positive integer (called the \"modulus\"). Each class contains a unique non-negative integer smaller than , and these integers are the canonical representatives. The class and its representative are more or less identified, as is witnessed by the fact that the notation may denote either the class, or its canonical representative (which is the remainder of the division of by ).\nProperties.\nEvery element of is a member of the equivalence class . Every two equivalence classes and are either equal or disjoint. Therefore, the set of all equivalence classes of forms a partition of : every element of belongs to one and only one equivalence class. Conversely, every partition of comes from an equivalence relation in this way, according to which if and only if and belong to the same set of the partition.\nIt follows from the properties of an equivalence relation that\nIn other words, if is an equivalence relation on a set , and and are two elements of , then these statements are equivalent:\nGraphical representation.\nAn undirected graph may be associated to any symmetric relation on a set , where the vertices are the elements of , and two vertices and are joined if and only if . Among these graphs are the graphs of equivalence relations; they are characterized as the graphs such that the connected components are cliques.\nInvariants.\nIf is an equivalence relation on , and is a property of elements of such that whenever , is true if is true, then the property is said to be an invariant of , or well-defined under the relation .\nA frequent particular case occurs when is a function from to another set ; if whenever , then is said to be \"class invariant under\" , or simply \"invariant under\" . This occurs, e.g. in the character theory of finite groups. Some authors use \"compatible with \" or just \"respects \" instead of \"invariant under \".\nAny function itself defines an equivalence relation on according to which if and only if . The equivalence class of is the set of all elements in which get mapped to , i.e. the class is the inverse image of . This equivalence relation is known as the kernel of .\nMore generally, a function may map equivalent arguments (under an equivalence relation on ) to equivalent values (under an equivalence relation on ). Such a function is a morphism of sets equipped with an equivalence relation.\nQuotient space in topology.\nIn topology, a quotient space is a topological space formed on the set of equivalence classes of an equivalence relation on a topological space, using the original space's topology to create the topology on the set of equivalence classes.\nIn abstract algebra, congruence relations on the underlying set of an algebra allow the algebra to induce an algebra on the equivalence classes of the relation, called a quotient algebra. In linear algebra, a quotient space is a vector space formed by taking a quotient group, where the quotient homomorphism is a linear map. By extension, in abstract algebra, the term quotient space may be used for quotient modules, quotient rings, quotient groups, or any quotient algebra. However, the use of the term for the more general cases can as often be by analogy with the orbits of a group action.\nThe orbits of a group action on a set may be called the quotient space of the action on the set, particularly when the orbits of the group action are the right cosets of a subgroup of a group, which arise from the action of the subgroup on the group by left translations, or respectively the left cosets as orbits under right translation.\nA normal subgroup of a topological group, acting on the group by translation action, is a quotient space in the senses of topology, abstract algebra, and group actions simultaneously.\nAlthough the term can be used for any equivalence relation's set of equivalence classes, possibly with further structure, the intent of using the term is generally to compare that type of equivalence relation on a set , either to an equivalence relation that induces some structure on the set of equivalence classes from a structure of the same kind on , or to the orbits of a group action. Both the sense of a structure preserved by an equivalence relation, and the study of invariants under group actions, lead to the definition of invariants of equivalence relations given above."}
{"id": "9261", "revid": "26386571", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9261", "title": "Electronic Music", "text": ""}
{"id": "9262", "revid": "12416903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9262", "title": "Entertainment", "text": "Entertainment is a form of activity that holds the attention and interest of an audience or gives pleasure and delight. It can be an idea or a task, but is more likely to be one of the activities or events that have developed over thousands of years specifically for the purpose of keeping an audience's attention. \nAlthough people's attention is held by different things because individuals have different preferences, most forms of entertainment are recognisable and familiar. Storytelling, music, drama, dance, and different kinds of performance exist in all cultures, were supported in royal courts, developed into sophisticated forms and over time became available to all citizens. The process has been accelerated in modern times by an entertainment industry that records and sells entertainment products. Entertainment evolves and can be adapted to suit any scale, ranging from an individual who chooses a private entertainment from a now enormous array of pre-recorded products; to a banquet adapted for two; to any size or type of party, with appropriate music and dance; to performances intended for thousands; and even for a global audience.\nThe experience of being entertained has come to be strongly associated with amusement, so that one common understanding of the idea is fun and laughter, although many entertainments have a serious purpose. This may be the case in the various forms of ceremony, celebration, religious festival, or satire for example. Hence, there is the possibility that what appears as entertainment may also be a means of achieving insight or intellectual growth.\nAn important aspect of entertainment is the audience, which turns a private recreation or leisure activity into entertainment. The audience may have a passive role, as in the case of persons watching a play, opera, television show, or film; or the audience role may be active, as in the case of games, where the participant/audience roles may be routinely reversed. Entertainment can be public or private, involving formal, scripted performance, as in the case of theatre or concerts; or unscripted and spontaneous, as in the case of children's games. Most forms of entertainment have persisted over many centuries, evolving due to changes in culture, technology, and fashion for example with stage magic. Films and video games, for example, although they use newer media, continue to tell stories, present drama, and play music. Festivals devoted to music, film, or dance allow audiences to be entertained over a number of consecutive days.\nSome entertainment, such as public executions, are now illegal in most countries. Activities such as fencing or archery, once used in hunting or war, have become spectator sports. In the same way, other activities, such as cooking, have developed into performances among professionals, staged as global competitions and then broadcast for entertainment. What is entertainment for one group or individual may be regarded as work or an act of cruelty by another.\nThe familiar forms of entertainment have the capacity to cross over different media and have demonstrated a seemingly unlimited potential for creative remix. This has ensured the continuity and longevity of many themes, images, and structures.\nEtymology.\nThe Oxford English Dictionary gives Latin and French origins for the word \"entertain\", including \"inter\" (among) + \"tenir\" (to hold) as derivations, giving translations of \"to hold mutually\" or \"to hold intertwined\" and \"to engage, keep occupied, the attention thoughts or time (of a person)\". It also provides words like \"merry-making\", \"pleasure\", \"delight\", as well as \"to receive as a guest and show hospitality to\". It cites a 1490 usage by William Caxton. \nPsychology and philosophy.\nEntertainment can be distinguished from other activities such as education and marketing even though they have learned how to use the appeal of entertainment to achieve their different goals. Sometimes entertainment can be a mixture for both. The importance and impact of entertainment is recognised by scholars and its increasing sophistication has influenced practices in other fields such as museology.\nPsychologists say the function of media entertainment is \"the attainment of gratification\". No other results or measurable benefit are usually expected from it (except perhaps the final score in a sporting entertainment). This is in contrast to education (which is designed with the purpose of developing understanding or helping people to learn) and marketing (which aims to encourage people to purchase commercial products). However, the distinctions become blurred when education seeks to be more \"entertaining\" and entertainment or marketing seek to be more \"educational\". Such mixtures are often known by the neologisms \"edutainment\" or \"infotainment\". The psychology of entertainment as well as of learning has been applied to all these fields. Some education-entertainment is a serious attempt to combine the best features of the two. Some people are entertained by others' pain or the idea of their unhappiness (schadenfreude).\nAn entertainment might go beyond gratification and produce some insight in its audience. Entertainment may skilfully consider universal philosophical questions such as: \"What does it mean to be human?\"; \"What is the right thing to do?\"; or \"How do I know what I know?\". \"The meaning of life\", for example, is the subject in a wide range of entertainment forms, including film, music and literature. Questions such as these drive many narratives and dramas, whether they are presented in the form of a story, film, play, poem, book, dance, comic, or game. Dramatic examples include Shakespeare's influential play \"Hamlet\", whose hero articulates these concerns in poetry; and films, such as \"The Matrix\", which explores the nature of knowledge and was released worldwide. Novels give great scope for investigating these themes while they entertain their readers. An example of a creative work that considers philosophical questions so entertainingly that it has been presented in a very wide range of forms is \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\". Originally a radio comedy, this story became so popular that it has also appeared as a novel, film, television series, stage show, comic, audiobook, LP record, adventure game and online game, its ideas became popular references (see Phrases from The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy) and has been translated into many languages. Its themes encompass the meaning of life, as well as \"the ethics of entertainment, artificial intelligence, multiple worlds, God, and philosophical method\".\nHistory.\nThe \"ancient craft of communicating events and experiences, using words, images, sounds and gestures\" by telling a story is not only the means by which people passed on their cultural values and traditions and history from one generation to another, it has been an important part of most forms of entertainment ever since the earliest times. Stories are still told in the early forms, for example, around a fire while camping, or when listening to the stories of another culture as a tourist. \"The earliest storytelling sequences we possess, now of course, committed to writing, were undoubtedly originally a speaking from mouth to ear and their force as entertainment derived from the very same elements we today enjoy in films and novels.\" Storytelling is an activity that has evolved and developed \"toward variety\". Many entertainments, including storytelling but especially music and drama, remain familiar but have developed into a wide variety of form to suit a very wide range of personal preferences and cultural expression. Many types are blended or supported by other forms. For example, drama, stories and banqueting (or dining) are commonly enhanced by music; sport and games are incorporated into other activities to increase appeal. Some may have evolved from serious or necessary activities (such as running and jumping) into competition and then become entertainment. It is said, for example, that pole vaulting \"may have originated in the Netherlands, where people used long poles to vault over wide canals rather than wear out their clogs walking miles to the nearest bridge. Others maintain that pole vaulting was used in warfare to vault over fortress walls during battle.\" The equipment for such sports has become increasingly sophisticated. Vaulting poles, for example, were originally made from woods such as ash, hickory or hazel; in the 19th century bamboo was used and in the 21st century poles can be made of carbon fibre. Other activities, such as walking on stilts, are still seen in circus performances in the 21st century. Gladiatorial combats, also known as \"gladiatorial games\", popular during Roman times, provide a good example of an activity that is a combination of sport, punishment, and entertainment.\nChanges to what is regarded as entertainment can occur in response to cultural or historical shifts. Hunting wild animals, for example, was introduced into the Roman Empire from Carthage and became a popular public entertainment and spectacle, supporting an international trade in wild animals.\nEntertainment also evolved into different forms and expressions as a result of social upheavals such as wars and revolutions. During the Chinese Cultural Revolution, for example, Revolutionary opera was sanctioned by the Communist party and World War I, the Great Depression and the Russian revolution all affected entertainment.\nRelatively minor changes to the form and venue of an entertainment continue to come and go as they are affected by the period, fashion, culture, technology, and economics. For example, a story told in dramatic form can be presented in an open-air theatre, a music hall, a movie theatre, a multiplex, or as technological possibilities advanced, via a personal electronic device such as a tablet computer. Entertainment is provided for mass audiences in purpose-built structures such as a theatre, auditorium, or stadium. One of the most famous venues in the Western world, the Colosseum, \"dedicated AD\u00a080 with a hundred days of games, held fifty thousand spectators,\" and in it audiences \"enjoyed blood sport with the trappings of stage shows\". Spectacles, competitions, races, and sports were once presented in this purpose-built arena as public entertainment. New stadia continue to be built to suit the ever more sophisticated requirements of global audiences.\nCourt entertainment.\nImperial and royal courts have provided training grounds and support for professional entertainers, with different cultures using palaces, castles and forts in different ways. In the Maya city states, for example, \"spectacles often took place in large plazas in front of palaces; the crowds gathered either there or in designated places from which they could watch at a distance.\" Court entertainments also crossed cultures. For example, the durbar was introduced to India by the Mughals, and passed onto the British Empire, which then followed Indian tradition: \"institutions, titles, customs, ceremonies by which a Maharaja or Nawab were installed\u00a0... the exchange of official presents\u00a0... the order of precedence\", for example, were \"all inherited from\u00a0... the Emperors of Delhi\". In Korea, the \"court entertainment dance\" was \"originally performed in the palace for entertainment at court banquets.\"\nCourt entertainment often moved from being associated with the court to more general use among commoners. This was the case with \"masked dance-dramas\" in Korea, which \"originated in conjunction with village shaman rituals and eventually became largely an entertainment form for commoners\". Nautch dancers in the Mughal Empire performed in Indian courts and palaces. Another evolution, similar to that from courtly entertainment to common practice, was the transition from religious ritual to secular entertainment, such as happened during the Goryeo dynasty with the Narye festival. Originally \"solely religious or ritualistic, a secular component was added at the conclusion\". Former courtly entertainments, such as jousting, often also survived in children's games.\nIn some courts, such as those during the Byzantine Empire, the genders were segregated among the upper classes, so that \"at least before the period of the Komnenoi\" (1081\u20131185) men were separated from women at ceremonies where there was entertainment such as receptions and banquets.\nCourt ceremonies, palace banquets and the spectacles associated with them, have been used not only to entertain but also to demonstrate wealth and power. Such events reinforce the relationship between ruler and ruled; between those with power and those without, serving to \"dramatise the differences between ordinary families and that of the ruler\". This is the case as much as for traditional courts as it is for contemporary ceremonials, such as the Hong Kong handover ceremony in 1997, at which an array of entertainments (including a banquet, a parade, fireworks, a festival performance and an art spectacle) were put to the service of highlighting a change in political power. Court entertainments were typically performed for royalty and courtiers as well as \"for the pleasure of local and visiting dignitaries\". Royal courts, such as the Korean one, also supported traditional dances. In Sudan, musical instruments such as the so-called \"slit\" or \"talking\" drums, once \"part of the court orchestra of a powerful chief\", had multiple purposes: they were used to make music; \"speak\" at ceremonies; mark community events; send long-distance messages; and call men to hunt or war.\nCourtly entertainments also demonstrate the complex relationship between entertainer and spectator: individuals may be either an entertainer or part of the audience, or they may swap roles even during the course of one entertainment. In the court at the Palace of Versailles, \"thousands of courtiers, including men and women who inhabited its apartments, acted as both performers and spectators in daily rituals that reinforced the status hierarchy\".\nLike court entertainment, royal occasions such as coronations and weddings provided opportunities to entertain both the aristocracy and the people. For example, the splendid 1595 Accession Day celebrations of Queen Elizabeth I offered tournaments and jousting and other events performed \"not only before the assembled court, in all their finery, but also before thousands of Londoners eager for a good day's entertainment. Entry for the day's events at the Tiltyard in Whitehall was set at 12d\".\nPublic punishment.\nAlthough most forms of entertainment have evolved and continued over time, some once-popular forms are no longer as acceptable. For example, during earlier centuries in Europe, watching or participating in the punishment of criminals or social outcasts was an accepted and popular form of entertainment. Many forms of public humiliation also offered local entertainment in the past. Even capital punishment such as hanging and beheading, offered to the public as a warning, were also regarded partly as entertainment. Capital punishments that lasted longer, such as stoning and drawing and quartering, afforded a greater public spectacle. \"A hanging was a carnival that diverted not merely the unemployed but the unemployable. Good bourgeois or curious aristocrats who could afford it watched it from a carriage or rented a room.\" Public punishment as entertainment lasted until the 19th century by which time \"the awesome event of a public hanging aroused the[ir] loathing of writers and philosophers\". Both Dickens and Thackeray wrote about a hanging in Newgate Prison in 1840, and \"taught an even wider public that executions are obscene entertainments\".\nChildren.\nChildren's entertainment is centred on play and is significant for their growth. It often mimics adult activities, such as watching performances (10); prepares them for adult responsibilities, such as child rearing or social interaction (1,2,3,4,9); or develops skills such as motor skills (6), needed for sports and music (5,7,8). \nEntertainment is also provided to children or taught to them by adults and many activities that appeal to them such as puppets, clowns, pantomimes and cartoons are also enjoyed by adults.\nChildren have always played games. It is accepted that as well as being entertaining, playing games helps children's development. One of the most famous visual accounts of children's games is a painting by Pieter Bruegel the Elder called \"Children's Games\", painted in 1560. It depicts children playing a range of games that presumably were typical of the time. Many of these games, such as marbles, hide-and-seek, blowing soap bubbles and piggyback riding continue to be played.\nMost forms of entertainment can be or are modified to suit children's needs and interests. During the 20th century, starting with the often criticised but nonetheless important work of G. Stanley Hall, who \"promoted the link between the study of development and the 'new' laboratory psychology\", and especially with the work of Jean Piaget, who \"saw cognitive development as being analogous to biological development\", it became understood that the psychological development of children occurs in stages and that their capacities differ from adults. Hence, stories and activities, whether in books, film, or video games were developed specifically for child audiences. Countries have responded to the special needs of children and the rise of digital entertainment by developing systems such as television content rating systems, to guide the public and the entertainment industry.\nIn the 21st century, as with adult products, much entertainment is available for children on the internet for private use. This constitutes a significant change from earlier times. The amount of time expended by children indoors on screen-based entertainment and the \"remarkable collapse of children's engagement with nature\" has drawn criticism for its negative effects on imagination, adult cognition and psychological well-being.&lt;ref name=\"http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/nov/19/children-lose-contact-with-nature\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; \nForms.\nBanquets.\nBanquets have been a venue for amusement, entertainment or pleasure since ancient times, continuing until the 21st century, when they are still being used for many of their original purposes to impress visitors, especially important ones (4, 6, 9); to show hospitality (2, 4, 8); as an occasion to showcase supporting entertainments such as music or dancing, or both (2, 3). They were an integral part of court entertainments (3, 4) and helped entertainers develop their skills (2, 3). They are also important components of celebrations such as coronations (9), weddings (7), birthdays (10) civic or political achievements (5), military engagements or victories (6) as well as religious obligations (1). In modern times, banquets are commercially available, for example, in restaurants (10) and combined with a performance in dinner theatres. Cooking by professional chefs has also become a form of entertainment as part of global competitions such as the Bocuse d'Or.\nMusic.\nMusic is a supporting component of many kinds of entertainment and most kinds of performance. For example, it is used to enhance storytelling, it is indispensable in dance (1, 4) and opera, and is usually incorporated into dramatic film or theatre productions.\nMusic is also a universal and popular type of entertainment on its own, constituting an entire performance such as when concerts are given (2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9). Depending on the rhythm, instrument, performance and style, music is divided into many genres, such as classical, jazz, folk, (4, 5, 8), rock, pop music (6, 9) or traditional (1, 3). Since the 20th century, performed music, once available only to those who could pay for the performers, has been available cheaply to individuals by the entertainment industry, which broadcasts it or pre-records it for sale.\nThe wide variety of musical performances, whether or not they are artificially amplified (6, 7, 9, 10), all provide entertainment irrespective of whether the performance is from soloists (6), choral (2) or orchestral groups (5, 8), or ensemble (3). Live performances use specialised venues, which might be small or large; indoors or outdoors; free or expensive. The audiences have different expectations of the performers as well as of their own role in the performance. For example, some audiences expect to listen silently and are entertained by the excellence of the music, its rendition or its interpretation (5, 8). Other audiences of live performances are entertained by the ambience and the chance to participate (7, 9). Even more listeners are entertained by pre-recorded music and listen privately (10).\nThe instruments used in musical entertainment are either solely the human voice (2, 6) or solely instrumental (1, 3) or some combination of the two (4, 5, 7, 8). Whether the performance is given by vocalists or instrumentalists, the performers may be soloists or part of a small or large group, in turn entertaining an audience that might be individual (10), passing by (3), small (1, 2) or large (6, 7, 8, 9). Singing is generally accompanied by instruments although some forms, notably a cappella and overtone singing, are unaccompanied. Modern concerts often use various special effects and other theatrics to accompany performances of singing and dancing (7).\nGames.\nGames are played for entertainment\u2014sometimes purely for recreation, sometimes for achievement or reward as well. They can be played alone, in teams, or online; by amateurs or by professionals. The players may have an audience of non-players, such as when people are entertained by watching a chess championship. On the other hand, players in a game may constitute their own audience as they take their turn to play. Often, part of the entertainment for children playing a game is deciding who is part of their audience and who is a player.\nEquipment varies with the game. Board games, such as Go, \"Monopoly\" or backgammon need a board and markers. One of the oldest known board games is Senet, a game played in Ancient Egypt, enjoyed by the pharaoh Tutankhamun. Card games, such as whist, poker and Bridge have long been played as evening entertainment among friends. For these games, all that is needed is a deck of playing cards. Other games, such as bingo, played with numerous strangers, have been organised to involve the participation of non-players via gambling. Many are geared for children, and can be played outdoors, including hopscotch, hide and seek, or Blind man's bluff. The list of ball games is quite extensive. It includes, for example, croquet, lawn bowling and paintball as well as many sports using various forms of balls. The options cater to a wide range of skill and fitness levels. Physical games can develop agility and competence in motor skills. Number games such as Sudoku and puzzle games like the Rubik's cube can develop mental prowess.\nVideo games are played using a controller to create results on a screen. They can also be played online with participants joining in remotely. In the second half of the 20th century and in the 21st century the number of such games increased enormously, providing a wide variety of entertainment to players around the world. Video games are popular across the world.\nLiterature.\nReading has been a source of entertainment for a very long time, especially when other forms, such as performance entertainments, were (or are) either unavailable or too costly. Even when the primary purpose of the writing is to inform or instruct, reading is well known for its capacity to distract from everyday worries. Both stories and information have been passed on through the tradition of orality and oral traditions survive in the form of performance poetry for example. However, they have drastically declined. \"Once literacy had arrived in strength, there was no return to the oral prerogative.\" The advent of printing, the reduction in costs of books and an increasing literacy all served to enhance the mass appeal of reading. Furthermore, as fonts were standardised and texts became clearer, \"reading ceased being a painful process of decipherment and became an act of pure pleasure\". By the 16th century in Europe, the appeal of reading for entertainment was well established.\nAmong literature's many genres are some designed, in whole or in part, purely for entertainment. Limericks, for example, use verse in a strict, predictable rhyme and rhythm to create humour and to amuse an audience of listeners or readers. Interactive books such as \"choose your own adventure\" can make literary entertainment more participatory.\nComics and cartoons are literary genres that use drawings or graphics, usually in combination with text, to convey an entertaining narrative. Many contemporary comics have elements of fantasy and are produced by companies that are part of the entertainment industry. Others have unique authors who offer a more personal, philosophical view of the world and the problems people face. Comics about superheroes such as Superman are of the first type. Examples of the second sort include the individual work over 50 years of Charles M. Schulz who produced a popular comic called \"Peanuts\" about the relationships among a cast of child characters; and Michael Leunig who entertains by producing whimsical cartoons that also incorporate social criticism. The Japanese Manga style differs from the western approach in that it encompasses a wide range of genres and themes for a readership of all ages. Caricature uses a kind of graphic entertainment for purposes ranging from merely putting a smile on the viewer's face, to raising social awareness, to highlighting the moral characteristics of a person being caricatured.\nComedy.\nComedy is both a genre of entertainment and a component of it, providing laughter and amusement, whether the comedy is the sole purpose or used as a form of contrast in an otherwise serious piece. It is a valued contributor to many forms of entertainment, including in literature, theatre, opera, film and games. In royal courts, such as in the Byzantine court, and presumably, also in its wealthy households, \"mimes were the focus of orchestrated humour, expected or obliged to make fun of all at court, not even excepting the emperor and members of the imperial family. This highly structured role of jester consisted of verbal humour, including teasing, jests, insult, ridicule, and obscenity and non-verbal humour such as slapstick and horseplay in the presence of an audience.\" In medieval times, all comic types the buffoon, jester, hunchback, dwarf, jokester, were all \"considered to be essentially of one comic type: the fool\", who while not necessarily funny, represented \"the shortcomings of the individual\".\nShakespeare wrote seventeen comedies that incorporate many techniques still used by performers and writers of comedy\u2014such as jokes, puns, parody, wit, observational humor, or the unexpected effect of irony. One-liner jokes and satire are also used to comedic effect in literature. In farce, the comedy is a primary purpose.\nThe meaning of the word \"comedy\" and the audience's expectations of it have changed over time and vary according to culture. Simple physical comedy such as slapstick is entertaining to a broad range of people of all ages. However, as cultures become more sophisticated, national nuances appear in the style and references so that what is amusing in one culture may be unintelligible in another.\nPerformance.\nLive performances before an audience constitute a major form of entertainment, especially before the invention of audio and video recording. Performance takes a wide range of forms, including theatre, music and drama. In the 16th and 17th centuries, European royal courts presented masques that were complex theatrical entertainments involving dancing, singing and acting. Opera is a similarly demanding performance style that remains popular. It also encompass all three forms, demanding a high level of musical and dramatic skill, collaboration and like the masque, production expertise as well.\nAudiences generally show their appreciation of an entertaining performance with applause. However, all performers run the risk of failing to hold their audience's attention and thus, failing to entertain. Audience dissatisfaction is often brutally honest and direct.\nStorytelling.\nStorytelling is an ancient form of entertainment that has influenced almost all other forms. It is \"not only entertainment, it is also thinking through human conflicts and contradictions\". Hence, although stories may be delivered directly to a small listening audience, they are also presented as entertainment and used as a component of any piece that relies on a narrative, such as film, drama, ballet, and opera. Written stories have been enhanced by illustrations, often to a very high artistic standard, for example, on illuminated manuscripts and on ancient scrolls such as Japanese ones. Stories remain a common way of entertaining a group that is on a journey. Showing how stories are used to pass the time and entertain an audience of travellers, Chaucer used pilgrims in his literary work \"The Canterbury Tales\" in the 14th century, as did Wu Cheng'en in the 16th century in \"Journey to the West\". Even though journeys can now be completed much faster, stories are still told to passengers en route in cars and aeroplanes either orally or delivered by some form of technology.\nThe power of stories to entertain is evident in one of the most famous ones\u2014Scheherazade\u2014a story in the Persian professional storytelling tradition, of a woman who saves her own life by telling stories. The connections between the different types of entertainment are shown by the way that stories like this inspire a retelling in another medium, such as music, film or games. For example, composers Rimsky-Korsakov, Ravel and Szymanowski have each been inspired by the Scheherazade story and turned it into an orchestral work; director Pasolini made a film adaptation; and there is an innovative video game based on the tale. Stories may be told wordlessly, in music, dance or puppetry for example, such as in the Javanese tradition of wayang, in which the performance is accompanied by a gamelan orchestra or the similarly traditional Punch and Judy show.\nEpic narratives, poems, sagas and allegories from all cultures tell such gripping tales that they have inspired countless other stories in all forms of entertainment. Examples include the Hindu \"Ramayana\" and \"Mahabharata\"; Homer's \"Odyssey\" and \"Iliad\"; the first Arabic novel \"Hayy ibn Yaqdhan\"; the Persian epic \"Shahnameh\"; the Sagas of Icelanders and the celebrated \"Tale of the Genji\". Collections of stories, such as \"Grimms' Fairy Tales\" or those by Hans Christian Andersen, have been similarly influential. Originally published in the early 19th century, this collection of folk stories significantly influence modern popular culture, which subsequently used its themes, images, symbols, and structural elements to create new entertainment forms.\nSome of the most powerful and long-lasting stories are the foundation stories, also called origin or creation myths such as the Dreamtime myths of the Australian aborigines, the Mesopotamian \"Epic of Gilgamesh\", or the Hawaiian stories of the origin of the world. These too are developed into books, films, music and games in a way that increases their longevity and enhances their entertainment value.\nTheatre.\nTheatre performances, typically dramatic or musical, are presented on a stage for an audience and have a history that goes back to Hellenistic times when \"leading musicians and actors\" performed widely at \"poetical competitions\", for example at \"Delphi, Delos, Ephesus\". Aristotle and his teacher Plato both wrote on the theory and purpose of theatre. Aristotle posed questions such as \"What is the function of the arts in shaping character? Should a member of the ruling class merely watch performances or be a participant and perform? What kind of entertainment should be provided for those who do not belong to the elite?\" The \"Ptolemys in Egypt, the Seleucids in Pergamum\" also had a strong theatrical tradition and later, wealthy patrons in Rome staged \"far more lavish productions\".\nExpectations about the performance and their engagement with it have changed over time (1). For example, in England during the 18th century, \"the prejudice against actresses had faded\" and in Europe generally, going to the theatre, once a socially dubious activity, became \"a more respectable middle-class pastime\" in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, when the variety of popular entertainments increased. Operetta and music halls became available, and new drama theatres such as the Moscow Art Theatre and the Suvorin Theatre in Russia opened. At the same time, commercial newspapers \"began to carry theatre columns and reviews\" that helped make theatre \"a legitimate subject of intellectual debate\" in general discussions about art and culture. Audiences began to gather to \"appreciate creative achievement, to marvel at, and be entertained by, the prominent 'stars'.\" Vaudeville and music halls, popular at this time in the United States, England, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, were themselves eventually superseded.\nPlays, musicals, monologues, pantomimes, and performance poetry are part of the very long history of theatre, which is also the venue for the type of performance known as stand-up comedy. In the 20th century, radio and television, often broadcast live, extended the theatrical tradition that continued to exist alongside the new forms.\nThe stage and the spaces set out in front of it for an audience create a theatre. All types of stage are used with all types of seating for the audience, including the impromptu or improvised (2, 3, 6); the temporary (2); the elaborate (9); or the traditional and permanent (5, 7). They are erected indoors (3, 5, 9) or outdoors (2, 4, 6). The skill of managing, organising and preparing the stage for a performance is known as stagecraft (10). The audience's experience of the entertainment is affected by their expectations, the stagecraft, the type of stage, and the type and standard of seating provided.\nCinema and film.\nFilms are a major form of entertainment, although not all films have entertainment as their primary purpose: documentary film, for example, aims to create a record or inform, although the two purposes often work together. The medium was a global business from the beginning: \"The Lumi\u00e8re brothers were the first to send cameramen throughout the world, instructing them to film everything which could be of interest for the public.\" In 1908, Path\u00e9 launched and distributed newsreels and by World War I, films were meeting an enormous need for mass entertainment. \"In the first decade of the [20th] century cinematic programmes combined, at random, fictions and newsfilms.\" The Americans first \"contrived a way of producing an illusion of motion through successive images,\" but \"the French were able to transform a scientific principle into a commercially lucrative spectacle\". Film therefore became a part of the entertainment industry from its early days. Increasingly sophisticated techniques have been used in the film medium to delight and entertain audiences. Animation, for example, which involves the display of rapid movement in an art work, is one of these techniques that particularly appeals to younger audiences. The advent of computer-generated imagery (CGI) in the 21st century made it \"possible to do spectacle\" more cheaply and \"on a scale never dreamed of\" by Cecil B. DeMille. From the 1930s to 1950s, movies and radio were the \"only mass entertainment\" but by the second decade of the 21st century, technological changes, economic decisions, risk aversion and globalisation reduced both the quality and range of films being produced. Sophisticated visual effects and CGI techniques, for example, rather than humans, were used not only to create realistic images of people, landscapes and events (both real and fantastic) but also to animate non-living items such as Lego normally used as entertainment as a game in physical form. Creators of \"The Lego Movie\" \"wanted the audience to believe they were looking at actual Lego bricks on a tabletop that were shot with a real camera, not what we actually did, which was create vast environments with digital bricks inside the computer.\" The convergence of computers and film has allowed entertainment to be presented in a new way and the technology has also allowed for those with the personal resources to screen films in a home theatre, recreating in a private venue the quality and experience of a public theatre. This is similar to the way that the nobility in earlier times could stage private musical performances or the use of domestic theatres in large homes to perform private plays in earlier centuries.\nFilms also re-imagine entertainment from other forms, turning stories, books and plays, for example, into new entertainments. \"\", a documentary about the history of film, gives a survey of global achievements and innovations in the medium, as well as changes in the conception of film-making. It demonstrates that while some films, particularly those in the Hollywood tradition that combines \"realism and melodramatic romanticism\", are intended as a form of escapism, others require a deeper engagement or more thoughtful response from their audiences. For example, the award-winning Senegalese film \"Xala\" takes government corruption as its theme. Charlie Chaplin's film \"The Great Dictator\" was a brave and innovative parody, also on a political theme. Stories that are thousands of years old, such as \"Noah\", have been re-interpreted in film, applying familiar literary devices such as allegory and personification with new techniques such as CGI to explore big themes such as \"human folly\", good and evil, courage and despair, love, faith, and death themes that have been a main-stay of entertainment across all its forms.\nAs in other media, excellence and achievement in films is recognised through a range of awards, including ones from the American Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, the Cannes International Film Festival in France and the Asia Pacific Screen Awards.\nDance.\nThe many forms of dance provide entertainment for all age groups and cultures. Dance can be serious in tone, such as when it is used to express a culture's history or important stories; it may be provocative; or it may put in the service of comedy. Since it combines many forms of entertainment music, movement, storytelling, theatre it provides a good example of the various ways that these forms can be combined to create entertainment for different purposes and audiences.\nDance is \"a form of cultural representation\" that involves not just dancers, but \"choreographers, audience members, patrons and impresarios\u00a0... coming from all over the globe and from vastly varied time periods.\" Whether from Africa, Asia or Europe, dance is constantly negotiating the realms of political, social, spiritual and artistic influence.\" Even though dance traditions may be limited to one cultural group, they all develop. For example, in Africa, there are \"Dahomean dances, Hausa dances, Masai dances and so forth.\" Ballet is an example of a highly developed Western form of dance that moved to the theatres from the French court during the time of Louis XIV, the dancers becoming professional theatrical performers. Some dances, such as the quadrille, a square dance that \"emerged during the Napoleonic years in France\" and other country dances were once popular at social gatherings like balls, but are now rarely performed. On the other hand, many folk dances (such as Scottish Highland dancing and Irish dancing), have evolved into competitions, which by adding to their audiences, has increased their entertainment value. \"Irish dance theatre, which sometimes features traditional Irish steps and music, has developed into a major dance form with an international reputation.\"\nSince dance is often \"associated with the female body and women's experiences\", female dancers, who dance to entertain, have in some cases been regarded as distinct from \"decent\" women because they \"use their bodies to make a living instead of hiding them as much as possible\". Society's attitudes to female dancers depend on the culture, its history and the entertainment industry itself. For example, while some cultures regard any dancing by women as \"the most shameful form of entertainment\", other cultures have established venues such as strip clubs where deliberately erotic or sexually provocative dances such as striptease are performed in public by professional women dancers for mostly male audiences.\nVarious political regimes have sought to control or ban dancing or specific types of dancing, sometimes because of disapproval of the music or clothes associated with it. Nationalism, authoritarianism and racism have played a part in banning dances or dancing. For example, during the Nazi regime, American dances such as swing, regarded as \"completely un-German\", had \"become a public offense and needed to be banned\". Similarly, in Shanghai, China, in the 1930s, \"dancing and nightclubs had come to symbolise the excess that plagued Chinese society\" and officials wondered if \"other forms of entertainment such as brothels\" should also be banned. Banning had the effect of making \"the dance craze\" even greater. In Ireland, the Public Dance Hall Act of 1935 \"banned but did not stop dancing at the crossroads and other popular dance forms such as house and barn dances.\" In the US, various dances were once banned, either because like burlesque, they were suggestive, or because, like the Twist, they were associated with African Americans. \"African American dancers were typically banned from performing in minstrel shows until after the Civil War.\"\nDances can be performed solo (1, 4); in pairs, (2, 3); in groups, (5, 6, 7); or by massed performers (10). They might be improvised (4, 8) or highly choreographed (1, 2, 5, 10); spontaneous for personal entertainment, (such as when children begin dancing for themselves); a private audience, (4); a paying audience (2); a world audience (10); or an audience interested in a particular dance genre (3, 5). They might be a part of a celebration, such as a wedding or New Year (6, 8); or a cultural ritual with a specific purpose, such as a dance by warriors like a haka (7). Some dances, such as traditional dance in 1 and ballet in 2, need a very high level of skill and training; others, such as the can-can, require a very high level of energy and physical fitness. Entertaining the audience is a normal part of dance but its physicality often also produces joy for the dancers themselves (9).\nAnimals.\nAnimals have been used for the purposes of entertainment for millennia. They have been hunted for entertainment (as opposed to hunted for food); displayed while they hunt for prey; watched when they compete with each other; and watched while they perform a trained routine for human amusement. The Romans, for example, were entertained both by competitions involving wild animals and acts performed by trained animals. They watched as \"lions and bears danced to the music of pipes and cymbals; horses were trained to kneel, bow, dance and prance\u00a0... acrobats turning handsprings over wild lions and vaulting over wild leopards.\" There were \"violent confrontations with wild beasts\" and \"performances over time became more brutal and bloodier\".\nAnimals that perform trained routines or \"acts\" for human entertainment include fleas in flea circuses, dolphins in dolphinaria, and monkeys doing tricks for an audience on behalf of the player of a street organ. Animals kept in zoos in ancient times were often kept there for later use in the arena as entertainment or for their entertainment value as exotica.\nMany contests between animals are now regarded as sports for example, horse racing is regarded as both a sport and an important source of entertainment. Its economic impact means that it is also considered a global industry, one in which horses are carefully transported around the world to compete in races. In Australia, the horse race run on Melbourne Cup Day is a public holiday and the public regards the race as an important annual event. Like horse racing, camel racing requires human riders, while greyhound racing does not. People find it entertaining to watch animals race competitively, whether they are trained, like horses, camels or dogs, or untrained, like cockroaches.\nThe use of animals for entertainment is sometimes controversial, especially the hunting of wild animals. Some contests between animals, once popular entertainment for the public, have become illegal because of the cruelty involved. Among these are blood sports such as bear-baiting, dog fighting and cockfighting. Other contests involving animals remain controversial and have both supporters and detractors. For example, the conflict between opponents of pigeon shooting who view it as \"a cruel and moronic exercise in marksmanship, and proponents, who view it as entertainment\" has been tested in a court of law. Fox hunting, which involves the use of horses as well as hounds, and bullfighting, which has a strong theatrical component, are two entertainments that have a long and significant cultural history. They both involve animals and are variously regarded as sport, entertainment or cultural tradition. Among the organisations set up to advocate for the rights of animals are some whose concerns include the use of animals for entertainment. However, \"in many cases of animal advocacy groups versus organisations accused of animal abuse, both sides have cultural claims.\"\nCircus.\nA circus, described as \"one of the most brazen of entertainment forms\", is a special type of theatrical performance, involving a variety of physical skills such as acrobatics and juggling and sometimes performing animals. Usually thought of as a travelling show performed in a big top, circus was first performed in permanent venues. Philip Astley is regarded as the founder of the modern circus in the second half of the 18th century and Jules L\u00e9otard is the French performer credited with developing the art of the trapeze, considered synonymous with circuses. Astley brought together performances that were generally familiar in traditional British fairs \"at least since the beginning of the 17th century\": \"tumbling, rope-dancing, juggling, animal tricks and so on\". It has been claimed that \"there is no direct link between the Roman circus and the circus of modern times.\u00a0... Between the demise of the Roman 'circus' and the foundation of Astley's Amphitheatre in London some 1300 years later, the nearest thing to a circus ring was the rough circle formed by the curious onlookers who gathered around the itinerant tumbler or juggler on a village green.\"\nMagic.\nThe form of entertainment known as stage magic or conjuring and recognisable as performance, is based on traditions and texts of magical rites and dogmas that have been a part of most cultural traditions since ancient times. (References to magic, for example, can be found in the Bible, in Hermeticism, in Zoroastrianism, in the Kabbalistic tradition, in mysticism and in the sources of Freemasonry.)\nStage magic is performed for an audience in a variety of media and locations: on stage, on television, in the street, and live at parties or events. It is often combined with other forms of entertainment, such as comedy or music and showmanship is often an essential part of magic performances. Performance magic relies on deception, psychological manipulation, sleight of hand and other forms of trickery to give an audience the illusion that a performer can achieve the impossible. Audiences amazed at the stunt performances and escape acts of Harry Houdini, for example, regarded him as a magician.\nFantasy magicians have held an important place in literature for centuries, offering entertainment to millions of readers. Famous wizards such as Merlin in the Arthurian legends have been written about since the 5th and 6th centuries, while in the 21st century, the young wizard Harry Potter became a global entertainment phenomenon when the book series about him sold about 450 million copies (as at June 2011), making it the best-selling book series in history.\nStreet performance.\nStreet entertainment, street performance, or \"busking\" are forms of performance that have been meeting the public's need for entertainment for centuries. It was \"an integral aspect of London's life\", for example, when the city in the early 19th century was \"filled with spectacle and diversion\". Minstrels or troubadours are part of the tradition. The art and practice of busking is still celebrated at annual busking festivals.\nThere are three basic forms of contemporary street performance. The first form is the \"circle show\". It tends to gather a crowd, usually has a distinct beginning and end, and is done in conjunction with street theatre, puppeteering, magicians, comedians, acrobats, jugglers and sometimes musicians. This type has the potential to be the most lucrative for the performer because there are likely to be more donations from larger audiences if they are entertained by the act. Good buskers control the crowd so patrons do not obstruct foot traffic. The second form, the \"walk-by act\", has no distinct beginning or end. Typically, the busker provides an entertaining ambience, often with an unusual instrument, and the audience may not stop to watch or form a crowd. Sometimes a walk-by act spontaneously turns into a circle show. The third form, \"caf\u00e9 busking\", is performed mostly in restaurants, pubs, bars and caf\u00e9s. This type of act occasionally uses public transport as a venue.\nParades.\nParades are held for a range of purposes, often more than one. Whether their mood is sombre or festive, being public events that are designed to attract attention and activities that necessarily divert normal traffic, parades have a clear entertainment value to their audiences. Cavalcades and the modern variant, the motorcade, are examples of public processions. Some people watching the parade or procession may have made a special effort to attend, while others become part of the audience by happenstance. Whatever their mood or primary purpose, parades attract and entertain people who watch them pass by. Occasionally, a parade takes place in an improvised theatre space (such as the Trooping the Colour in 8) and tickets are sold to the physical audience while the global audience participates via broadcast.\nOne of the earliest forms of parade were \"triumphs\" grand and sensational displays of foreign treasures and spoils, given by triumphant Roman generals to celebrate their victories. They presented conquered peoples and nations that exalted the prestige of the victor. \"In the summer of 46\u00a0BCE Julius Caesar chose to celebrate four triumphs held on different days extending for about one month.\" In Europe from the Middle Ages to the Baroque the Royal Entry celebrated the formal visit of the monarch to the city with a parade through elaborately decorated streets, passing various shows and displays. The annual Lord Mayor's Show in London is an example of a civic parade that has survived since medieval times.\nMany religious festivals (especially those that incorporate processions, such as Holy Week processions or the Indian festival of Holi) have some entertainment appeal in addition to their serious purpose. Sometimes, religious rituals have been adapted or evolved into secular entertainments, or like the Festa del Redentore in Venice, have managed to grow in popularity while holding both secular and sacred purposes in balance. However, pilgrimages, such as the Roman Catholic pilgrimage of the Way of St. James, the Muslim Hajj and the Hindu Kumbh Mela, which may appear to the outsider as an entertaining parade or procession, are not intended as entertainment: they are instead about an individual's spiritual journey. Hence, the relationship between spectator and participant, unlike entertainments proper, is different. The manner in which the Kumbh Mela, for example, \"is divorced from its cultural context and repackaged for Western consumption renders the presence of voyeurs deeply problematic.\"\nParades generally impress and delight often by including unusual, colourful costumes (7, 10). Sometimes they also commemorate (5, 8) or celebrate (1, 4, 6, 8, 9). Sometimes they have a serious purpose, such as when the context is military (1, 2, 5), when the intention is sometimes to intimidate; or religious, when the audience might participate or have a role to play (6, 7, 10). Even if a parade uses new technology and is some distance away (9), it is likely to have a strong appeal, draw the attention of onlookers and entertain them.\nFireworks.\nFireworks are a part of many public entertainments and have retained an enduring popularity since they became a \"crowning feature of elaborate celebrations\" in the 17th century. First used in China, classical antiquity and Europe for military purposes, fireworks were most popular in the 18th century and high prices were paid for pyrotechnists, especially the skilled Italian ones, who were summoned to other countries to organise displays. Fire and water were important aspects of court spectacles because the displays \"inspired by means of fire, sudden noise, smoke and general magnificence the sentiments thought fitting for the subject to entertain of his sovereign: awe fear and a vicarious sense of glory in his might. Birthdays, name-days, weddings and anniversaries provided the occasion for celebration.\" One of the most famous courtly uses of fireworks was one used to celebrate the end of the War of the Austrian Succession and while the fireworks themselves caused a fire, the accompanying Music for the Royal Fireworks written by Handel has been popular ever since. Aside from their contribution to entertainments related to military successes, courtly displays and personal celebrations, fireworks are also used as part of religious ceremony. For example, during the Indian Dashavatara Kala of Gomantaka \"the temple deity is taken around in a procession with a lot of singing, dancing and display of fireworks\".\nThe \"fire, sudden noise and smoke\" of fireworks is still a significant part of public celebration and entertainment. For example, fireworks were one of the primary forms of display chosen to celebrate the turn of the millennium around the world. As the clock struck midnight and 1999 became 2000, firework displays and open-air parties greeted the New Year as the time zones changed over to the next century. Fireworks, carefully planned and choreographed, were let off against the backdrop of many of the world's most famous buildings, including the Sydney Harbour Bridge, the Pyramids of Giza in Egypt, the Acropolis in Athens, Red Square in Moscow, Vatican City in Rome, the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin, the Eiffel Tower in Paris, and Elizabeth Tower in London.\nSport.\nSporting competitions have always provided entertainment for crowds. To distinguish the players from the audience, the latter are often known as spectators. Developments in stadium and auditorium design, as well as in recording and broadcast technology, have allowed off-site spectators to watch sport, with the result that the size of the audience has grown ever larger and spectator sport has become increasingly popular. Two of the most popular sports with global appeal are association football and cricket. Their ultimate international competitions, the FIFA World Cup and the Cricket World Cup, are broadcast around the world. Beyond the very large numbers involved in playing these sports, they are notable for being a major source of entertainment for many millions of non-players worldwide. A comparable multi-stage, long-form sport with global appeal is the Tour de France, unusual in that it takes place outside of special stadia, being run instead in the countryside.\nAside from sports that have worldwide appeal and competitions, such as the Olympic Games, the entertainment value of a sport depends on the culture and country where people play it. For example, in the United States, baseball and basketball games are popular forms of entertainment; in Bhutan, the national sport is archery; in New Zealand, it is rugby union; in Iran, it is freestyle wrestling. Japan's unique sumo wrestling contains ritual elements that derive from its long history. In some cases, such as the international running group Hash House Harriers, participants create a blend of sport and entertainment for themselves, largely independent of spectator involvement, where the social component is more important than the competitive.\nThe evolution of an activity into a sport and then an entertainment is also affected by the local climate and conditions. For example, the modern sport of surfing is associated with Hawaii and that of snow skiing probably evolved in Scandinavia. While these sports and the entertainment they offer to spectators have spread around the world, people in the two originating countries remain well known for their prowess. Sometimes the climate offers a chance to adapt another sport such as in the case of ice hockey\u2014an important entertainment in Canada.\nFairs, expositions, shopping.\nFairs and exhibitions have existed since ancient and medieval times, displaying wealth, innovations and objects for trade and offering specific entertainments as well as being places of entertainment in themselves. Whether in a medieval market or a small shop, \"shopping always offered forms of exhilaration that took one away from the everyday\". However, in the modern world, \"merchandising has become entertainment: spinning signs, flashing signs, thumping music\u00a0... video screens, interactive computer kiosks, day care .. caf\u00e9s\".\nBy the 19th century, \"expos\" that encouraged arts, manufactures and commerce had become international. They were not only hugely popular but affected international ideas. For example, the 1878 Paris Exposition facilitated international cooperation about ideas, innovations and standards. From London 1851 to Paris 1900, \"in excess of 200 million visitors had entered the turnstiles in London, Paris, Vienna, Philadelphia, Chicago and a myriad of smaller shows around the world.\" Since World War II \"well over 500 million visits have been recorded through world expo turnstiles\". As a form of spectacle and entertainment, expositions influenced \"everything from architecture, to patterns of globalisation, to fundamental matters of human identity\" and in the process established the close relationship between \"fairs, the rise of department stores and art museums\", the modern world of mass consumption and the entertainment industry.\nSafety.\nSome entertainments, such as at large festivals (whether religious or secular), concerts, clubs, parties and celebrations, involve big crowds. From earliest times, crowds at an entertainment have associated hazards and dangers, especially when combined with the recreational consumption of intoxicants such as alcohol. The Ancient Greeks had Dionysian Mysteries, for example, and the Romans had Saturnalia. The consequence of excess and crowds can produce breaches of social norms of behaviour, sometimes causing injury or even death, such as for example, at the Altamont Free Concert, an outdoor rock festival. The list of serious incidents at nightclubs includes those caused by stampede; overcrowding; terrorism, such as the 2002 Bali bombings that targeted a nightclub; and especially fire. Investigations, such as that carried out in the US after The Station nightclub fire often demonstrate that lessons learned \"regarding fire safety in nightclubs\" from earlier events such as the Cocoanut Grove fire do \"not necessarily result in lasting effective change\". Efforts to prevent such incidents include appointing special officers, such as the medieval Lord of Misrule or, in modern times, security officers who control access; and also ongoing improvement of relevant standards such as those for building safety. The tourism industry now regards safety and security at entertainment venues as an important management task.\nIndustry.\nEntertainment is big business, especially in the United States,but ubiquitous in all cultures.\nAlthough kings, rulers and powerful people have always been able to pay for entertainment to be provided for them and in many cases have paid for public entertainment, people generally have made their own entertainment or when possible, attended a live performance. Technological developments in the 20th century, especially in the area of mass media, meant that entertainment could be produced independently of the audience, packaged and sold on a commercial basis by an entertainment industry. Sometimes referred to as show business, the industry relies on business models to produce, market, broadcast or otherwise distribute many of its traditional forms, including performances of all types. The industry became so sophisticated that its economics became a separate area of academic study.\nThe film industry is a part of the entertainment industry. Components of it include the Hollywood and Bollywood film industries, as well as the cinema of the United Kingdom and all the cinemas of Europe, including France, Germany, Spain, Italy and others. The sex industry is another component of the entertainment industry, applying the same forms and media (for example, film, books, dance and other performances) to the development, marketing and sale of sex products on a commercial basis.\nAmusement parks entertain paying guests with rides, such as roller coasters, ridable miniature railways, water rides, and dark rides, as well as other events and associated attractions. The parks are built on a large area subdivided into themed areas named \"lands\". Sometimes the whole amusement park is based on one theme, such as the various SeaWorld parks that focus on the theme of sea life.\nOne of the consequences of the development of the entertainment industry has been the creation of new types of employment. While jobs such as writer, musician and composer exist as they always have, people doing this work are likely to be employed by a company rather than a patron as they once would have been. New jobs have appeared, such as gaffer or special effects supervisor in the film industry, and attendants in an amusement park.\nPrestigious awards are given by the industry for excellence in the various types of entertainment. For example, there are awards for Music, Games (including video games), Comics, Comedy, Theatre, Television, Film, Dance and Magic. Sporting awards are made for the results and skill, rather than for the entertainment value.\nArchitecture.\nArchitecture for entertainment.\nPurpose-built structures as venues for entertainment that accommodate audiences have produced many famous and innovative buildings, among the most recognisable of which are theatre structures. For the ancient Greeks, \"the architectural importance of the theatre is a reflection of their importance to the community, made apparent in their monumentality, in the effort put into their design, and in the care put into their detail.\" The Romans subsequently developed the stadium in an oval form known as a circus. In modern times, some of the grandest buildings for entertainment have brought fame to their cities as well as their designers. The Sydney Opera House, for example, is a World Heritage Site and The O\u2082 in London is an entertainment precinct that contains an indoor arena, a music club, a cinema and exhibition space. The Bayreuth Festspielhaus in Germany is a theatre designed and built for performances of one specific musical composition.\nTwo of the chief architectural concerns for the design of venues for mass audiences are speed of egress and safety. The speed at which the venue empty is important both for amenity and safety, because large crowds take a long time to disperse from a badly designed venue, which creates a safety risk. The Hillsborough disaster is an example of how poor aspects of building design can contribute to audience deaths. Sightlines and acoustics are also important design considerations in most theatrical venues.\nIn the 21st century, entertainment venues, especially stadia, are \"likely to figure among the leading architectural genres\". However, they require \"a whole new approach\" to design, because they need to be \"sophisticated entertainment centres, multi-experience venues, capable of being enjoyed in many diverse ways\". Hence, architects now have to design \"with two distinct functions in mind, as sports and entertainment centres playing host to live audiences, and as sports and entertainment studios serving the viewing and listening requirements of the remote audience\".\nArchitecture as entertainment.\nArchitects who push the boundaries of design or construction sometimes create buildings that are entertaining because they exceed the expectations of the public and the client and are aesthetically outstanding. Buildings such as Guggenheim Museum Bilbao, designed by Frank Gehry, are of this type, becoming a tourist attraction as well as a significant international museum. Other apparently usable buildings are really follies, deliberately constructed for a decorative purpose and never intended to be practical.\nOn the other hand, sometimes architecture is entertainment, while pretending to be functional. The tourism industry, for example, creates or renovates buildings as \"attractions\" that have either never been used or can never be used for their ostensible purpose. They are instead re-purposed to entertain visitors often by simulating cultural experiences. Buildings, history and sacred spaces are thus made into commodities for purchase. Such intentional tourist attractions divorce buildings from the past so that \"the difference between historical authenticity and contemporary entertainment venues/theme parks becomes hard to define\". Examples include \"the preservation of the Alc\u00e1zar of Toledo, with its grim Civil War History, the conversion of slave dungeons into tourist attractions in Ghana, [such as, for example, Cape Coast Castle] and the presentation of indigenous culture in Libya\". The specially constructed buildings in amusement parks represent the park's theme and are usually neither authentic nor completely functional.\nEffects of developments in electronic media.\nGlobalisation.\nBy the second half of the 20th century, developments in electronic media made possible the delivery of entertainment products to mass audiences across the globe. The technology enabled people to see, hear and participate in all the familiar forms stories, theatre, music, dance wherever they live. The rapid development of entertainment technology was assisted by improvements in data storage devices such as cassette tapes or compact discs, along with increasing miniaturisation. Computerisation and the development of barcodes also made ticketing easier, faster and global.\nObsolescence.\nIn the 1940s, radio was the electronic medium for family entertainment and information. In the 1950s, it was television that was the new medium and it rapidly became global, bringing visual entertainment, first in black and white, then in colour, to the world. By the 1970s, games could be played electronically, then hand-held devices provided mobile entertainment, and by the last decade of the 20th century, via networked play. In combination with products from the entertainment industry, all the traditional forms of entertainment became available personally. People could not only select an entertainment product such as a piece of music, film or game, they could choose the time and place to use it. The \"proliferation of portable media players and the emphasis on the computer as a site for film consumption\" together have significantly changed how audiences encounter films. One of the most notable consequences of the rise of electronic entertainment has been the rapid obsolescence of the various recording and storage methods. As an example of speed of change driven by electronic media, over the course of one generation, television as a medium for receiving standardised entertainment products went from unknown, to novel, to ubiquitous and finally to superseded. One estimate was that by 2011 over 30 percent of households in the US would own a Wii console, \"about the same percentage that owned a television in 1953\". Some expected that halfway through the second decade of the 21st century, online entertainment would have completely replaced television\u2014which didn't happen. The so-called \"digital revolution\" has produced an increasingly transnational marketplace that has caused difficulties for governments, business, industries, and individuals, as they all try to keep up. Even the sports stadium of the future will increasingly compete with television viewing \"...in terms of comfort, safety and the constant flow of audio-visual information and entertainment available.\" Other flow on effects of the shift are likely to include those on public architecture such as hospitals and nursing homes, where television, regarded as an essential entertainment service for patients and residents, will need to be replaced by access to the internet. At the same time, the ongoing need for entertainers as \"professional engagers\" shows the continuity of traditional entertainment.\nConvergence.\nBy the second decade of the 21st century, analogue recording was being replaced by digital recording and all forms of electronic entertainment began to converge. For example, convergence is challenging standard practices in the film industry: whereas \"success or failure used to be determined by the first weekend of its run. Today,\u00a0... a series of exhibition 'windows', such as DVD, pay-per-view, and fibre-optic video-on-demand are used to maximise profits.\" Part of the industry's adjustment is its release of new commercial product directly via video hosting services. Media convergence is said to be more than technological: the convergence is cultural as well. It is also \"the result of a deliberate effort to protect the interests of business entities, policy institutions and other groups\". Globalisation and cultural imperialism are two of the cultural consequences of convergence. Others include fandom and interactive storytelling as well as the way that single franchises are distributed through and affect a range of delivery methods. The \"greater diversity in the ways that signals may be received and packaged for the viewer, via terrestrial, satellite or cable television, and of course, via the Internet\" also affects entertainment venues, such as sports stadia, which now need to be designed so that both live and remote audiences can interact in increasingly sophisticated ways for example, audiences can \"watch highlights, call up statistics\", \"order tickets and merchandise\" and generally \"tap into the stadium's resources at any time of the day or night\".\nThe introduction of television altered the availability, cost, variety and quality of entertainment products for the public and the convergence of online entertainment is having a similar effect. For example, the possibility and popularity of user-generated content, as distinct from commercial product, creates a \"networked audience model [that] makes programming obsolete\". Individuals and corporations use video hosting services to broadcast content that is equally accepted by the public as legitimate entertainment.\nWhile technology increases demand for entertainment products and offers increased speed of delivery, the forms that make up the content are in themselves, relatively stable. Storytelling, music, theatre, dance and games are recognisably the same as in earlier centuries."}
{"id": "9263", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9263", "title": "Ether", "text": "Ethers are a class of organic compounds that contain an ether group\u2014an oxygen atom connected to two alkyl or aryl groups. They have the general formula R\u2013O\u2013R\u2032, where R and R\u2032 represent the alkyl or aryl groups. Ethers can again be classified into two varieties: if the alkyl groups are the same on both sides of the oxygen atom, then it is a simple or symmetrical ether, whereas if they are different, the ethers are called mixed or unsymmetrical ethers. A typical example of the first group is the solvent and anesthetic diethyl ether, commonly referred to simply as \"ether\" (). Ethers are common in organic chemistry and even more prevalent in biochemistry, as they are common linkages in carbohydrates and lignin.\nStructure and bonding.\nEthers feature bent C\u2013O\u2013C linkages. In dimethyl ether, the bond angle is 111\u00b0 and C\u2013O distances are 141\u00a0pm. The barrier to rotation about the C\u2013O bonds is low. The bonding of oxygen in ethers, alcohols, and water is similar. In the language of valence bond theory, the hybridization at oxygen is sp3.\nOxygen is more electronegative than carbon, thus the hydrogens alpha to ethers are more acidic than in simple hydrocarbons. They are far less acidic than hydrogens alpha to carbonyl groups (such as in ketones or aldehydes), however.\nEthers can be symmetrical of the type ROR or unsymmetrical of the type ROR'. Examples of the former are diethyl ether, dimethyl ether, dipropyl ether etc. Illustrative unsymmetrical ethers are anisole (methoxybenzene) and dimethoxyethane.\nNomenclature.\nIn the IUPAC Nomenclature system, ethers are named using the general formula \"alkoxyalkane\", for example CH3\u2013CH2\u2013O\u2013CH3 is methoxyethane. If the ether is part of a more-complex molecule, it is described as an alkoxy substituent, so \u2013OCH3 would be considered a \"methoxy-\" group. The simpler alkyl radical is written in front, so CH3\u2013O\u2013CH2CH3 would be given as \"methoxy\"(CH3O)\"ethane\"(CH2CH3).\nTrivial name.\nIUPAC rules are often not followed for simple ethers. The trivial names for simple ethers (i.e., those with none or few other functional groups) are a composite of the two substituents followed by \"ether\". For example, ethyl methyl ether (CH3OC2H5), diphenylether (C6H5OC6H5). As for other organic compounds, very common ethers acquired names before rules for nomenclature were formalized. Diethyl ether is simply called \"ether\", but was once called \"sweet oil of vitriol\". Methyl phenyl ether is anisole, because it was originally found in aniseed. The aromatic ethers include furans. Acetals (\u03b1-alkoxy ethers R\u2013CH(\u2013OR)\u2013O\u2013R) are another class of ethers with characteristic properties.\nPolyethers.\nPolyethers are generally polymers containing ether linkages in their main chain. The term glycol generally refers to polyether polyols with one or more functional end-groups such as a hydroxyl group. The term \"oxide\" or other terms are used for high molar mass polymer when end-groups no longer affect polymer properties.\nCrown ethers are cyclic polyethers. Some toxins produced by dinoflagellates such as brevetoxin and ciguatoxin are extremely large and are known as \"cyclic\" or \"ladder\" polyethers.\nThe phenyl ether polymers are a class of aromatic polyethers containing aromatic cycles in their main chain: Polyphenyl ether (PPE) and Poly(\"p\"-phenylene oxide) (PPO).\nRelated compounds.\nMany classes of compounds with C\u2013O\u2013C linkages are not considered ethers: Esters (R\u2013C(=O)\u2013O\u2013R\u2032), hemiacetals (R\u2013CH(\u2013OH)\u2013O\u2013R\u2032), carboxylic acid anhydrides (RC(=O)\u2013O\u2013C(=O)R\u2032).\nPhysical properties.\nEthers have boiling points similar to those of the analogous alkanes. Simple ethers are generally colorless.\nReactions.\nThe C-O bonds that comprise simple ethers are strong. They are unreactive toward all but the strongest bases. Although generally of low chemical reactivity, they are more reactive than alkanes. \nSpecialized ethers such as epoxides, ketals, and acetals are unrepresentative classes of ethers and are discussed in separate articles. Important reactions are listed below.\nCleavage.\nAlthough ethers resist hydrolysis, they are cleaved by hydrobromic acid and hydroiodic acid. Hydrogen chloride cleaves ethers only slowly. Methyl ethers typically afford methyl halides:\nThese reactions proceed via onium intermediates, i.e. [RO(H)CH3]+Br\u2212.\nSome ethers undergo rapid cleavage with boron tribromide (even aluminium chloride is used in some cases) to give the alkyl bromide. Depending on the substituents, some ethers can be cleaved with a variety of reagents, e.g. strong base.\nPeroxide formation.\nWhen stored in the presence of air or oxygen, ethers tend to form explosive peroxides, such as diethyl ether hydroperoxide. The reaction is accelerated by light, metal catalysts, and aldehydes. In addition to avoiding storage conditions likely to form peroxides, it is recommended, when an ether is used as a solvent, not to distill it to dryness, as any peroxides that may have formed, being less volatile than the original ether, will become concentrated in the last few drops of liquid. The presence of peroxide in old samples of ethers may be detected by shaking them with freshly prepared solution of a ferrous sulfate followed by addition of KSCN. Appearance of blood red color indicates presence of peroxides. The dangerous properties of ether peroxides are the reason that diethyl ether and other peroxide forming ethers like tetrahydrofuran (THF) or ethylene glycol dimethyl ether (1,2-dimethoxyethane) are avoided in industrial processes.\nLewis bases.\nEthers serve as Lewis bases. For instance, diethyl ether forms a complex with boron trifluoride, i.e. diethyl etherate (BF3\u00b7OEt2). Ethers also coordinate to the Mg center in Grignard reagents. The cyclic ether thf is more basic than acyclic ethers. It forms complexes with many metal halides.\nAlpha-halogenation.\nThis reactivity is similar to the tendency of ethers with alpha hydrogen atoms to form peroxides. Reaction with chlorine produces alpha-chloroethers.\nSynthesis.\nEthers can be prepared by numerous routes. In general alkyl ethers form more readily than aryl ethers, with the later species often requiring metal catalysts.\nThe synthesis of diethyl ether by a reaction between ethanol and sulfuric acid has been known since the 13th century.\nDehydration of alcohols.\nThe dehydration of alcohols affords ethers:\nThis direct nucleophilic substitution reaction requires elevated temperatures (about 125\u00a0\u00b0C). The reaction is catalyzed by acids, usually sulfuric acid. The method is effective for generating symmetrical ethers, but not unsymmetrical ethers, since either OH can be protonated, which would give a mixture of products. Diethyl ether is produced from ethanol by this method. Cyclic ethers are readily generated by this approach. Elimination reactions compete with dehydration of the alcohol:\nThe dehydration route often requires conditions incompatible with delicate molecules. Several milder methods exist to produce ethers.\nWilliamson ether synthesis.\nNucleophilic displacement of alkyl halides by alkoxides\nThis reaction is called the Williamson ether synthesis. It involves treatment of a parent alcohol with a strong base to form the alkoxide, followed by addition of an appropriate aliphatic compound bearing a suitable leaving group (R\u2013X). Suitable leaving groups (X) include iodide, bromide, or sulfonates. This method usually does not work well for aryl halides (e.g. bromobenzene, see Ullmann condensation below). Likewise, this method only gives the best yields for primary halides. Secondary and tertiary halides are prone to undergo E2 elimination on exposure to the basic alkoxide anion used in the reaction due to steric hindrance from the large alkyl groups.\nIn a related reaction, alkyl halides undergo nucleophilic displacement by phenoxides. The R\u2013X cannot be used to react with the alcohol. However phenols can be used to replace the alcohol while maintaining the alkyl halide. Since phenols are acidic, they readily react with a strong base like sodium hydroxide to form phenoxide ions. The phenoxide ion will then substitute the \u2013X group in the alkyl halide, forming an ether with an aryl group attached to it in a reaction with an SN2 mechanism.\nUllmann condensation.\nThe Ullmann condensation is similar to the Williamson method except that the substrate is an aryl halide. Such reactions generally require a catalyst, such as copper.\nElectrophilic addition of alcohols to alkenes.\nAlcohols add to electrophilically activated alkenes.\nAcid catalysis is required for this reaction. Often, mercury trifluoroacetate (Hg(OCOCF3)2) is used as a catalyst for the reaction generating an ether with Markovnikov regiochemistry. Using similar reactions, tetrahydropyranyl ethers are used as protective groups for alcohols.\nPreparation of epoxides.\nEpoxides are typically prepared by oxidation of alkenes. The most important epoxide in terms of industrial scale is ethylene oxide, which is produced by oxidation of ethylene with oxygen. Other epoxides are produced by one of two routes:"}
{"id": "9264", "revid": "962462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9264", "title": "Ecliptic", "text": "The ecliptic is the plane of Earth's orbit around the Sun. From the perspective of an observer on Earth, the Sun's movement around the celestial sphere over the course of a year traces out a path along the ecliptic against the background of stars. The ecliptic is an important reference plane and is the basis of the ecliptic coordinate system.\nSun's apparent motion.\nThe ecliptic is the apparent path of the Sun throughout the course of a year.\nBecause Earth takes one year to orbit the Sun, the apparent position of the Sun takes one year to make a complete circuit of the ecliptic. With slightly more than 365 days in one year, the Sun moves a little less than 1\u00b0 eastward every day. This small difference in the Sun's position against the stars causes any particular spot on Earth's surface to catch up with (and stand directly north or south of) the Sun about four minutes later each day than it would if Earth did not orbit; a day on Earth is therefore 24 hours long rather than the approximately 23-hour 56-minute sidereal day. Again, this is a simplification, based on a hypothetical Earth that orbits at uniform speed around the Sun. The actual speed with which Earth orbits the Sun varies slightly during the year, so the speed with which the Sun seems to move along the ecliptic also varies. For example, the Sun is north of the celestial equator for about 185 days of each year, and south of it for about 180 days. The variation of orbital speed accounts for part of the equation of time.\nBecause of the movement of Earth around the Earth\u2013Moon center of mass, the apparent path of the Sun wobbles slightly, with a period of about one month. Because of further perturbations by the other planets of the Solar System, the Earth\u2013Moon barycenter wobbles slightly around a mean position in a complex fashion.\nRelationship to the celestial equator.\nBecause Earth's rotational axis is not perpendicular to its orbital plane, Earth's equatorial plane is not coplanar with the ecliptic plane, but is inclined to it by an angle of about 23.4\u00b0, which is known as the obliquity of the ecliptic. If the equator is projected outward to the celestial sphere, forming the celestial equator, it crosses the ecliptic at two points known as the equinoxes. The Sun, in its apparent motion along the ecliptic, crosses the celestial equator at these points, one from south to north, the other from north to south. The crossing from south to north is known as the vernal equinox, also known as the \"first point of Aries\" and the \"ascending node of the ecliptic\" on the celestial equator. The crossing from north to south is the autumnal equinox or descending node.\nThe orientation of Earth's axis and equator are not fixed in space, but rotate about the poles of the ecliptic with a period of about 26,000 years, a process known as \"lunisolar precession\", as it is due mostly to the gravitational effect of the Moon and Sun on Earth's equatorial bulge. Likewise, the ecliptic itself is not fixed. The gravitational perturbations of the other bodies of the Solar System cause a much smaller motion of the plane of Earth's orbit, and hence of the ecliptic, known as \"planetary precession\". The combined action of these two motions is called \"general precession\", and changes the position of the equinoxes by about 50 arc seconds (about 0.014\u00b0) per year.\nOnce again, this is a simplification. Periodic motions of the Moon and apparent periodic motions of the Sun (actually of Earth in its orbit) cause short-term small-amplitude periodic oscillations of Earth's axis, and hence the celestial equator, known as nutation.\nThis adds a periodic component to the position of the equinoxes; the positions of the celestial equator and (vernal) equinox with fully updated precession and nutation are called the \"true equator and equinox\"; the positions without nutation are the \"mean equator and equinox\".\nObliquity of the ecliptic.\nObliquity of the ecliptic is the term used by astronomers for the inclination of Earth's equator with respect to the ecliptic, or of Earth's rotation axis to a perpendicular to the ecliptic. It is about 23.4\u00b0 and is currently decreasing 0.013 degrees (47 arcseconds) per hundred years because of planetary perturbations.\nThe angular value of the obliquity is found by observation of the motions of Earth and other planets over many years. Astronomers produce new fundamental ephemerides as the accuracy of observation improves and as the understanding of the dynamics increases, and from these ephemerides various astronomical values, including the obliquity, are derived.\nUntil 1983 the obliquity for any date was calculated from work of Newcomb, who analyzed positions of the planets until about 1895:\nwhere is the obliquity and is tropical centuries from B1900.0 to the date in question.\nFrom 1984, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory's DE series of computer-generated ephemerides took over as the fundamental ephemeris of the \"Astronomical Almanac\". Obliquity based on DE200, which analyzed observations from 1911 to 1979, was calculated:\nwhere hereafter is Julian centuries from J2000.0.\nJPL's fundamental ephemerides have been continually updated. The \"Astronomical Almanac\" for 2010 specifies:\nThese expressions for the obliquity are intended for high precision over a relatively short time span, perhaps several centuries. \nJ. Laskar computed an expression to order good to /1000 years over 10,000 years.\nAll of these expressions are for the \"mean\" obliquity, that is, without the nutation of the equator included. The \"true\" or instantaneous obliquity includes the nutation.\nPlane of the Solar System.\nMost of the major bodies of the Solar System orbit the Sun in nearly the same plane. This is likely due to the way in which the Solar System formed from a protoplanetary disk. Probably the closest current representation of the disk is known as the \"invariable plane of the Solar System\". Earth's orbit, and hence, the ecliptic, is inclined a little more than 1\u00b0 to the invariable plane, Jupiter's orbit is within a little more than \u00b0 of it, and the other major planets are all within about 6\u00b0. Because of this, most Solar System bodies appear very close to the ecliptic in the sky.\nThe invariable plane is defined by the angular momentum of the entire Solar System, essentially the vector sum of all of the orbital and rotational angular momenta of all the bodies of the system; more than 60% of the total comes from the orbit of Jupiter. That sum requires precise knowledge of every object in the system, making it a somewhat uncertain value. Because of the uncertainty regarding the exact location of the invariable plane, and because the ecliptic is well defined by the apparent motion of the Sun, the ecliptic is used as the reference plane of the Solar System both for precision and convenience. The only drawback of using the ecliptic instead of the invariable plane is that over geologic time scales, it will move against fixed reference points in the sky's distant background.\nCelestial reference plane.\nThe ecliptic forms one of the two fundamental planes used as reference for positions on the celestial sphere, the other being the celestial equator. Perpendicular to the ecliptic are the ecliptic poles, the north ecliptic pole being the pole north of the equator. Of the two fundamental planes, the ecliptic is closer to unmoving against the background stars, its motion due to planetary precession being roughly 1/100 that of the celestial equator.\nSpherical coordinates, known as ecliptic longitude and latitude or celestial longitude and latitude, are used to specify positions of bodies on the celestial sphere with respect to the ecliptic. Longitude is measured positively eastward 0\u00b0 to 360\u00b0 along the ecliptic from the vernal equinox, the same direction in which the Sun appears to move. Latitude is measured perpendicular to the ecliptic, to +90\u00b0 northward or \u221290\u00b0 southward to the poles of the ecliptic, the ecliptic itself being 0\u00b0 latitude. For a complete spherical position, a distance parameter is also necessary. Different distance units are used for different objects. Within the Solar System, astronomical units are used, and for objects near Earth, Earth radii or kilometers are used. A corresponding right-handed rectangular coordinate system is also used occasionally; the \"x\"-axis is directed toward the vernal equinox, the \"y\"-axis 90\u00b0 to the east, and the \"z\"-axis toward the north ecliptic pole; the astronomical unit is the unit of measure. Symbols for ecliptic coordinates are somewhat standardized; see the table.\nEcliptic coordinates are convenient for specifying positions of Solar System objects, as most of the planets' orbits have small inclinations to the ecliptic, and therefore always appear relatively close to it on the sky. Because Earth's orbit, and hence the ecliptic, moves very little, it is a relatively fixed reference with respect to the stars.\nBecause of the precessional motion of the equinox, the ecliptic coordinates of objects on the celestial sphere are continuously changing. Specifying a position in ecliptic coordinates requires specifying a particular equinox, that is, the equinox of a particular date, known as an epoch; the coordinates are referred to the direction of the equinox at that date. For instance, the \"Astronomical Almanac\" lists the heliocentric position of Mars at 0h Terrestrial Time, 4 January 2010 as: longitude 118\u00b0 09' 15\".8, latitude +1\u00b0 43' 16\".7, true heliocentric distance 1.6302454 AU, mean equinox and ecliptic of date. This specifies the mean equinox of 4 January 2010 0h TT as above, without the addition of nutation.\nEclipses.\nBecause the orbit of the Moon is inclined only about 5.145\u00b0 to the ecliptic and the Sun is always very near the ecliptic, eclipses always occur on or near it. Because of the inclination of the Moon's orbit, eclipses do not occur at every conjunction and opposition of the Sun and Moon, but only when the Moon is near an ascending or descending node at the same time it is at conjunction (new) or opposition (full). The ecliptic is so named because the ancients noted that eclipses only occur when the Moon is crossing it.\nEquinoxes and solstices.\nThe exact instants of equinoxes and solstices are the times when the apparent ecliptic longitude (including the effects of aberration and nutation) of the Sun is 0\u00b0, 90\u00b0, 180\u00b0, and 270\u00b0. Because of perturbations of Earth's orbit and anomalies of the calendar, the dates of these are not fixed.\nIn the constellations.\nThe ecliptic currently passes through the following constellations:\nAstrology.\nThe ecliptic forms the center of the zodiac, a celestial belt about 20\u00b0 wide in latitude through which the Sun, Moon, and planets always appear to move. \nTraditionally, this region is divided into 12 signs of 30\u00b0 longitude, each of which approximates the Sun's motion in one month. In ancient times, the signs corresponded roughly to 12 of the constellations that straddle the ecliptic.\nThese signs are sometimes still used in modern terminology. The \"First Point of Aries\" was named when the March equinox Sun was actually in the constellation Aries; it has since moved into Pisces because of precession of the equinoxes."}
{"id": "9265", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9265", "title": "Extint countries", "text": ""}
{"id": "9266", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9266", "title": "Extinct countries", "text": ""}
{"id": "9267", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9267", "title": "Extinct political countries, empires, etc.", "text": ""}
{"id": "9269", "revid": "31682050", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9269", "title": "List of former sovereign states", "text": "A historical sovereign state is a state that once existed, but has since been dissolved due to conflict, war, rebellion, annexation, or uprising. This page lists sovereign states, countries, nations, or empires that have ceased to exist as political entities, grouped geographically and by constitutional nature. The asserted sovereignty of some states listed here was generally unrecognized.\nThe most recent sovereign state to no longer exist in each continent was:\nCriteria for inclusion.\nThe criteria for inclusion in this list is similar to that of the List of states with limited recognition. To be included here, a polity must have claimed statehood and either:\nFor purposes of this list, the cutoff between medieval and early modern states is the Fall of Constantinople in 1453.\nModern states and territories by geography.\nEurope.\nNordic countries.\nIn the Nordic countries, unions were personal, not unitary\nModern states and territories by type.\nDismembered countries.\nThese states are now dissolved into a number of states, none of which retain the old name.\nNominally-independent homelands of South Africa.\nFour of the homelands, or bantustans, for black South Africans, were granted nominal independence by the apartheid regime of South Africa. Not recognised by other nations, these effectively were puppet states and were re-incorporated in 1994.\nSecessionist states.\nThese nations declared themselves independent, but failed to achieve it in fact or did not seek permanent independence and were either re-incorporated into the mother country or incorporated into another country.\nAnnexed countries.\nThese nations, once separate, are now part of another country. Cases of voluntary accession are included."}
{"id": "9275", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9275", "title": "Electronic Music/Jungle", "text": ""}
{"id": "9276", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9276", "title": "Electronic Music/Drum and Bass", "text": ""}
{"id": "9277", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9277", "title": "Ellipse", "text": "In mathematics, an ellipse is a plane curve surrounding two focal points, such that for all points on the curve, the sum of the two distances to the focal points is a constant. As such, it generalizes a circle, which is the special type of ellipse in which the two focal points are the same. The elongation of an ellipse is measured by its eccentricity formula_1, a number ranging from formula_2 (the limiting case of a circle) to formula_3 (the limiting case of infinite elongation, no longer an ellipse but a parabola).\nAn ellipse has a simple algebraic solution for its area, but only approximations for its perimeter, for which integration is required to obtain an exact solution.\nAnalytically, the equation of a standard ellipse centered at the origin with width formula_4 and height formula_5 is:\nAssuming formula_7, the foci are formula_8 for formula_9. The standard parametric equation is:\nEllipses are the closed type of conic section: a plane curve tracing the intersection of a cone with a plane (see figure). Ellipses have many similarities with the other two forms of conic sections, parabolas and hyperbolas, both of which are open and unbounded. An angled cross section of a cylinder is also an ellipse.\nAn ellipse may also be defined in terms of one focal point and a line outside the ellipse called the directrix: for all points on the ellipse, the ratio between the distance to the focus and the distance to the directrix is a constant. This constant ratio is the above-mentioned eccentricity:\nEllipses are common in physics, astronomy and engineering. For example, the orbit of each planet in the solar system is approximately an ellipse with the Sun at one focus point (more precisely, the focus is the barycenter of the Sunplanet pair). The same is true for moons orbiting planets and all other systems of two astronomical bodies. The shapes of planets and stars are often well described by ellipsoids. A circle viewed from a side angle looks like an ellipse: that is, the ellipse is the image of a circle under parallel or perspective projection. The ellipse is also the simplest Lissajous figure formed when the horizontal and vertical motions are sinusoids with the same frequency: a similar effect leads to elliptical polarization of light in optics.\nThe name, (, \"omission\"), was given by Apollonius of Perga in his \"Conics\".\nDefinition as locus of points.\nAn ellipse can be defined geometrically as a set or locus of points in the Euclidean plane:\nThe midpoint formula_18 of the line segment joining the foci is called the \"center\" of the ellipse. The line through the foci is called the \"major axis\", and the line perpendicular to it through the center is the \"minor axis\". The major axis intersects the ellipse at two \"vertices\" formula_19, which have distance formula_20 to the center. The distance formula_21 of the foci to the center is called the \"focal distance\" or linear eccentricity. The quotient formula_22 is the \"eccentricity\".\nThe case formula_23 yields a circle and is included as a special type of ellipse.\nThe equation formula_24 can be viewed in a different way (see figure):\nformula_25 is called the \"circular directrix\" (related to focus formula_26) of the ellipse. This property should not be confused with the definition of an ellipse using a directrix line below.\nUsing Dandelin spheres, one can prove that any plane section of a cone with a plane is an ellipse, assuming the plane does not contain the apex and has slope less than that of the lines on the cone.\nIn Cartesian coordinates.\nStandard equation.\nThe standard form of an ellipse in Cartesian coordinates assumes that the origin is the center of the ellipse, the \"x\"-axis is the major axis, and:\nFor an arbitrary point formula_36 the distance to the focus formula_37 is\nformula_38 and to the other focus formula_39. Hence the point formula_40 is on the ellipse whenever:\nRemoving the radicals by suitable squarings and using formula_42 produces the standard equation of the ellipse:\nor, solved for \"y:\"\nThe width and height parameters formula_45 are called the semi-major and semi-minor axes. The top and bottom points formula_46 are the \"co-vertices\". The distances from a point formula_40 on the ellipse to the left and right foci are formula_48 and formula_49.\nIt follows from the equation that the ellipse is \"symmetric\" with respect to the coordinate axes and hence with respect to the origin.\nParameters.\nPrincipal axes.\nThroughout this article, the semi-major and semi-minor axes are denoted formula_20 and formula_51, respectively, i.e. formula_52\nIn principle, the canonical ellipse equation formula_53 may have formula_54 (and hence the ellipse would be taller than it is wide). This form can be converted to the standard form by transposing the variable names formula_55 and formula_56 and the parameter names formula_20 and formula_58\nLinear eccentricity.\nThis is the distance from the center to a focus: formula_59.\nEccentricity.\nThe eccentricity can be expressed as:\nassuming formula_61 An ellipse with equal axes (formula_62) has zero eccentricity, and is a circle.\nSemi-latus rectum.\nThe length of the chord through one focus, perpendicular to the major axis, is called the \"latus rectum\". One half of it is the \"semi-latus rectum\" formula_63. A calculation shows:\nThe semi-latus rectum formula_63 is equal to the radius of curvature at the vertices (see section curvature).\nTangent.\nAn arbitrary line formula_66 intersects an ellipse at formula_67, formula_68, or formula_69 points, respectively called an \"exterior line\", \"tangent\" and \"secant\". Through any point of an ellipse there is a unique tangent. The tangent at a point formula_70 of the ellipse formula_71 has the coordinate equation:\nA vector parametric equation of the tangent is:\nProof:\nLet formula_70 be a point on an ellipse and formula_76 be the equation of any line formula_66 containing formula_70. Inserting the line's equation into the ellipse equation and respecting formula_79 yields:\nUsing (1) one finds that formula_92 is a tangent vector at point formula_70, which proves the vector equation.\nIf formula_94 and formula_95 are two points of the ellipse such that formula_96, then the points lie on two \"conjugate diameters\" (see below). (If formula_62, the ellipse is a circle and \"conjugate\" means \"orthogonal\".)\nShifted ellipse.\nIf the standard ellipse is shifted to have center formula_98, its equation is\nThe axes are still parallel to the x- and y-axes.\nGeneral ellipse.\nIn analytic geometry, the ellipse is defined as a quadric: the set of points formula_100 of the Cartesian plane that, in non-degenerate cases, satisfy the implicit equation\nprovided formula_102\nTo distinguish the degenerate cases from the non-degenerate case, let \"\u2206\" be the determinant\nThen the ellipse is a non-degenerate real ellipse if and only if \"C\u2206\" &lt; 0. If \"C\u2206\" &gt; 0, we have an imaginary ellipse, and if \"\u2206\" = 0, we have a point ellipse.\nThe general equation's coefficients can be obtained from known semi-major axis formula_20, semi-minor axis formula_51, center coordinates formula_98, and rotation angle formula_107 (the angle from the positive horizontal axis to the ellipse's major axis) using the formulae:\nThese expressions can be derived from the canonical equation formula_71 by an affine transformation of the coordinates formula_40:\nConversely, the canonical form parameters can be obtained from the general form coefficients by the equations:\nParametric representation.\nStandard parametric representation.\nUsing trigonometric functions, a parametric representation of the standard ellipse formula_113 is:\nThe parameter \"t\" (called the \"eccentric anomaly\" in astronomy) is not the angle of formula_115 with the \"x\"-axis, but has a geometric meaning due to Philippe de La Hire (see \"Drawing ellipses\" below).\nRational representation.\nWith the substitution formula_116 and trigonometric formulae one obtains\nand the \"rational\" parametric equation of an ellipse\nwhich covers any point of the ellipse formula_71 except the left vertex formula_120.\nFor formula_121 this formula represents the right upper quarter of the ellipse moving counter-clockwise with increasing formula_122 The left vertex is the limit formula_123\nRational representations of conic sections are commonly used in computer-aided design (see Bezier curve).\nTangent slope as parameter.\nA parametric representation, which uses the slope formula_124 of the tangent at a point of the ellipse\ncan be obtained from the derivative of the standard representation formula_125:\nWith help of trigonometric formulae\none obtains:\nReplacing formula_128 and formula_129 of the standard representation yields:\nHere formula_124 is the slope of the tangent at the corresponding ellipse point, formula_132 is the upper and formula_133 the lower half of the ellipse. The verticesformula_134, having vertical tangents, are not covered by the representation.\nThe equation of the tangent at point formula_135 has the form formula_136. The still unknown formula_137 can be determined by inserting the coordinates of the corresponding ellipse point formula_135:\nThis description of the tangents of an ellipse is an essential tool for the determination of the orthoptic of an ellipse. The orthoptic article contains another proof, without differential calculus and trigonometric formulae.\nGeneral ellipse.\nAnother definition of an ellipse uses affine transformations:\nAn affine transformation of the Euclidean plane has the form formula_141, where formula_142 is a regular matrix (with non-zero determinant) and formula_143 is an arbitrary vector. If formula_144 are the column vectors of the matrix formula_142, the unit circle formula_146, formula_147, is mapped onto the ellipse:\nHere formula_143 is the center and formula_150 are the directions of two conjugate diameters, in general not perpendicular.\nThe four vertices of the ellipse are formula_151, for a parameter formula_152 defined by:\n(If formula_154, then formula_155.) This is derived as follows. The tangent vector at point formula_156 is:\nAt a vertex parameter formula_152, the tangent is perpendicular to the major/minor axes, so:\nExpanding and applying the identities formula_160 gives the equation for formula_161\nFrom Apollonios theorem (see below) one obtains:&lt;br&gt;\nThe area of an ellipse formula_162 is\nWith the abbreviations\nformula_164 the statements of Apollonios's theorem can be written as:\nSolving this nonlinear system for formula_166 yields the semiaxes:\nSolving the parametric representation for formula_169 by Cramer's rule and using formula_170, one obtains the implicit representation\nConversely: If the equation\nof an ellipse centered at the origin is given, then the two vectors \npoint to two conjugate points and the tools developed above are applicable.\n\"Example\": For the ellipse with equation formula_175 the vectors are \nFor formula_177 one obtains a parametric representation of the standard ellipse rotated by angle formula_107:\nThe definition of an ellipse in this section gives a parametric representation of an arbitrary ellipse, even in space, if one allows formula_181 to be vectors in space.\nPolar forms.\nPolar form relative to center.\nIn polar coordinates, with the origin at the center of the ellipse and with the angular coordinate formula_107 measured from the major axis, the ellipse's equation is\nPolar form relative to focus.\nIf instead we use polar coordinates with the origin at one focus, with the angular coordinate formula_184 still measured from the major axis, the ellipse's equation is\nwhere the sign in the denominator is negative if the reference direction formula_184 points towards the center (as illustrated on the right), and positive if that direction points away from the center.\nIn the slightly more general case of an ellipse with one focus at the origin and the other focus at angular coordinate formula_187, the polar form is\nThe angle formula_107 in these formulas is called the true anomaly of the point. The numerator of these formulas is the semi-latus rectum formula_190.\nEccentricity and the directrix property.\nEach of the two lines parallel to the minor axis, and at a distance of formula_191 from it, is called a \"directrix\" of the ellipse (see diagram).\nThe proof for the pair formula_194 follows from the fact that formula_195 and formula_196 satisfy the equation\nThe second case is proven analogously.\nThe converse is also true and can be used to define an ellipse (in a manner similar to the definition of a parabola):\nThe choice formula_2, which is the eccentricity of a circle, is not allowed in this context. One may consider the directrix of a circle to be the line at infinity.\nLet formula_208, and assume formula_209 is a point on the curve.\nThe directrix formula_199 has equation formula_211. With formula_212, the relation formula_213 produces the equations\nThe substitution formula_216 yields\nThis is the equation of an \"ellipse\" (formula_218), or a \"parabola\" (formula_3), or a \"hyperbola\" (formula_207). All of these non-degenerate conics have, in common, the origin as a vertex (see diagram).\nIf formula_218, introduce new parameters formula_222 so that formula_223, and then the equation above becomes\nwhich is the equation of an ellipse with center formula_225, the \"x\"-axis as major axis, and\nthe major/minor semi axis formula_222.\nBecause of formula_227 point formula_228 of directrix formula_229 (see diagram) and focus formula_30 are inverse with respect to the circle inversion at circle formula_231 (in diagram green). Hence formula_228 can be constructed as shown in the diagram. Directrix formula_229 is the perpendicular to the main axis at point formula_228. \nIf the focus is formula_235 and the directrix formula_236, one obtains the equation\nFocus-to-focus reflection property.\nAn ellipse possesses the following property:\nBecause the tangent is perpendicular to the normal, the statement is true for the tangent and the supplementary angle of the angle between the lines to the foci (see diagram), too.\nLet formula_241 be the point on the line formula_242 with the distance formula_4 to the focus formula_26, formula_20 is the semi-major axis of the ellipse. Let line formula_246 be the bisector of the supplementary angle to the angle between the lines formula_240. In order to prove that formula_246 is the tangent line at point formula_14, one checks that any point formula_250 on line formula_246 which is different from formula_14 cannot be on the ellipse. Hence formula_246 has only point formula_14 in common with the ellipse and is, therefore, the tangent at point formula_14.\nFrom the diagram and the triangle inequality one recognizes that formula_256 holds, which means: formula_257 . The equality formula_258 is true from the Angle bisector theorem because formula_259 and formula_260 . But if formula_250 is a point of the ellipse, the sum should be formula_4.\nThe rays from one focus are reflected by the ellipse to the second focus. This property has optical and acoustic applications similar to the reflective property of a parabola (see whispering gallery).\nConjugate diameters.\nDefinition of conjugate diameters.\nA circle has the following property:\nAn affine transformation preserves parallelism and midpoints of line segments, so this property is true for any ellipse. (Note that the parallel chords and the diameter are no longer orthogonal.)\nTwo diameters formula_263 of an ellipse are \"conjugate\" if the midpoints of chords parallel to formula_264 lie on formula_265\nFrom the diagram one finds:\nConjugate diameters in an ellipse generalize orthogonal diameters in a circle.\nIn the parametric equation for a general ellipse given above,\nany pair of points formula_271 belong to a diameter, and the pair formula_272 belong to its conjugate diameter.\nTheorem of Apollonios on conjugate diameters.\nFor an ellipse with semi-axes formula_222 the following is true:\nLet the ellipse be in the canonical form with parametric equation\nThe two points formula_287 are on conjugate diameters (see previous section). From trigonometric formulae one obtains formula_288 and\nThe area of the triangle generated by formula_290 is\nand from the diagram it can be seen that the area of the parallelogram is 8 times that of formula_292. Hence\nOrthogonal tangents.\nFor the ellipse formula_294 the intersection points of \"orthogonal\" tangents lie on the circle formula_295.\nThis circle is called \"orthoptic\" or director circle of the ellipse (not to be confused with the circular directrix defined above).\nDrawing ellipses.\nEllipses appear in descriptive geometry as images (parallel or central projection) of circles. There exist various tools to draw an ellipse. Computers provide the fastest and most accurate method for drawing an ellipse. However, technical tools (\"ellipsographs\") to draw an ellipse without a computer exist. The principle of ellipsographs were known to Greek mathematicians such as Archimedes and Proklos.\nIf there is no ellipsograph available, one can draw an ellipse using an approximation by the four osculating circles at the vertices.\nFor any method described below, knowledge of the axes and the semi-axes is necessary (or equivalently: the foci and the semi-major axis).\nIf this presumption is not fulfilled one has to know at least two conjugate diameters. With help of Rytz's construction the axes and semi-axes can be retrieved.\nde La Hire's point construction.\nThe following construction of single points of an ellipse is due to de La Hire. It is based on the standard parametric representation formula_296 of an ellipse:\nPins-and-string method.\nThe characterization of an ellipse as the locus of points so that sum of the distances to the foci is constant leads to a method of drawing one using two drawing pins, a length of string, and a pencil. In this method, pins are pushed into the paper at two points, which become the ellipse's foci. A string is tied at each end to the two pins; its length after tying is formula_4. The tip of the pencil then traces an ellipse if it is moved while keeping the string taut. Using two pegs and a rope, gardeners use this procedure to outline an elliptical flower bed\u2014thus it is called the \"gardener's ellipse\".\nA similar method for drawing with a \"closed\" string is due to the Irish bishop Charles Graves.\nPaper strip methods.\nThe two following methods rely on the parametric representation (see section \"parametric representation\", above):\nThis representation can be modeled technically by two simple methods. In both cases center, the axes and semi axes formula_304 have to be known.\nThe first method starts with\nThe point, where the semi axes meet is marked by formula_14. If the strip slides with both ends on the axes of the desired ellipse, then point formula_14 traces the ellipse. For the proof one shows that point formula_14 has the parametric representation formula_296, where parameter formula_310 is the angle of the slope of the paper strip.\nA technical realization of the motion of the paper strip can be achieved by a Tusi couple (see animation). The device is able to draw any ellipse with a \"fixed\" sum formula_305, which is the radius of the large circle. This restriction may be a disadvantage in real life. More flexible is the second paper strip method.\nA variation of the paper strip method 1 uses the observation that the midpoint formula_312 of the paper strip is moving on the circle with center formula_313 (of the ellipse) and radius formula_314. Hence, the paperstrip can be cut at point formula_312 into halves, connected again by a joint at formula_312 and the sliding end formula_317 fixed at the center formula_313 (see diagram). After this operation the movement of the unchanged half of the paperstrip is unchanged. This variation requires only one sliding shoe.\nThe second method starts with\nOne marks the point, which divides the strip into two substrips of length formula_51 and formula_321. The strip is positioned onto the axes as described in the diagram. Then the free end of the strip traces an ellipse, while the strip is moved. For the proof, one recognizes that the tracing point can be described parametrically by formula_296, where parameter formula_310 is the angle of slope of the paper strip.\nThis method is the base for several \"ellipsographs\" (see section below).\nSimilar to the variation of the paper strip method 1 a \"variation of the paper strip method 2\" can be established (see diagram) by cutting the part between the axes into halves.\nMost ellipsograph drafting instruments are based on the second paperstrip method.\nApproximation by osculating circles.\nFrom \"Metric properties\" below, one obtains:\nThe diagram shows an easy way to find the centers of curvature formula_328 at vertex formula_329 and co-vertex formula_330, respectively:\nThe centers for the remaining vertices are found by symmetry.\nWith help of a French curve one draws a curve, which has smooth contact to the osculating circles.\nSteiner generation.\nThe following method to construct single points of an ellipse relies on the Steiner generation of a conic section:\nFor the generation of points of the ellipse formula_71 one uses the pencils at the vertices formula_324. Let formula_344 be an upper co-vertex of the ellipse and formula_345.\nformula_14 is the center of the rectangle formula_347. The side formula_348 of the rectangle is divided into n equal spaced line segments and this division is projected parallel with the diagonal formula_349 as direction onto the line segment formula_350 and assign the division as shown in the diagram. The parallel projection together with the reverse of the orientation is part of the projective mapping between the pencils at formula_329 and formula_352 needed. The intersection points of any two related lines formula_353 and formula_354 are points of the uniquely defined ellipse. With help of the points formula_355 the points of the second quarter of the ellipse can be determined. Analogously one obtains the points of the lower half of the ellipse.\nSteiner generation can also be defined for hyperbolas and parabolas. It is sometimes called a \"parallelogram method\" because one can use other points rather than the vertices, which starts with a parallelogram instead of a rectangle.\nAs hypotrochoid.\nThe ellipse is a special case of the hypotrochoid when formula_356, as shown in the adjacent image. The special case of a moving circle with radius formula_357 inside a circle with radius formula_356 is called a Tusi couple.\nInscribed angles and three-point form.\nCircles.\nA circle with equation formula_359 is uniquely determined by three points formula_360 not on a line. A simple way to determine the parameters formula_361 uses the \"inscribed angle theorem\" for circles:\nUsually one measures inscribed angles by a degree or radian \"\u03b8,\" but here the following measurement is more convenient:\nInscribed angle theorem for circles.\nFor four points formula_362 no three of them on a line, we have the following (see diagram):\nAt first the measure is available only for chords not parallel to the y-axis, but the final formula works for any chord.\nThree-point form of circle equation.\nFor example, for formula_373 the three-point equation is:\nUsing vectors, dot products and determinants this formula can be arranged more clearly, letting formula_376:\nThe center of the circle formula_98 satisfies:\nThe radius is the distance between any of the three points and the center.\nEllipses.\nThis section, we consider the family of ellipses defined by equations formula_381 with a \"fixed\" eccentricity formula_1. It is convenient to use the parameter:\nand to write the ellipse equation as:\nwhere \"q\" is fixed and formula_385 vary over the real numbers. (Such ellipses have their axes parallel to the coordinate axes: if formula_386, the major axis is parallel to the \"x\"-axis; if formula_387, it is parallel to the \"y\"-axis.)\nLike a circle, such an ellipse is determined by three points not on a line.\nFor this family of ellipses, one introduces the following q-analog angle measure, which is \"not\" a function of the usual angle measure \"\u03b8\":\nInscribed angle theorem for ellipses.\nAt first the measure is available only for chords which are not parallel to the y-axis. But the final formula works for any chord. The proof follows from a straightforward calculation. For the direction of proof given that the points are on an ellipse, one can assume that the center of the ellipse is the origin.\nThree-point form of ellipse equation.\nFor example, for formula_397 and formula_398 one obtains the three-point form\nAnalogously to the circle case, the equation can be written more clearly using vectors:\nwhere formula_402 is the modified dot product formula_403\nPole-polar relation.\nAny ellipse can be described in a suitable coordinate system by an equation formula_71. The equation of the tangent at a point formula_405 of the ellipse is formula_406 If one allows point formula_405 to be an arbitrary point different from the origin, then\nThis relation between points and lines is a bijection.\nThe inverse function maps\nSuch a relation between points and lines generated by a conic is called \"pole-polar relation\" or \"polarity\". The pole is the point; the polar the line.\nBy calculation one can confirm the following properties of the pole-polar relation of the ellipse:\nPole-polar relations exist for hyperbolas and parabolas as well.\nMetric properties.\nAll metric properties given below refer to an ellipse with equation\nexcept for the section on the area enclosed by a tilted ellipse, where the generalized form of Eq.() will be given.\nArea.\nThe area formula_424 enclosed by an ellipse is:\nwhere formula_20 and formula_51 are the lengths of the semi-major and semi-minor axes, respectively. The area formula formula_427 is intuitive: start with a circle of radius formula_51 (so its area is formula_429) and stretch it by a factor formula_430 to make an ellipse. This scales the area by the same factor: formula_431 It is also easy to rigorously prove the area formula using integration as follows. Equation () can be rewritten as formula_432 For formula_433 this curve is the top half of the ellipse. So twice the integral of formula_434 over the interval formula_435 will be the area of the ellipse:\nThe second integral is the area of a circle of radius formula_437 that is, formula_438 So\nAn ellipse defined implicitly by formula_440 has area formula_441\nThe area can also be expressed in terms of eccentricity and the length of the semi-major axis as formula_442 (obtained by solving for flattening, then computing the semi-minor axis).\nSo far we have dealt with \"erect\" ellipses, whose major and minor axes are parallel to the formula_55 and formula_444 axes. However, some applications require \"tilted\" ellipses. In charged-particle beam optics, for instance, the enclosed area of an erect or tilted ellipse is an important property of the beam, its \"emittance\". In this case a simple formula still applies, namely\nwhere formula_445, formula_446 are intercepts and formula_447, formula_448 are maximum values. It follows directly from Appolonio's theorem.\nCircumference.\nThe circumference formula_18 of an ellipse is:\nwhere again formula_20 is the length of the semi-major axis, formula_452 is the eccentricity, and the function formula_453 is the complete elliptic integral of the second kind,\nwhich is in general not an elementary function.\nThe circumference of the ellipse may be evaluated in terms of formula_455 using Gauss's arithmetic-geometric mean; this is a quadratically converging iterative method.\nThe exact infinite series is:\nwhere formula_457 is the double factorial (extended to negative odd integers by the recurrence relation formula_458, for formula_459). This series converges, but by expanding in terms of formula_460 James Ivory and Bessel derived an expression that converges much more rapidly:\nSrinivasa Ramanujan gives two close approximations for the circumference in \u00a716 of \"Modular Equations and Approximations to formula_339\"; they are\nand\nThe errors in these approximations, which were obtained empirically, are of order formula_465 and formula_466 respectively.\nArc length.\nMore generally, the arc length of a portion of the circumference, as a function of the angle subtended (or -coordinates of any two points on the upper half of the ellipse), is given by an incomplete elliptic integral. The upper half of an ellipse is parameterized by\nThen the arc length formula_468 from formula_469 to formula_470 is:\nThis is equivalent to\nwhere formula_473 is the incomplete elliptic integral of the second kind with parameter formula_474\nThe inverse function, the angle subtended as a function of the arc length, is given by a certain elliptic function.\nSome lower and upper bounds on the circumference of the canonical ellipse formula_475 with formula_476 are\nHere the upper bound formula_478 is the circumference of a circumscribed concentric circle passing through the endpoints of the ellipse's major axis, and the lower bound formula_479 is the perimeter of an inscribed rhombus with vertices at the endpoints of the major and the minor axes.\nCurvature.\nThe curvature is given by formula_480\nradius of curvature at point formula_36:\nRadius of curvature at the two \"vertices\" formula_483 and the centers of curvature:\nRadius of curvature at the two \"co-vertices\" formula_485 and the centers of curvature:\nIn triangle geometry.\nEllipses appear in triangle geometry as\nAs plane sections of quadrics.\nEllipses appear as plane sections of the following quadrics:\nApplications.\nPhysics.\nElliptical reflectors and acoustics.\nIf the water's surface is disturbed at one focus of an elliptical water tank, the circular waves of that disturbance, after reflecting off the walls, converge simultaneously to a single point: the \"second focus\". This is a consequence of the total travel length being the same along any wall-bouncing path between the two foci.\nSimilarly, if a light source is placed at one focus of an elliptic mirror, all light rays on the plane of the ellipse are reflected to the second focus. Since no other smooth curve has such a property, it can be used as an alternative definition of an ellipse. (In the special case of a circle with a source at its center all light would be reflected back to the center.) If the ellipse is rotated along its major axis to produce an ellipsoidal mirror (specifically, a prolate spheroid), this property holds for all rays out of the source. Alternatively, a cylindrical mirror with elliptical cross-section can be used to focus light from a linear fluorescent lamp along a line of the paper; such mirrors are used in some document scanners.\nSound waves are reflected in a similar way, so in a large elliptical room a person standing at one focus can hear a person standing at the other focus remarkably well. The effect is even more evident under a vaulted roof shaped as a section of a prolate spheroid. Such a room is called a \"whisper chamber\". The same effect can be demonstrated with two reflectors shaped like the end caps of such a spheroid, placed facing each other at the proper distance. Examples are the National Statuary Hall at the United States Capitol (where John Quincy Adams is said to have used this property for eavesdropping on political matters); the Mormon Tabernacle at Temple Square in Salt Lake City, Utah; at an exhibit on sound at the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago; in front of the University of Illinois at Urbana\u2013Champaign Foellinger Auditorium; and also at a side chamber of the Palace of Charles V, in the Alhambra.\nPlanetary orbits.\nIn the 17th century, Johannes Kepler discovered that the orbits along which the planets travel around the Sun are ellipses with the Sun [approximately] at one focus, in his first law of planetary motion. Later, Isaac Newton explained this as a corollary of his law of universal gravitation.\nMore generally, in the gravitational two-body problem, if the two bodies are bound to each other (that is, the total energy is negative), their orbits are similar ellipses with the common barycenter being one of the foci of each ellipse. The other focus of either ellipse has no known physical significance. The orbit of either body in the reference frame of the other is also an ellipse, with the other body at the same focus.\nKeplerian elliptical orbits are the result of any radially directed attraction force whose strength is inversely proportional to the square of the distance. Thus, in principle, the motion of two oppositely charged particles in empty space would also be an ellipse. (However, this conclusion ignores losses due to electromagnetic radiation and quantum effects, which become significant when the particles are moving at high speed.)\nFor elliptical orbits, useful relations involving the eccentricity formula_1 are:\nwhere\nAlso, in terms of formula_489 and formula_490, the semi-major axis formula_20 is their arithmetic mean, the semi-minor axis formula_51 is their geometric mean, and the semi-latus rectum formula_63 is their harmonic mean. In other words,\nHarmonic oscillators.\nThe general solution for a harmonic oscillator in two or more dimensions is also an ellipse. Such is the case, for instance, of a long pendulum that is free to move in two dimensions; of a mass attached to a fixed point by a perfectly elastic spring; or of any object that moves under influence of an attractive force that is directly proportional to its distance from a fixed attractor. Unlike Keplerian orbits, however, these \"harmonic orbits\" have the center of attraction at the geometric center of the ellipse, and have fairly simple equations of motion.\nPhase visualization.\nIn electronics, the relative phase of two sinusoidal signals can be compared by feeding them to the vertical and horizontal inputs of an oscilloscope. If the Lissajous figure display is an ellipse, rather than a straight line, the two signals are out of phase.\nElliptical gears.\nTwo non-circular gears with the same elliptical outline, each pivoting around one focus and positioned at the proper angle, turn smoothly while maintaining contact at all times. Alternatively, they can be connected by a link chain or timing belt, or in the case of a bicycle the main chainring may be elliptical, or an ovoid similar to an ellipse in form. Such elliptical gears may be used in mechanical equipment to produce variable angular speed or torque from a constant rotation of the driving axle, or in the case of a bicycle to allow a varying crank rotation speed with inversely varying mechanical advantage.\nElliptical bicycle gears make it easier for the chain to slide off the cog when changing gears.\nAn example gear application would be a device that winds thread onto a conical bobbin on a spinning machine. The bobbin would need to wind faster when the thread is near the apex than when it is near the base.\nStatistics and finance.\nIn statistics, a bivariate random vector formula_498 is jointly elliptically distributed if its iso-density contours\u2014loci of equal values of the density function\u2014are ellipses. The concept extends to an arbitrary number of elements of the random vector, in which case in general the iso-density contours are ellipsoids. A special case is the multivariate normal distribution. The elliptical distributions are important in finance because if rates of return on assets are jointly elliptically distributed then all portfolios can be characterized completely by their mean and variance\u2014that is, any two portfolios with identical mean and variance of portfolio return have identical distributions of portfolio return.\nComputer graphics.\nDrawing an ellipse as a graphics primitive is common in standard display libraries, such as the MacIntosh QuickDraw API, and Direct2D on Windows. Jack Bresenham at IBM is most famous for the invention of 2D drawing primitives, including line and circle drawing, using only fast integer operations such as addition and branch on carry bit. M. L. V. Pitteway extended Bresenham's algorithm for lines to conics in 1967. Another efficient generalization to draw ellipses was invented in 1984 by Jerry Van Aken.\nIn 1970 Danny Cohen presented at the \"Computer Graphics 1970\" conference in England a linear algorithm for drawing ellipses and circles. In 1971, L. B. Smith published similar algorithms for all conic sections and proved them to have good properties. These algorithms need only a few multiplications and additions to calculate each vector.\nIt is beneficial to use a parametric formulation in computer graphics because the density of points is greatest where there is the most curvature. Thus, the change in slope between each successive point is small, reducing the apparent \"jaggedness\" of the approximation.\nComposite B\u00e9zier curves may also be used to draw an ellipse to sufficient accuracy, since any ellipse may be construed as an affine transformation of a circle. The spline methods used to draw a circle may be used to draw an ellipse, since the constituent B\u00e9zier curves behave appropriately under such transformations.\nOptimization theory.\nIt is sometimes useful to find the minimum bounding ellipse on a set of points. The ellipsoid method is quite useful for solving this problem."}
{"id": "9278", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9278", "title": "Extension", "text": "Extension, extend or extended may refer to:"}
{"id": "9279", "revid": "25771582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9279", "title": "Elephant", "text": "Elephants are the largest existing land animals. Three species are currently recognised: the African bush elephant, the African forest elephant, and the Asian elephant. Elephantidae is the only surviving family of the order Proboscidea; extinct members include the mastodons. The family Elephantidae also contains several extinct groups, including the mammoths and straight-tusked elephants. African elephants have larger ears and concave backs, whereas Asian elephants have smaller ears, and convex or level backs. Distinctive features of all elephants include a long proboscis called a trunk, tusks, large ear flaps, massive legs, and tough but sensitive skin. The trunk is used for breathing, bringing food and water to the mouth, and grasping objects. Tusks, which are derived from the incisor teeth, serve both as weapons and as tools for moving objects and digging. The large ear flaps assist in maintaining a constant body temperature as well as in communication. The pillar-like legs carry their great weight.\nElephants are scattered throughout sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and Southeast Asia and are found in different habitats, including savannahs, forests, deserts, and marshes. They are herbivorous, and they stay near water when it is accessible. They are considered to be keystone species, due to their impact on their environments. Elephants have a fission\u2013fusion society, in which multiple family groups come together to socialise. Females (cows) tend to live in family groups, which can consist of one female with her calves or several related females with offspring. The groups, which do not include bulls, are usually led by the oldest cow, known as the matriarch.\nMales (bulls) leave their family groups when they reach puberty and may live alone or with other males. Adult bulls mostly interact with family groups when looking for a mate. They enter a state of increased testosterone and aggression known as musth, which helps them gain dominance over other males as well as reproductive success. Calves are the centre of attention in their family groups and rely on their mothers for as long as three years. Elephants can live up to 70 years in the wild. They communicate by touch, sight, smell, and sound; elephants use infrasound, and seismic communication over long distances. Elephant intelligence has been compared with that of primates and cetaceans. They appear to have self-awareness, and appear to show empathy for dying and dead family members.\nAfrican bush elephants and Asian elephants are listed as endangered and African forest elephants as critically endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). One of the biggest threats to elephant populations is the ivory trade, as the animals are poached for their ivory tusks. Other threats to wild elephants include habitat destruction and conflicts with local people. Elephants are used as working animals in Asia. In the past, they were used in war; today, they are often controversially put on display in zoos, or exploited for entertainment in circuses. Elephants are highly recognisable and have been featured in art, folklore, religion, literature, and popular culture.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"elephant\" is based on the Latin \"elephas\" (genitive \"elephantis\") (\"elephant\"), which is the Latinised form of the Greek \u1f10\u03bb\u03ad\u03c6\u03b1\u03c2 (\"elephas\") (genitive \u1f10\u03bb\u03ad\u03c6\u03b1\u03bd\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2 (\"elephantos\"), probably from a non-Indo-European language, likely Phoenician. It is attested in Mycenaean Greek as \"e-re-pa\" (genitive \"e-re-pa-to\") in Linear B syllabic script. As in Mycenaean Greek, Homer used the Greek word to mean ivory, but after the time of Herodotus, it also referred to the animal. The word \"elephant\" appears in Middle English as \"olyfaunt\" (c.1300) and was borrowed from Old French \"oliphant\" (12th century).\nTaxonomy and phylogeny.\nElephants belong to the family Elephantidae, the sole remaining family within the order Proboscidea which belongs to the superorder Afrotheria. Their closest extant relatives are the sirenians (dugongs and manatees) and the hyraxes, with which they share the clade Paenungulata within the superorder Afrotheria. Elephants and sirenians are further grouped in the clade Tethytheria.\nThree species of elephants are recognised; the African bush elephant (\"Loxodonta africana\") and forest elephant (\"Loxodonta cyclotis\") of sub-Saharan Africa, and the Asian elephant (\"Elephas maximus\") of South and Southeast Asia. African elephants have larger ears, a concave back, more wrinkled skin, a sloping abdomen, and two finger-like extensions at the tip of the trunk. Asian elephants have smaller ears, a convex or level back, smoother skin, a horizontal abdomen that occasionally sags in the middle and one extension at the tip of the trunk. The looped ridges on the molars are narrower in the Asian elephant while those of the African are more diamond-shaped. The Asian elephant also has dorsal bumps on its head and some patches of depigmentation on its skin.\nAmong African elephants, forest elephants have smaller and more rounded ears and thinner and straighter tusks than bush elephants and are limited in range to the forested areas of western and Central Africa. Both were traditionally considered a single species, \"Loxodonta africana\", but molecular studies have affirmed their status as separate species. In 2017, DNA sequence analysis showed that \"L. cyclotis\" is more closely related to the extinct \"Palaeoloxodon antiquus\", than it is to \"L. africana,\" possibly undermining the genus \"Loxodonta\" as a whole.\nEvolution and extinct relatives.\nOver 180 extinct members and three major evolutionary radiations of the order Proboscidea have been recorded. The earliest proboscids, the African \"Eritherium\" and \"Phosphatherium\" of the late Paleocene, heralded the first radiation. The Eocene included \"Numidotherium\", \"Moeritherium,\" and \"Barytherium\" from Africa. These animals were relatively small and aquatic. Later on, genera such as \"Phiomia\" and \"Palaeomastodon\" arose; the latter likely inhabited forests and open woodlands. Proboscidean diversity declined during the Oligocene. One notable species of this epoch was \"Eritreum melakeghebrekristosi\" of the Horn of Africa, which may have been an ancestor to several later species. The beginning of the Miocene saw the second diversification, with the appearance of the deinotheres and the mammutids. The former were related to \"Barytherium\" and lived in Africa and Eurasia, while the latter may have descended from \"Eritreum\" and spread to North America.\nThe second radiation was represented by the emergence of the gomphotheres in the Miocene, which likely evolved from \"Eritreum\" and originated in Africa, spreading to every continent except Australia and Antarctica. Members of this group included \"Gomphotherium\" and \"Platybelodon\". The third radiation started in the late Miocene and led to the arrival of the elephantids, which descended from, and slowly replaced, the gomphotheres. The African \"Primelephas gomphotheroides\" gave rise to \"Loxodonta\", \"Mammuthus,\" and \"Elephas\". \"Loxodonta\" branched off earliest around the Miocene and Pliocene boundary while \"Mammuthus\" and \"Elephas\" diverged later during the early Pliocene. \"Loxodonta\" remained in Africa while \"Mammuthus\" and \"Elephas\" spread to Eurasia, and the former reached North America. At the same time, the stegodontids, another proboscidean group descended from gomphotheres, spread throughout Asia, including the Indian subcontinent, China, southeast Asia, and Japan. Mammutids continued to evolve into new species, such as the American mastodon.\nAt the beginning of the Pleistocene, elephantids experienced a high rate of speciation. The Pleistocene also saw the arrival of \"Palaeoloxodon namadicus\", the largest terrestrial mammal of all time. \"Loxodonta atlantica\" became the most common species in northern and southern Africa but was replaced by \"Elephas iolensis\" later in the Pleistocene. Only when \"Elephas\" disappeared from Africa did \"Loxodonta\" become dominant once again, this time in the form of the modern species. \"Elephas\" diversified into new species in Asia, such as \"E.\u00a0hysudricus\" and \"E.\u00a0platycephus\"; the latter the likely ancestor of the modern Asian elephant. \"Mammuthus\" evolved into several species, including the well-known woolly mammoth. Interbreeding appears to have been common among elephantid species, which in some cases led to species with three ancestral genetic components, such as the \"Palaeoloxodon antiquus\". In the Late Pleistocene, most proboscidean species vanished during the Quaternary glaciation which killed off 50% of genera weighing over worldwide.\nProboscideans experienced several evolutionary trends, such as an increase in size, which led to many giant species that stood up to tall. As with other megaherbivores, including the extinct sauropod dinosaurs, the large size of elephants likely developed to allow them to survive on vegetation with low nutritional value. Their limbs grew longer and the feet shorter and broader. The feet were originally plantigrade and developed into a digitigrade stance with cushion pads and the sesamoid bone providing support. Early proboscideans developed longer mandibles and smaller craniums while more derived ones developed shorter mandibles, which shifted the head's centre of gravity. The skull grew larger, especially the cranium, while the neck shortened to provide better support for the skull. The increase in size led to the development and elongation of the mobile trunk to provide reach. The number of premolars, incisors and canines decreased. The cheek teeth (molars and premolars) became larger and more specialized, especially after elephants started to switch from C3-plants to C4-grasses, which caused their teeth to undergo a three-fold increase in teeth height as well as substantial multiplication of lamellae after about five million years ago. Only in the last million years or so did they return to a diet mainly consisting of C3 trees and shrubs. The upper second incisors grew into tusks, which varied in shape from straight, to curved (either upward or downward), to spiralled, depending on the species. Some proboscideans developed tusks from their lower incisors. Elephants retain certain features from their aquatic ancestry, such as their middle ear anatomy.\nDwarf species.\nSeveral species of proboscideans lived on islands and experienced insular dwarfism. This occurred primarily during the Pleistocene when some elephant populations became isolated by fluctuating sea levels, although dwarf elephants did exist earlier in the Pliocene. These elephants likely grew smaller on islands due to a lack of large or viable predator populations and limited resources. By contrast, small mammals such as rodents develop gigantism in these conditions. Dwarf proboscideans are known to have lived in Indonesia, the Channel Islands of California, and several islands of the Mediterranean.\n\"Elephas celebensis\" of Sulawesi is believed to have descended from \"Elephas planifrons\". \"Palaeoloxodon falconeri\" of Malta and Sicily was only and had probably evolved from the straight-tusked elephant. Other descendants of the straight-tusked elephant existed in Cyprus. Dwarf elephants of uncertain descent lived in Crete, Cyclades, and Dodecanese while dwarf mammoths are known to have lived in Sardinia. The Columbian mammoth colonised the Channel Islands and evolved into the pygmy mammoth. This species reached a height of and weighed . A population of small woolly mammoths survived on Wrangel Island, now north of the Siberian coast, as recently as 4,000 years ago. After their discovery in 1993, they were considered dwarf mammoths. This classification has been re-evaluated and since the Second International Mammoth Conference in 1999, these animals are no longer considered to be true \"dwarf mammoths\".\nAnatomy and morphology.\nSize.\nElephants are the largest living terrestrial animals. African bush elephants are the largest species, with males being tall at the shoulder with a body mass of and females standing tall at the shoulder with a body mass of . Male Asian elephants are usually about tall at the shoulder and whereas females are tall at the shoulder and . African forest elephants are the smallest species, with males usually being around tall at the shoulder and . Male African bush elephants are typically 23% taller than females, whereas male Asian elephants are only around 15% taller than females.\nBones.\nThe skeleton of the elephant is made up of 326\u2013351 bones. The vertebrae are connected by tight joints, which limit the backbone's flexibility. African elephants have 21 pairs of ribs, while Asian elephants have 19 or 20 pairs.\nHead.\nAn elephant's skull is resilient enough to withstand the forces generated by the leverage of the tusks and head-to-head collisions. The back of the skull is flattened and spread out, creating arches that protect the brain in every direction. The skull contains air cavities (sinuses) that reduce the weight of the skull while maintaining overall strength. These cavities give the inside of the skull a honeycomb-like appearance. The cranium is particularly large and provides enough room for the attachment of muscles to support the entire head. The lower jaw is solid and heavy. Because of the size of the head, the neck is relatively short to provide better support. Lacking a lacrimal apparatus, the eye relies on the harderian gland to keep it moist. A durable nictitating membrane protects the eye globe. The animal's field of vision is compromised by the location and limited mobility of the eyes. Elephants are considered dichromats and they can see well in dim light but not in bright light.\nEars.\nElephant ears have thick bases with thin tips. The ear flaps, or pinnae, contain numerous blood vessels called capillaries. Warm blood flows into the capillaries, helping to release excess body heat into the environment. This occurs when the pinnae are still, and the animal can enhance the effect by flapping them. Larger ear surfaces contain more capillaries, and more heat can be released. Of all the elephants, African bush elephants live in the hottest climates, and have the largest ear flaps. Elephants are capable of hearing at low frequencies and are most sensitive at 1 kHz (in close proximity to the Soprano C).\nTrunk.\nThe trunk, or proboscis, is a fusion of the nose and upper lip, although in early fetal life, the upper lip and trunk are separated. The trunk is elongated and specialised to become the elephant's most important and versatile appendage. It contains up to 150,000 separate muscle fascicles, with no bone and little fat. These paired muscles consist of two major types: superficial (surface) and internal. The former are divided into dorsals, ventrals, and laterals while the latter are divided into transverse and radiating muscles. The muscles of the trunk connect to a bony opening in the skull. The nasal septum is composed of tiny muscle units that stretch horizontally between the nostrils. Cartilage divides the nostrils at the base. As a muscular hydrostat, the trunk moves by precisely coordinated muscle contractions. The muscles work both with and against each other. A unique proboscis nerve \u2013 formed by the maxillary and facial nerves \u2013 runs along both sides of the trunk.\nElephant trunks have multiple functions, including breathing, olfaction, touching, grasping, and sound production. The animal's sense of smell may be four times as sensitive as that of a bloodhound. The trunk's ability to make powerful twisting and coiling movements allows it to collect food, wrestle with other elephants, and lift up to . It can be used for delicate tasks, such as wiping an eye and checking an orifice, and is capable of cracking a peanut shell without breaking the seed. With its trunk, an elephant can reach items at heights of up to and dig for water under mud or sand. Individuals may show lateral preference when grasping with their trunks: some prefer to twist them to the left, others to the right. Elephants can suck up water both to drink and to spray on their bodies. An adult Asian elephant is capable of holding of water in its trunk. They will also spray dust or grass on themselves. When underwater, the elephant uses its trunk as a snorkel.\nThe African elephant has two finger-like extensions at the tip of the trunk that allow it to grasp and bring food to its mouth. The Asian elephant has only one and relies more on wrapping around a food item and squeezing it into its mouth. Asian elephants have more muscle coordination and can perform more complex tasks. Losing the trunk would be detrimental to an elephant's survival, although in rare cases, individuals have survived with shortened ones. One elephant has been observed to graze by kneeling on its front legs, raising on its hind legs and taking in grass with its lips. Floppy trunk syndrome is a condition of trunk paralysis in African bush elephants caused by the degradation of the peripheral nerves and muscles beginning at the tip.\nTeeth.\nElephants usually have 26 teeth: the incisors, known as the tusks, 12 deciduous premolars, and 12 molars. Unlike most mammals, which grow baby teeth and then replace them with a single permanent set of adult teeth, elephants are polyphyodonts that have cycles of tooth rotation throughout their lives. The chewing teeth are replaced six times in a typical elephant's lifetime. Teeth are not replaced by new ones emerging from the jaws vertically as in most mammals. Instead, new teeth grow in at the back of the mouth and move forward to push out the old ones. The first chewing tooth on each side of the jaw falls out when the elephant is two to three years old. The second set of chewing teeth falls out at four to six years old. The third set falls out at 9\u201315 years of age and set four lasts until 18\u201328 years of age. The fifth set of teeth falls out at the early 40s. The sixth (and usually final) set must last the elephant the rest of its life. Elephant teeth have loop-shaped dental ridges, which are thicker and more diamond-shaped in African elephants.\nTusks.\nThe tusks of an elephant are modified second incisors in the upper jaw. They replace deciduous milk teeth at 6\u201312 months of age and grow continuously at about a year. A newly developed tusk has a smooth enamel cap that eventually wears off. The dentine is known as ivory and its cross-section consists of crisscrossing line patterns, known as \"engine turning\", which create diamond-shaped areas. As a piece of living tissue, a tusk is relatively soft; it is as hard as the mineral calcite. Much of the tusk can be seen outside; the rest is in a socket in the skull. At least one-third of the tusk contains the pulp and some have nerves stretching to the tip. Thus it would be difficult to remove it without harming the animal. When removed, ivory begins to dry up and crack if not kept cool and moist. Tusks serve multiple purposes. They are used for digging for water, salt, and roots; debarking or marking trees; and for moving trees and branches when clearing a path. When fighting, they are used to attack and defend, and to protect the trunk.\nLike humans, who are typically right- or left-handed, elephants are usually right- or left-tusked. The dominant tusk, called the master tusk, is generally more worn down, as it is shorter with a rounder tip. For the African elephants, tusks are present in both males and females, and are around the same length in both sexes, reaching up to , but those of males tend to be thicker. In earlier times, elephant tusks weighing over 200 pounds (more than 90\u00a0kg) were not uncommon, though it is rare today to see any over .\nIn the Asian species, only the males have large tusks. Female Asians have very small tusks, or none at all. Tuskless males exist and are particularly common among Sri Lankan elephants. Asian males can have tusks as long as Africans', but they are usually slimmer and lighter; the largest recorded was long and weighed . Hunting for elephant ivory in Africa and Asia has led to natural selection for shorter tusks and tusklessness.\nSkin.\nAn elephant's skin is generally very tough, at thick on the back and parts of the head. The skin around the mouth, anus, and inside of the ear is considerably thinner. Elephants typically have grey skin, but African elephants look brown or reddish after wallowing in coloured mud. Asian elephants have some patches of depigmentation, particularly on the forehead and ears and the areas around them. Calves have brownish or reddish hair, especially on the head and back. As elephants mature, their hair darkens and becomes sparser, but dense concentrations of hair and bristles remain on the end of the tail as well as the chin, genitals and the areas around the eyes and ear openings. Normally the skin of an Asian elephant is covered with more hair than its African counterpart. Their hair is thought to be for thermoregulation, helping them lose heat in their hot environments.\nAn elephant uses mud as a sunscreen, protecting its skin from ultraviolet light. Although tough, an elephant's skin is very sensitive. Without regular mud baths to protect it from burning, insect bites and moisture loss, an elephant's skin suffers serious damage. After bathing, the elephant will usually use its trunk to blow dust onto its body and this dries into a protective crust.\nElephants have difficulty releasing heat through the skin because of their low surface-area-to-volume ratio, which is many times smaller than that of a human. They have even been observed lifting up their legs, presumably in an effort to expose their soles to the air.\nLegs, locomotion, and posture.\nTo support the animal's weight, an elephant's limbs are positioned more vertically under the body than in most other mammals. The long bones of the limbs have cancellous bone in place of medullary cavities. This strengthens the bones while still allowing haematopoiesis. Both the front and hind limbs can support an elephant's weight, although 60% is borne by the front. Since the limb bones are placed on top of each other and under the body, an elephant can stand still for long periods of time without using much energy. Elephants are incapable of rotating their front legs, as the ulna and radius are fixed in pronation; the \"palm\" of the manus faces backward. The pronator quadratus and the pronator teres are either reduced or absent. The circular feet of an elephant have soft tissues or \"cushion pads\" beneath the manus or pes, which distribute the weight of the animal. They appear to have a sesamoid, an extra \"toe\" similar in placement to a giant panda's extra \"thumb\", that also helps in weight distribution. As many as five toenails can be found on both the front and hind feet.\nElephants can move both forwards and backwards, but cannot trot, jump, or gallop. They use only two gaits when moving on land: the walk and a faster gait similar to running. In walking, the legs act as pendulums, with the hips and shoulders rising and falling while the foot is planted on the ground. With no \"aerial phase\", the fast gait does not meet all the criteria of running, although the elephant uses its legs much like other running animals, with the hips and shoulders falling and then rising while the feet are on the ground. Fast-moving elephants appear to 'run' with their front legs, but 'walk' with their hind legs and can reach a top speed of . At this speed, most other quadrupeds are well into a gallop, even accounting for leg length. Spring-like kinetics could explain the difference between the motion of elephants and other animals. During locomotion, the cushion pads expand and contract, and reduce both the pain and noise that would come from a very heavy animal moving. Elephants are capable swimmers. They have been recorded swimming for up to six hours without touching the bottom, and have travelled as far as at a stretch and at speeds of up to .\nOrgans.\nThe brain of an elephant weighs compared to for a human brain. While the elephant brain is larger overall, it is proportionally smaller. At birth, an elephant's brain already weighs 30\u201340% of its adult weight. The cerebrum and cerebellum are well developed, and the temporal lobes are so large that they bulge out laterally. The throat of an elephant appears to contain a pouch where it can store water for later use. The larynx of the elephant is the largest known among mammals. The vocal folds are long and are attached close to the epiglottis base. When comparing an elephant's vocal folds to those of a human, an elephant's are longer, thicker, and have a larger cross-sectional area. In addition, they are tilted at 45 degrees and positioned more anteriorly than a human's vocal folds.\nThe heart of an elephant weighs . It has a double-pointed apex, an unusual trait among mammals. In addition, the ventricles separate near the top of the heart, a trait they share with sirenians. When standing, the elephant's heart beats approximately 30 times per minute. Unlike many other animals, the heart rate speeds up by 8 to 10 beats per minute when the elephant is lying down. The blood vessels in most of the body are wide and thick and can withstand high blood pressures. The lungs are attached to the diaphragm, and breathing relies mainly on the diaphragm rather than the expansion of the ribcage. Connective tissue exists in place of the pleural cavity. This may allow the animal to deal with the pressure differences when its body is underwater and its trunk is breaking the surface for air, although this explanation has been questioned. Another possible function for this adaptation is that it helps the animal suck up water through the trunk. Elephants inhale mostly through the trunk, although some air goes through the mouth. They have a hindgut fermentation system, and their large and small intestines together reach in length. The majority of an elephant's food intake goes undigested despite the process lasting up to a day.\nA male elephant's testes are located internally near the kidneys. The elephant's penis can reach a length of and a diameter of at the base. It is S-shaped when fully erect and has a Y-shaped orifice. The female has a well-developed clitoris at up to . The vulva is located between the hind legs instead of near the tail as in most mammals. Determining pregnancy status can be difficult due to the animal's large abdominal cavity. The female's mammary glands occupy the space between the front legs, which puts the suckling calf within reach of the female's trunk. Elephants have a unique organ, the temporal gland, located in both sides of the head. This organ is associated with sexual behaviour, and males secrete a fluid from it when in musth. Females have also been observed with secretions from the temporal glands.\nBody temperature.\nElephants are homeotherm, and maintain their average body temperature at ~ 36 \u00b0C, with minimum 35.2 \u00b0C during cool season, and maximum 38.0 \u00b0C during hot dry season. Sweat glands are absent in the elephant's skin, but water diffuses through the skin, allowing cooling by evaporative loss. Other physiological or behavioral features may assist with thermoregulation such as flapping ears, mud bathing, spraying water on the skin, seeking shade, and adopting different walking patterns. In addition, the interconnected crevices in the elephant's skin is thought to impede dehydration and improve thermal regulation over a long period of time.\nBehaviour and life history.\nEcology and activities.\nThe African bush elephant can be found in habitats as diverse as dry savannahs, deserts, marshes, and lake shores, and in elevations from sea level to mountains above the snow line. Forest elephants mainly live in equatorial forests but will enter gallery forests and ecotones between forests and savannahs. Asian elephants prefer areas with a mix of grasses, low woody plants, and trees, primarily inhabiting dry thorn-scrub forests in southern India and Sri Lanka and evergreen forests in Malaya. Elephants are herbivorous and will eat leaves, twigs, fruit, bark, grass and roots. They are born with sterile intestines and require bacteria obtained from their mother's feces to digest vegetation. African elephants are mostly browsers while Asian elephants are mainly grazers. They can consume as much as of food and of water in a day. Elephants tend to stay near water sources. Major feeding bouts take place in the morning, afternoon and night. At midday, elephants rest under trees and may doze off while standing. Sleeping occurs at night while the animal is lying down. Elephants average 3\u20134 hours of sleep per day. Both males and family groups typically move a day, but distances as far as have been recorded in the Etosha region of Namibia. Elephants go on seasonal migrations in search of food, water, minerals, and mates. At Chobe National Park, Botswana, herds travel to visit the river when the local waterholes dry up.\nBecause of their large size, elephants have a huge impact on their environments and are considered keystone species. Their habit of uprooting trees and undergrowth can transform savannah into grasslands; when they dig for water during drought, they create waterholes that can be used by other animals. They can enlarge waterholes when they bathe and wallow in them. At Mount Elgon, elephants excavate caves that are used by ungulates, hyraxes, bats, birds and insects. Elephants are important seed dispersers; African forest elephants ingest and defecate seeds, with either no effect or a positive effect on germination. The seeds are typically dispersed in large amounts over great distances. In Asian forests, large seeds require giant herbivores like elephants and rhinoceros for transport and dispersal. This ecological niche cannot be filled by the next largest herbivore, the tapir. Because most of the food elephants eat goes undigested, their dung can provide food for other animals, such as dung beetles and monkeys. Elephants can have a negative impact on ecosystems. At Murchison Falls National Park in Uganda, the overabundance of elephants has threatened several species of small birds that depend on woodlands. Their weight can compact the soil, which causes the rain to run off, leading to erosion.\nElephants typically coexist peacefully with other herbivores, which will usually stay out of their way. Some aggressive interactions between elephants and rhinoceros have been recorded. At Aberdare National Park, Kenya, a rhino attacked an elephant calf and was killed by the other elephants in the group. At Hluhluwe\u2013Umfolozi Game Reserve, South Africa, introduced young orphan elephants went on a killing spree that claimed the lives of 36 rhinos during the 1990s, but ended with the introduction of older males. The size of adult elephants makes them nearly invulnerable to predators, though there are rare reports of adult Asian elephants falling prey to tigers. Calves may be preyed on by lions, spotted hyenas, and wild dogs in Africa and tigers in Asia. The lions of Savuti, Botswana, have adapted to hunting elephants, mostly calves, juveniles or even sub-adults, during the dry season, and a pride of 30 lions has been normally recorded killing juvenile individuals between the ages of four and eleven years, and a young bull of about 15 years in an exceptional case. Elephants appear to distinguish between the growls of larger predators like tigers and smaller predators like leopards (which have not been recorded killing calves); they react to leopards less fearfully and more aggressively. Elephants tend to have high numbers of parasites, particularly nematodes, compared to other herbivores. This is due to lower predation pressures that would otherwise kill off many of the individuals with significant parasite loads.\nSocial organisation.\nFemale elephants spend their entire lives in tight-knit matrilineal family groups, some of which are made up of more than ten members, including three mothers and their dependent offspring, and are led by the matriarch which is often the eldest female. She remains leader of the group until death or if she no longer has the energy for the role; a study on zoo elephants showed that when the matriarch died, the levels of faecal corticosterone ('stress hormone') dramatically increased in the surviving elephants. When her tenure is over, the matriarch's eldest daughter takes her place; this occurs even if her sister is present. One study found that younger matriarchs are more likely than older ones to under-react to severe danger. Family groups may split after becoming too large for the available resources.\nThe social circle of the female elephant does not necessarily end with the small family unit. In the case of elephants in Amboseli National Park, Kenya, a female's life involves interaction with other families, clans, and subpopulations. Families may associate and bond with each other, forming what are known as bond groups which typically made of two family groups. During the dry season, elephant families may cluster together and form another level of social organisation known as the clan. Groups within these clans do not form strong bonds, but they defend their dry-season ranges against other clans. There are typically nine groups in a clan. The Amboseli elephant population is further divided into the \"central\" and \"peripheral\" subpopulations.\nSome elephant populations in India and Sri Lanka have similar basic social organisations. There appear to be cohesive family units and loose aggregations. They have been observed to have \"nursing units\" and \"juvenile-care units\". In southern India, elephant populations may contain family groups, bond groups and possibly clans. Family groups tend to be small, consisting of one or two adult females and their offspring. A group containing more than two adult females plus offspring is known as a \"joint family\". Malay elephant populations have even smaller family units and do not have any social organisation higher than a family or bond group. Groups of African forest elephants typically consist of one adult female with one to three offspring. These groups appear to interact with each other, especially at forest clearings.\nThe social life of the adult male is very different. As he matures, a male spends more time at the edge of his group and associates with outside males or even other families. At Amboseli, young males spend over 80% of their time away from their families when they are 14\u201315. When males permanently leave, they either live alone or with other males. The former is typical of bulls in dense forests. Asian males are usually solitary, but occasionally form groups of two or more individuals; the largest consisted of seven bulls. Larger bull groups consisting of over 10 members occur only among African bush elephants, the largest of which numbered up to 144 individuals. Bulls only return to the herd to breed or to socialize, they do not provide prenatal care to their offspring but rather play a fatherly role to younger bulls to show dominance.\nMale elephants can be quite sociable when not competing for dominance or mates, and will form long-term relationships. A dominance hierarchy exists among males, whether they range socially or solitarily. Dominance depends on the age, size and sexual condition, and when in groups, males follow the lead of the dominant bull. Young bulls may seek out the company and leadership of older, more experienced males, whose presence appears to control their aggression and prevent them from exhibiting \"deviant\" behaviour. Adult males and females come together for reproduction. Bulls associate with family groups if an oestrous cow is present.\nSexual behaviour.\nMusth.\nAdult males enter a state of increased testosterone known as musth. In a population in southern India, males first enter musth at the age of 15, but it is not very intense until they are older than 25. At Amboseli, bulls under 24 do not go into musth, while half of those aged 25\u201335 and all those over 35 do. Young bulls appear to enter musth during the dry season (January\u2013May), while older bulls go through it during the wet season (June\u2013December). The main characteristic of a bull's musth is a fluid secreted from the temporal gland that runs down the side of his face. He may urinate with his penis still in his sheath, which causes the urine to spray on his hind legs. Behaviours associated with musth include walking with the head held high and swinging, picking at the ground with the tusks, marking, rumbling and waving only one ear at a time. This can last from a day to four months.\nMales become extremely aggressive during musth. Size is the determining factor in agonistic encounters when the individuals have the same condition. In contests between musth and non-musth individuals, musth bulls win the majority of the time, even when the non-musth bull is larger. A male may stop showing signs of musth when he encounters a musth male of higher rank. Those of equal rank tend to avoid each other. Agonistic encounters typically consist of threat displays, chases, and minor sparring with the tusks. Serious fights are rare.\nMating.\nElephants are polygynous breeders, and copulations are most frequent during the peak of the wet season. A cow in oestrus releases chemical signals (pheromones) in her urine and vaginal secretions to signal her readiness to mate. A bull will follow a potential mate and assess her condition with the flehmen response, which requires the male to collect a chemical sample with his trunk and bring it to the vomeronasal organ. The oestrous cycle of a cow lasts 14\u201316 weeks with a 4\u20136-week follicular phase and an 8- to 10-week luteal phase. While most mammals have one surge of luteinizing hormone during the follicular phase, elephants have two. The first (or anovulatory) surge, could signal to males that the female is in oestrus by changing her scent, but ovulation does not occur until the second (or ovulatory) surge. Fertility rates in cows decline around 45\u201350 years of age.\nBulls engage in a behaviour known as mate-guarding, where they follow oestrous females and defend them from other males. Most mate-guarding is done by musth males, and females actively seek to be guarded by them, particularly older ones. Thus these bulls have more reproductive success. Musth appears to signal to females the condition of the male, as weak or injured males do not have normal musths. For young females, the approach of an older bull can be intimidating, so her relatives stay nearby to provide support and reassurance. During copulation, the male lays his trunk over the female's back. The penis is very mobile, being able to move independently of the pelvis. Prior to mounting, it curves forward and upward. Copulation lasts about 45 seconds and does not involve pelvic thrusting or ejaculatory pause. Elephant sperm must swim close to to reach the egg. By comparison, human sperm has to swim around only .\nHomosexual behaviour is frequent in both sexes. As in heterosexual interactions, this involves mounting. Male elephants sometimes stimulate each other by playfighting and \"championships\" may form between old bulls and younger males. Female same-sex behaviours have been documented only in captivity where they are known to masturbate one another with their trunks.\nBirth and development.\nGestation in elephants typically lasts around two years with interbirth intervals usually lasting four to five years. Births tend to take place during the wet season. Calves are born tall and weigh around . Typically, only a single young is born, but twins sometimes occur. The relatively long pregnancy is maintained by five corpus luteums (as opposed to one in most mammals) and gives the foetus more time to develop, particularly the brain and trunk. As such, newborn elephants are precocial and quickly stand and walk to follow their mother and family herd. A new calf is usually the centre of attention for herd members. Adults and most of the other young will gather around the newborn, touching and caressing it with their trunks. For the first few days, the mother is intolerant of other herd members near her young. Alloparenting \u2013 where a calf is cared for by someone other than its mother \u2013 takes place in some family groups. Allomothers are typically two to twelve years old.\nFor the first few days, the newborn is unsteady on its feet and needs the support of its mother. It relies on touch, smell, and hearing, as its eyesight is poor. It has little precise control over its trunk, which wiggles around and may cause it to trip. By its second week of life, the calf can walk more firmly and has more control over its trunk. After its first month, a calf can pick up, hold, and put objects in its mouth, but cannot suck water through the trunk and must drink directly through the mouth. It is still dependent on its mother and keeps close to her.\nFor its first three months, a calf relies entirely on milk from its mother for nutrition, after which it begins to forage for vegetation and can use its trunk to collect water. At the same time, improvements in lip and leg coordination occur. Calves continue to suckle at the same rate as before until their sixth month, after which they become more independent when feeding. By nine months, mouth, trunk and foot coordination is perfected. After a year, a calf's abilities to groom, drink, and feed itself are fully developed. It still needs its mother for nutrition and protection from predators for at least another year. Suckling bouts tend to last 2\u20134 min/hr for a calf younger than a year and it continues to suckle until it reaches three years of age or older. Suckling after two years may serve to maintain growth rate, body condition and reproductive ability.\nPlay behaviour in calves differs between the sexes; females run or chase each other while males play-fight. The former are sexually mature by the age of nine years while the latter become mature around 14\u201315 years. Adulthood starts at about 18 years of age in both sexes. Elephants have long lifespans, reaching 60\u201370 years of age. Lin Wang, a captive male Asian elephant, lived for 86 years.\nCommunication.\nTouching is an important form of communication among elephants. Individuals greet each other by stroking or wrapping their trunks; the latter also occurs during mild competition. Older elephants use trunk-slaps, kicks, and shoves to discipline younger ones. Individuals of any age and sex will touch each other's mouths, temporal glands, and genitals, particularly during meetings or when excited. This allows individuals to pick up chemical cues. Touching is especially important for mother\u2013calf communication. When moving, elephant mothers will touch their calves with their trunks or feet when side-by-side or with their tails if the calf is behind them. If a calf wants to rest, it will press against its mother's front legs and when it wants to suckle, it will touch her breast or leg.\nVisual displays mostly occur in agonistic situations. Elephants will try to appear more threatening by raising their heads and spreading their ears. They may add to the display by shaking their heads and snapping their ears, as well as throwing dust and vegetation. They are usually bluffing when performing these actions. Excited elephants may raise their trunks. Submissive ones will lower their heads and trunks, as well as flatten their ears against their necks, while those that accept a challenge will position their ears in a V shape.\nElephants produce several sounds, usually through the larynx, though some may be modified by the trunk. Perhaps the most well known call is the trumpet which is made by blowing through the trunk. Trumpeting is made during excitement, distress or aggression. Fighting elephants may roar or squeal, and wounded ones may bellow. Rumbles are produced during mild arousal and some appear to be infrasonic. These calls occur at frequencies less than 20\u00a0Hz. Infrasonic calls are important, particularly for long-distance communication, in both Asian and African elephants. For Asian elephants, these calls have a frequency of 14\u201324\u00a0Hz, with sound pressure levels of 85\u201390\u00a0dB and last 10\u201315 seconds. For African elephants, calls range from 15 to 35\u00a0Hz with sound pressure levels as high as 117\u00a0dB, allowing communication for many kilometres, with a possible maximum range of around .\nAt Amboseli, several different infrasonic calls have been identified. A greeting rumble is emitted by members of a family group after having been separated for several hours. Contact calls are soft, unmodulated sounds made by individuals that have been separated from their group and may be responded to with a \"contact answer\" call that starts out loud, but becomes softer. A \"let's go\" soft rumble is emitted by the matriarch to signal to the other herd members that it is time to move to another spot. Bulls in musth emit a distinctive, low-frequency pulsated rumble nicknamed the \"motorcycle\". Musth rumbles may be answered by the \"female chorus\", a low-frequency, modulated chorus produced by several cows. A loud postcopulatory call may be made by an oestrous cow after mating. When a cow has mated, her family may produce calls of excitement known as the \"mating pandemonium\".\nFrom various experiments, the elephant larynx is shown to produce various and complex vibratory phenomena. During in vivo situations, these phenomena could be triggered when the vocal folds and vocal tract interact to raise or lower the fundamental frequency. One of the vibratory phenomena that occurred inside the larynx is alternating A-P (anterior-posterior) and P-A traveling waves, which happened due to the unusual larynx layout. This can be characterized by its unique glottal opening/closing pattern. When the trachea is at a pressure of approximately 6 kPa, phonation begins in the larynx and the laryngeal tissue starts to vibrate at approximately 15 kPa. Vocal production mechanisms at certain frequencies are similar to that of humans and other mammals and the laryngeal tissues are subjected to self-maintained oscillations. Two biomechanical features can trigger these traveling wave patterns, which are a low fundamental frequency and in the vocal folds, increasing longitudinal tension.\nElephants are known to communicate with seismics, vibrations produced by impacts on the earth's surface or acoustical waves that travel through it. They appear to rely on their leg and shoulder bones to transmit the signals to the middle ear. When detecting seismic signals, the animals lean forward and put more weight on their larger front feet; this is known as the \"freezing behaviour\". Elephants possess several adaptations suited for seismic communication. The cushion pads of the feet contain cartilaginous nodes and have similarities to the acoustic fat found in marine mammals like toothed whales and sirenians. A unique sphincter-like muscle around the ear canal constricts the passageway, thereby dampening acoustic signals and allowing the animal to hear more seismic signals. Elephants appear to use seismics for a number of purposes. An individual running or mock charging can create seismic signals that can be heard at great distances. When detecting the seismics of an alarm call signalling danger from predators, elephants enter a defensive posture and family groups will pack together. Seismic waveforms produced by locomotion appear to travel distances of up to while those from vocalisations travel .\nIntelligence and cognition.\nElephants exhibit mirror self-recognition, an indication of self-awareness and cognition that has also been demonstrated in some apes and dolphins. One study of a captive female Asian elephant suggested the animal was capable of learning and distinguishing between several visual and some acoustic discrimination pairs. This individual was even able to score a high accuracy rating when re-tested with the same visual pairs a year later. Elephants are among the species known to use tools. An Asian elephant has been observed modifying branches and using them as flyswatters. Tool modification by these animals is not as advanced as that of chimpanzees. Elephants are popularly thought of as having an excellent memory. This could have a factual basis; they possibly have cognitive maps to allow them to remember large-scale spaces over long periods of time. Individuals appear to be able to keep track of the current location of their family members.\nScientists debate the extent to which elephants feel emotion. They appear to show interest in the bones of their own kind, regardless of whether they are related. As with chimps and dolphins, a dying or dead elephant may elicit attention and aid from others, including those from other groups. This has been interpreted as expressing \"concern\"; however, others would dispute such an interpretation as being anthropomorphic; the \"Oxford Companion to Animal Behaviour\" (1987) advised that \"one is well advised to study the behaviour rather than attempting to get at any underlying emotion\".\nConservation.\nStatus.\nAfrican bush elephants were listed as Endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) in 2021, and African forest elephants were listed as Critically Endangered in the same year. In 1979, Africa had an estimated minimum population of 1.3\u00a0million elephants, with a possible upper limit of 3.0\u00a0million. By 1989, the population was estimated to be 609,000; with 277,000 in Central Africa, 110,000 in eastern Africa, 204,000 in southern Africa, and 19,000 in western Africa. About 214,000 elephants were estimated to live in the rainforests, fewer than had previously been thought. From 1977 to 1989, elephant populations declined by 74% in East Africa. After 1987, losses in elephant numbers accelerated, and savannah populations from Cameroon to Somalia experienced a decline of 80%. African forest elephants had a total loss of 43%. Population trends in southern Africa were mixed, with anecdotal reports of losses in Zambia, Mozambique and Angola while populations grew in Botswana and Zimbabwe and were stable in South Africa. Conversely, studies in 2005 and 2007 found populations in eastern and southern Africa were increasing by an average annual rate of 4.0%. Due to the vast areas involved, assessing the total African elephant population remains difficult and involves an element of guesswork. The IUCN estimates a total of around 440,000 individuals for 2012 while TRAFFIC estimates as many as 55 are poached daily.\nAfrican elephants receive at least some legal protection in every country where they are found, but 70% of their range exists outside protected areas. Successful conservation efforts in certain areas have led to high population densities. As of 2008, local numbers were controlled by contraception or translocation. Large-scale cullings ceased in 1988 when Zimbabwe abandoned the practice. In 1989, the African elephant was listed under Appendix I by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), making trade illegal. Appendix II status (which allows restricted trade) was given to elephants in Botswana, Namibia, and Zimbabwe in 1997 and South Africa in 2000. In some countries, sport hunting of the animals is legal; Botswana, Cameroon, Gabon, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe have CITES export quotas for elephant trophies. In June 2016, the First Lady of Kenya, Margaret Kenyatta, helped launch the East Africa Grass-Root Elephant Education Campaign Walk, organised by elephant conservationist Jim Nyamu. The event was conducted to raise awareness of the value of elephants and rhinos, to help mitigate human-elephant conflicts, and to promote anti-poaching activities.\nIn 2008, the IUCN listed the Asian elephant as endangered due to a 50% population decline over the past 60\u201375 years while CITES lists the species under Appendix I. Asian elephants once ranged from Syria and Iraq (the subspecies \"Elephas maximus asurus\"), to China (up to the Yellow River) and Java. It is now extinct in these areas, and the current range of Asian elephants is highly fragmented. The total population of Asian elephants is estimated to be around 40,000\u201350,000, although this may be a loose estimate. It is likely that around half of the population is in India. Although Asian elephants are declining in numbers overall, particularly in Southeast Asia, the population in the Western Ghats appears to be increasing.\nThreats.\nThe poaching of elephants for their ivory, meat and hides has been one of the major threats to their existence. Historically, numerous cultures made ornaments and other works of art from elephant ivory, and its use rivalled that of gold. The ivory trade contributed to the African elephant population decline in the late 20th century. This prompted international bans on ivory imports, starting with the United States in June 1989, and followed by bans in other North American countries, western European countries, and Japan. Around the same time, Kenya destroyed all its ivory stocks. CITES approved an international ban on ivory that went into effect in January 1990. Following the bans, unemployment rose in India and China, where the ivory industry was important economically. By contrast, Japan and Hong Kong, which were also part of the industry, were able to adapt and were not badly affected. Zimbabwe, Botswana, Namibia, Zambia, and Malawi wanted to continue the ivory trade and were allowed to, since their local elephant populations were healthy, but only if their supplies were from elephants that had been culled or died of natural causes.\nThe ban allowed the elephant to recover in parts of Africa. In January 2012, 650 elephants in Bouba Njida National Park, Cameroon, were killed by Chadian raiders. This has been called \"one of the worst concentrated killings\" since the ivory ban. Asian elephants are potentially less vulnerable to the ivory trade, as females usually lack tusks. Still, members of the species have been killed for their ivory in some areas, such as Periyar National Park in India. China was the biggest market for poached ivory but announced they would phase out the legal domestic manufacture and sale of ivory products in May 2015, and in September 2015, China and the United States said \"they would enact a nearly complete ban on the import and export of ivory\" due to causes of extinction.\nOther threats to elephants include habitat destruction and fragmentation. The Asian elephant lives in areas with some of the highest human populations. Because they need larger amounts of land than other sympatric terrestrial mammals, they are the first to be affected by human encroachment. In extreme cases, elephants may be confined to small islands of forest among human-dominated landscapes. Elephants cannot coexist with humans in agricultural areas due to their size and food requirements. Elephants commonly trample and consume crops, which contributes to conflicts with humans, and both elephants and humans have died by the hundreds as a result. Mitigating these conflicts is important for conservation. One proposed solution is the provision of 'urban corridors' which allow the animals access to key areas.\nAssociation with humans.\nWorking animal.\nElephants have been working animals since at least the Indus Valley Civilization and continue to be used in modern times. There were 13,000\u201316,500 working elephants employed in Asia in 2000. These animals are typically captured from the wild when they are 10\u201320 years old when they can be trained quickly and easily, and will have a longer working life. They were traditionally captured with traps and lassos, but since 1950, tranquillisers have been used.\nIndividuals of the Asian species have been often trained as working animals. Asian elephants perform tasks such as hauling loads into remote areas, moving logs to rivers and roads, transporting tourists around national parks, pulling wagons, and leading religious processions. In northern Thailand, the animals are used to digest coffee beans for Black Ivory coffee. They are valued over mechanised tools because they can work in relatively deep water, require relatively little maintenance, need only vegetation and water as fuel and can be trained to memorise specific tasks. Elephants can be trained to respond to over 30 commands. Musth bulls can be difficult and dangerous to work with and are chained and semi-starved until the condition passes. In India, many working elephants are alleged to have been subject to abuse. They and other captive elephants are thus protected under The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act of 1960.\nIn both Myanmar and Thailand, deforestation and other economic factors have resulted in sizable populations of unemployed elephants resulting in health problems for the elephants themselves as well as economic and safety problems for the people amongst whom they live.\nThe practice of working elephants has also been attempted in Africa. The taming of African elephants in the Belgian Congo began by decree of Leopold II of Belgium during the 19th century and continues to the present with the Api Elephant Domestication Centre.\nWarfare.\nHistorically, elephants were considered formidable instruments of war. They were equipped with armour to protect their sides, and their tusks were given sharp points of iron or brass if they were large enough. War elephants were trained to grasp an enemy soldier and toss him to the person riding on them or to pin the soldier to the ground and impale him.\nOne of the earliest references to war elephants is in the Indian epic \"Mahabharata\" (written in the 4th century BC, but said to describe events between the 11th and 8th centuries BC). They were not used as much as horse-drawn chariots by either the Pandavas or Kauravas. During the Magadha Kingdom (which began in the 6th century BC), elephants began to achieve greater cultural importance than horses, and later Indian kingdoms used war elephants extensively; 3,000 of them were used in the Nandas (5th and 4th centuries BC) army while 9,000 may have been used in the Mauryan army (between the 4th and 2nd centuries BC). The \"Arthashastra\" (written around 300 BC) advised the Mauryan government to reserve some forests for wild elephants for use in the army, and to execute anyone who killed them. From South Asia, the use of elephants in warfare spread west to Persia and east to Southeast Asia. The Persians used them during the Achaemenid Empire (between the 6th and 4th centuries BC) while Southeast Asian states first used war elephants possibly as early as the 5th century BC and continued to the 20th century.\nIn his 326 B.C. Indian campaign, Alexander the Great confronted elephants for the first time and suffered heavy casualties. Among the reasons for the refusal of the rank-and-file Macedonian soldiers to continue the Indian conquest were rumors of even larger elephant armies in India. Alexander trained his foot soldiers to injure the animals and cause them to panic during wars with both the Persians and Indians. Ptolemy, who was one of Alexander's generals, used corps of Asian elephants during his reign as the ruler of Egypt (which began in 323 BC). His son and successor Ptolemy II (who began his rule in 285 BC) obtained his supply of elephants further south in Nubia. From then on, war elephants were employed in the Mediterranean and North Africa throughout the classical period. The Greek king Pyrrhus used elephants in his attempted invasion of Rome in 280 BC. While they frightened the Roman horses, they were not decisive and Pyrrhus ultimately lost the battle. The Carthaginian general Hannibal took elephants across the Alps during his war with the Romans and reached the Po Valley in 217 BC with all of them alive, but they later succumbed to disease.\nOverall, elephants owed their initial successes to the element of surprise and to the fear that their great size invoked. With time, strategists devised counter-measures and war elephants turned into an expensive liability and were hardly ever used by Romans and Parthians.\nZoos and circuses.\nElephants were historically kept for display in the menageries of Ancient Egypt, China, Greece, and Rome. The Romans in particular pitted them against humans and other animals in gladiator events. In the modern era, elephants have traditionally been a major part of zoos and circuses around the world. In circuses, they are trained to perform tricks. The most famous circus elephant was probably Jumbo (1861 \u2013 15 September 1885), who was a major attraction in the Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus. These animals do not reproduce well in captivity, due to the difficulty of handling musth bulls and limited understanding of female oestrous cycles. Asian elephants were always more common than their African counterparts in modern zoos and circuses. After CITES listed the Asian elephant under Appendix I in 1975, the number of African elephants in zoos increased in the 1980s, although the import of Asians continued. Subsequently, the US received many of its captive African elephants from Zimbabwe, which had an overabundance of the animals. In the year 2000, around 1,200 Asian and 700 African elephants were kept in zoos and circuses. The largest captive population was in North America, which had an estimated 370 Asian and 350 African elephants. About 380 Asians and 190 Africans were known to exist in Europe, and Japan had around 70 Asians and 67 Africans.\nKeeping elephants in zoos has met with some controversy. Proponents of zoos argue that they offer researchers easy access to the animals and provide money and expertise for preserving their natural habitats, as well as safekeeping for the species. Critics claim that the animals in zoos are under physical and mental stress. Elephants have been recorded displaying stereotypical behaviours in the form of swaying back and forth, trunk swaying, or route tracing. This has been observed in 54% of individuals in UK zoos. Elephants in European zoos appear to have shorter lifespans than their wild counterparts at only 17 years, although other studies suggest that zoo elephants live as long those in the wild.\nThe use of elephants in circuses has also been controversial; the Humane Society of the United States has accused circuses of mistreating and distressing their animals. In testimony to a US federal court in 2009, Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus CEO Kenneth Feld acknowledged that circus elephants are struck behind their ears, under their chins and on their legs with metal-tipped prods, called bull hooks or ankus. Feld stated that these practices are necessary to protect circus workers and acknowledged that an elephant trainer was reprimanded for using an electric shock device, known as a hot shot or electric prod, on an elephant. Despite this, he denied that any of these practices harm elephants. Some trainers have tried to train elephants without the use of physical punishment. Ralph Helfer is known to have relied on gentleness and reward when training his animals, including elephants and lions. Ringling Bros. and Barnum and Bailey circus retired its touring elephants in May 2016.\nAttacks.\nElephants can exhibit bouts of aggressive behaviour and engage in destructive actions against humans. In Africa, groups of adolescent elephants damaged homes in villages after cullings in the 1970s and 1980s. Because of the timing, these attacks have been interpreted as vindictive. In parts of India, male elephants regularly enter villages at night, destroying homes and killing people. Elephants killed around 300 people between 2000 and 2004 in Jharkhand while in Assam, 239 people were reportedly killed between 2001 and 2006.\nLocal people have reported their belief that some elephants were drunk during their attacks, although officials have disputed this explanation. Purportedly drunk elephants attacked an Indian village a second time in December 2002, killing six people, which led to the killing of about 200 elephants by locals.\nCultural depictions.\nIn many cultures, elephants represent strength, power, wisdom, longevity, stamina, leadership, sociability, nurturance and loyalty. Several cultural references emphasise the elephant's size and exotic uniqueness. For instance, a \"white elephant\" is a byword for something expensive, useless, and bizarre. The expression \"elephant in the room\" refers to an obvious truth that is ignored or otherwise unaddressed. The story of the blind men and an elephant teaches that reality can be observed from different perspectives.\nElephants have been represented in art since Paleolithic times. Africa, in particular, contains many rock paintings and engravings of the animals, especially in the Sahara and southern Africa. In Asia, the animals are depicted as motifs in Hindu and Buddhist shrines and temples. Elephants were often difficult to portray by people with no first-hand experience of them. The ancient Romans, who kept the animals in captivity, depicted anatomically accurate elephants on mosaics in Tunisia and Sicily. At the beginning of the Middle Ages, when Europeans had little to no access to the animals, elephants were portrayed more like fantasy creatures. They were often depicted with horse- or bovine-like bodies with trumpet-like trunks and tusks like a boar; some were even given hooves. Elephants were commonly featured in motifs by the stonemasons of the Gothic churches. As more elephants began to be sent to European kings as gifts during the 15th century, depictions of them became more accurate, including one made by Leonardo da Vinci. Despite this, some Europeans continued to portray them in a more stylised fashion. Max Ernst's 1921 surrealist painting, \"The Elephant Celebes,\" depicts an elephant as a silo with a trunk-like hose protruding from it.\nElephants have been the subject of religious beliefs. The Mbuti people of central Africa believe that the souls of their dead ancestors resided in elephants. Similar ideas existed among other African societies, who believed that their chiefs would be reincarnated as elephants. During the 10th century AD, the people of Igbo-Ukwu, near the Niger Delta, buried their leaders with elephant tusks. The animals' religious importance is only totemic in Africa but is much more significant in Asia. In Sumatra, elephants have been associated with lightning. Likewise in Hinduism, they are linked with thunderstorms as Airavata, the father of all elephants, represents both lightning and rainbows. One of the most important Hindu deities, the elephant-headed Ganesha, is ranked equal with the supreme gods Shiva, Vishnu, and Brahma. Ganesha is associated with writers and merchants and it is believed that he can give people success as well as grant them their desires. In Buddhism, Buddha is said to have been a white elephant reincarnated as a human. In Islamic tradition, the year 570 when Muhammad was born is known as the Year of the Elephant. Elephants were thought to be religious themselves by the Romans, who believed that they worshipped the sun and stars.\nElephants are ubiquitous in Western popular culture as emblems of the exotic, especially since \u2013 as with the giraffe, hippopotamus and rhinoceros \u2013 there are no similar animals familiar to Western audiences. The use of the elephant as a symbol of the U.S. Republican Party began with an 1874 cartoon by Thomas Nast. As characters, elephants are most common in children's stories, in which they are generally cast as models of exemplary behaviour. They are typically surrogates for humans with ideal human values. Many stories tell of isolated young elephants returning to a close-knit community, such as \"The Elephant's Child\" from Rudyard Kipling's \"Just So Stories\", Disney's \"Dumbo,\" and Kathryn and Byron Jackson's \"The Saggy Baggy Elephant\". Other elephant heroes given human qualities include Jean de Brunhoff's Babar, David McKee's Elmer, and Dr. Seuss's Horton."}
{"id": "9281", "revid": "7279272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9281", "title": "Evolutionary linguistics", "text": "Evolutionary linguistics or Darwinian linguistics is a sociobiological approach to the study of language. Evolutionary linguists consider linguistics as a subfield of evolutionary biology and evolutionary psychology. The approach is also closely linked with evolutionary anthropology, cognitive linguistics and biolinguistics. Studying languages as the products of nature, it is interested in the biological origin and development of language. Evolutionary linguistics is contrasted with humanistic approaches, especially structural linguistics.\nA main challenge in this research is the lack of empirical data: there are no archaeological traces of early human language. Computational biological modelling and clinical research with artificial languages have been employed to fill in gaps of knowledge. Although biology is understood to shape the brain which processes language, there is no clear link between biology and specific human language structures or linguistic universals.\nFor lack of a breakthrough in the field, there have been numerous debates about what kind of natural phenomenon language might be. Some researchers focus on the innate aspects of language. It is suggested that grammar has emerged adaptationally from the human genome, bringing about a language instinct; or that it depends on a single mutation which has caused a language organ to appear in the human brain. This is hypothesized to result in a crystalline grammatical structure underlying all human languages. Others suggest language is not crystallized, but fluid and ever-changing, forming patterns like sand dunes. Others, yet, liken languages to living organisms. Languages are considered analogous to a parasites or populations of mind-viruses. While there is no solid scientific evidence for any of the claims, some of them have been labelled as pseudoscience.\nHistory.\n1863\u20141945: social Darwinism.\nAlthough pre-Darwinian theorists had compared languages to living organisms as a metaphor, the comparison was first taken literally in 1863 by the historical linguist August Schleicher who was inspired by Charles Darwin's \"Origin of the Species\". At the time there was no scientific evidence to prove that Darwin's theory of natural selection was correct. Schleicher proposed that linguistics could be used as a testing ground for the study of the evolution of species. A review of Schleicher's book \"Darwinism as Tested by the Science of Language\" appeared in the first issue of the evolutionary biology journal \"Nature\" in 1870. Darwin reiterated Schleicher's proposition in his 1871 book \"The Descent of Man\", claiming that languages are comparable to species, and that language change occurs through natural selection as words 'struggle for life'. Darwin believed that languages had evolved from animal mating calls. Darwinists considered the concept of language creation as unscientific.\nThe social Darwinists Schleicher and Ernst Haeckel were keen gardeners and regarded the study of cultures as a type of botany, with different species competing for the same living space. Their ideas became advocated by politicians who wanted to appeal to working class voters, not least by the national socialists who subsequently included the concept of struggle for living space in their agenda. Highly influential until the end of World War II, social Darwinism was eventually banished from human sciences, leading to a strict separation of natural and sociocultural studies.\nThis gave rise to the dominance of structural linguistics in Europe. There had long been a dispute between the Darwinists and the French intellectuals with the topic of language evolution famously having been banned by the Paris Linguistic Society as early as in 1866. Ferdinand de Saussure proposed structuralism to replace evolutionary linguistics in his \"Course in General Linguistics\", published posthumously in 1916. The structuralists rose to academic political power in human and social sciences in the aftermath of the student revolts of Spring 1968, establishing Sorbonne as an international centrepoint of humanistic thinking.\nFrom 1959 onwards: genetic determinism.\nIn the United States, structuralism was however fended off by the advocates of behavioural psychology; a linguistics framework nicknamed as 'American structuralism'. It was eventually replaced by the approach of Noam Chomsky who published a modification of Louis Hjelmslev's formal structuralist theory, claiming that syntactic structures are innate. An active figure in peace demonstrations in the 1950s and 1960s, Chomsky rose to academic political power following Spring 1968 at the MIT.\nChomsky became an influential opponent of the French intellectuals during the following decades, and his supporters successfully confronted the post-structuralists in the \"Science Wars\" of the late 1990s. The shift of the century saw a new academic funding policy where interdisciplinary research became favoured, effectively directing research funds to biological humanities. The decline of structuralism was evident by 2015 with Sorbonne having lost its former spirit.\nChomsky eventually claimed that syntactic structures are caused by a random mutation in the human genome, proposing a similar explanation for other human faculties such as ethics. But Steven Pinker argued in 1990 that they are the outcome of evolutionary adaptations.\nFrom 1976 onwards: Neo-Darwinism.\nAt the same time when the Chomskyan paradigm of biological determinism defeated humanism, it was losing its own clout within sociobiology. It was reported likewise in 2015 that generative grammar was under fire in applied linguistics and in the process of being replaced with \"usage-based linguistics\"; a derivative of Richard Dawkins's memetics. It is a concept of linguistic units as replicators. Following the publication of memetics in Dawkins's 1976 nonfiction bestseller \"The Selfish Gene\", many biologically inclined linguists, frustrated with the lack of evidence for Chomsky's Universal Grammar, grouped under different brands including a framework called Cognitive Linguistics (with capitalised initials), and 'functional' (adaptational) linguistics (not to be confused with functional linguistics) to confront both Chomsky and the humanists. The replicator approach is today dominant in evolutionary linguistics, applied linguistics, cognitive linguistics and linguistic typology; while the generative approach has maintained its position in general linguistics, especially syntax; and in computational linguistics.\nView of linguistics.\nEvolutionary linguistics is part of a wider framework of Universal Darwinism. In this view, linguistics is seen as an ecological environment for research traditions struggling for the same resources. According to David Hull, these traditions correspond to species in biology. Relationships between research traditions can be symbiotic, competitive or parasitic. An adaptation of Hull's theory in linguistics is proposed by William Croft. He argues that the Darwinian method is more advantageous than linguistic models based on physics, structuralist sociology, or hermeneutics.\nApproaches.\nEvolutionary linguistics is often divided into functionalism and formalism, concepts which are not to be confused with functionalism and formalism in the humanistic reference. Functional evolutionary linguistics considers languages as adaptations to human mind. The formalist view regards them as crystallised or non-adaptational.\nFunctionalism (adaptationism).\nThe adaptational view of language is advocated by various frameworks of cognitive and evolutionary linguistics, with the terms 'functionalism' and 'Cognitive Linguistics' often being equated. It is hypothesised that the evolution of the animal brain provides humans with a mechanism of abstract reasoning which is a 'metaphorical' version of image-based reasoning. Language is not considered as a separate area of cognition, but as coinciding with general cognitive capacities, such as perception, attention, motor skills, and spatial and visual processing. It is argued to function according to the same principles as these.\nIt is thought that the brain links action schemes to form\u2013meaning pairs which are called constructions. Cognitive linguistic approaches to syntax are called cognitive and construction grammar. Also deriving from memetics and other cultural replicator theories, these can study the natural or social selection and adaptation of linguistic units. Adaptational models reject a formal systemic view of language and consider language as a population of linguistic units.\nThe bad reputation of social Darwinism and memetics has been discussed in the literature, and recommendations for new terminology have been given. What correspond to replicators or mind-viruses in memetics are called \"linguemes\" in Croft's \"theory of Utterance Selection\" (TUS), and likewise linguemes or constructions in construction grammar and usage-based linguistics; and metaphors, frames or schemas in cognitive and construction grammar. The reference of memetics has been largely replaced with that of a Complex Adaptive System. In current linguistics, this term covers a wide range of evolutionary notions while maintaining the Neo-Darwinian concepts of replication and replicator population.\nFunctional evolutionary linguistics is not to be confused with functional humanistic linguistics.\nFormalism (structuralism).\nAdvocates of formal evolutionary explanation in linguistics argue that linguistic structures are crystallised. Inspired by 19th century advances in crystallography, Schleicher argued that different types of languages are like plants, animals and crystals. The idea of linguistic structures as frozen drops was revived in tagmemics, an approach to linguistics with the goal to uncover divine symmetries underlying all languages, as if caused by the Creation.\nIn modern biolinguistics, the X-bar tree is argued to be like natural systems such as ferromagnetic droplets and botanic forms. Generative grammar considers syntactic structures similar to snowflakes. It is hypothesised that such patterns are caused by a mutation in humans.\nThe formal\u2013structural evolutionary aspect of linguistics is not to be confused with structural linguistics.\nEvidence.\nThere was some hope of a breakthrough at the discovery of the \"FOXP2\" gene. There is little support, however, for the idea that \"FOXP2\" is 'the grammar gene' or that it had much to do with the relatively recent emergence of syntactical speech. There is no evidence that people have a language instinct. Memetics is widely discredited as pseudoscience and neurological claims made by evolutionary cognitive linguists have been likened to pseudoscience. All in all, there does not appear to be any evidence for the basic tenets of evolutionary linguistics beyond the fact that language is processed by the brain, and brain structures are shaped by genes.\nCriticism.\nEvolutionary linguistics has been criticised by advocates of (humanistic) structural and functional linguistics. Ferdinand de Saussure commented on 19th century evolutionary linguistics:\nMark Aronoff however argues that historical linguistics had its golden age during the time of Schleicher and his supporters, enjoying a place among the hard sciences, and considers the return of Darwnian linguistics as a positive development. Esa Itkonen nonetheless deems the revival of Darwinism as a hopeless enterprise:\nItkonen also points out that the principles of natural selection are not applicable because language innovation and acceptance have the same source which is the speech community. In biological evolution, mutation and selection have different sources. This makes it possible for people to change their languages, but not their genotype."}
{"id": "9282", "revid": "14888336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9282", "title": "ECHELON", "text": "ECHELON, originally a secret government code name, is a surveillance program (signals intelligence/SIGINT collection and analysis network) operated by the United States with the aid of four other signatory states to the UKUSA Security Agreement: Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom, also known as the Five Eyes.\nCreated in the late 1960s to monitor the military and diplomatic communications of the Soviet Union and its Eastern Bloc allies during the Cold War, the ECHELON project became formally established in 1971.\nBy the end of the 20th century, the system referred to as \"ECHELON\" had evolved beyond its military and diplomatic origins into \"a global system for the interception of private and commercial communications\" (mass surveillance and industrial espionage).\nName.\nThe European Parliament's Temporary Committee on the ECHELON Interception System stated, \"It seems likely, in view of the evidence and the consistent pattern of statements from a very wide range of individuals and organisations, including American sources, that its name is in fact ECHELON, although this is a relatively minor detail\". The US intelligence community uses many code names (\"see\", for example, CIA cryptonym).\nFormer NSA employee Margaret Newsham said that she worked on the configuration and installation of software that makes up the ECHELON system while employed at Lockheed Martin, from 1974 to 1984 in Sunnyvale, California, in the United States, and in Menwith Hill, England, in the UK. At that time, according to Newsham, the code name ECHELON was NSA's term for the computer network itself. Lockheed called it \"P415\". The software programs were called \"SILKWORTH\" and \"SIRE\". A satellite named \"VORTEX\" intercepted communications. An image available on the internet of a fragment apparently torn from a job description shows Echelon listed along with several other code names.\nBritain's \"The Guardian\" newspaper summarized the capabilities of the ECHELON system as follows:\nDocuments leaked by the former NSA contractor Edward Snowden revealed that the ECHELON system's collection of satellite data is also referred to as FORNSAT - an abbreviation for \"Foreign Satellite Collection\".\nReporting and disclosures.\nPublic disclosures (1972\u20132000).\nFormer NSA analyst Perry Fellwock, under the pseudonym Winslow Peck, first blew the whistle on ECHELON to \"Ramparts\" in 1972, when he revealed the existence of a global network of listening posts and told of his experiences working there. He also revealed the existence of nuclear weapons in Israel in 1972, the widespread involvement of CIA and NSA personnel in drugs and human smuggling, and CIA operatives leading Nationalist Chinese (Taiwan) commandos in burning villages inside PRC borders.\nIn 1982, James Bamford, investigative journalist and author wrote \"The Puzzle Palace\", an in-depth look inside the workings of the NSA, then a super-secret agency, and the massive eavesdropping operation under the codename \"SHAMROCK\". The NSA has used many codenames, and SHAMROCK was the codename used for ECHELON prior to 1975.\nIn 1988, Margaret Newsham, a Lockheed employee under NSA contract, disclosed the ECHELON surveillance system to members of congress. Newsham told a member of the US Congress that the telephone calls of Strom Thurmond, a Republican US senator, were being collected by the NSA. Congressional investigators determined that \"targeting of US political figures would not occur by accident, but was designed into the system from the start.\"\nAlso in 1988, an article titled \"Somebody's Listening\", written by investigative journalist Duncan Campbell in the \"New Statesman\", described the signals intelligence gathering activities of a program code-named \"ECHELON\". James Bamford describes the system as the software controlling the collection and distribution of civilian telecommunications traffic conveyed using communication satellites, with the collection being undertaken by ground stations located in the footprint of the downlink leg.\nA detailed description of ECHELON was provided by the New Zealand journalist Nicky Hager in his 1996 book \"Secret Power: New Zealand's Role in the International Spy Network\". Two years later, Hager's book was cited by the European Parliament in a report titled \"An Appraisal of the Technology of Political Control\" (PE 168.184).\nIn March 1999, for the first time in history, the Australian government admitted that news reports about the top secret UKUSA Agreement were true. Martin Brady, the director of Australia's Defence Signals Directorate (DSD, now known as Australian Signals Directorate, or ASD) told the Australian broadcasting channel Nine Network that the DSD \"does co-operate with counterpart signals intelligence organisations overseas under the UKUSA relationship.\"\nIn 2000, James Woolsey, the former Director of the US Central Intelligence Agency, confirmed that US intelligence uses interception systems and keyword searches to monitor European businesses.\nLawmakers in the United States feared that the ECHELON system could be used to monitor US citizens. According to \"The New York Times\", the ECHELON system has been \"shrouded in such secrecy that its very existence has been difficult to prove.\" Critics said the ECHELON system emerged from the Cold War as a \"Big Brother without a cause\".\nEuropean Parliament investigation (2000\u20132001).\nThe program's capabilities and political implications were investigated by a committee of the European Parliament during 2000 and 2001 with a report published in 2001. In July 2000, the Temporary Committee on the ECHELON Interception System was established by the European parliament to investigate the surveillance network. It was chaired by the Portuguese politician Carlos Coelho, who was in charge of supervising investigations throughout 2000 and 2001.\nIn May 2001, as the committee finalised its report on the ECHELON system, a delegation travelled to Washington, D.C. to attend meetings with US officials from the following agencies and departments:\nAll meetings were cancelled by the US government and the committee was forced to end its trip prematurely. According to a BBC correspondent in May 2001, \"The US Government still refuses to admit that Echelon even exists.\"\nIn July 2001, the Committee released its final report. On 5 September 2001, the European parliament voted to accept the report.\nThe European Parliament stated in its report that the term ECHELON is used in a number of contexts, but that the evidence presented indicates that it was the name for a signals intelligence collection system. The report concludes that, on the basis of information presented, ECHELON was capable of interception and content inspection of telephone calls, fax, e-mail and other data traffic globally through the interception of communication bearers including satellite transmission, public switched telephone networks (which once carried most Internet traffic), and microwave links.\nConfirmation of ECHELON (2015).\nTwo internal NSA newsletters from January 2011 and July 2012, published as part of the Snowden-revelations by the website \"The Intercept\" on 3 August 2015, for the first time confirmed that NSA used the code word ECHELON and provided some details about the scope of the program: ECHELON was part of an umbrella program with the code name FROSTING, which was established by the NSA in 1966 to collect and process data from communications satellites. FROSTING had two sub-programs:\nOrganization.\nThe UKUSA intelligence community was assessed by the European Parliament (EP) in 2000 to include the signals intelligence agencies of each of the member states:\nThe EP report concluded that it seemed likely that ECHELON is a method of sorting captured signal traffic, rather than a comprehensive analysis tool.\nLikely satellite intercept stations.\nIn 2001, the EP report (p.\u00a054 ff) listed the following ground stations as likely to have, or to have had, a role in intercepting transmissions from telecommunications satellites:\nOther potentially related stations.\nThe following stations are listed in the EP report (p.\u00a057 ff) as ones whose roles \"cannot be clearly established\":\nHistory and context.\nThe ability to intercept communications depends on the medium used, be it radio, satellite, microwave, cellular or fiber-optic. During World War II and through the 1950s, high-frequency (\"short-wave\") radio was widely used for military and diplomatic communication and could be intercepted at great distances. The rise of geostationary communications satellites in the 1960s presented new possibilities for intercepting international communications. In 1964, plans for the establishment of the ECHELON network took off after dozens of countries agreed to establish the International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation (Intelsat), which would own and operate a global constellation of communications satellites.\nIn 1966, the first Intelsat satellite was launched into orbit. From 1970 to 1971, the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) of Britain began to operate a secret signal station at Morwenstow, near Bude in Cornwall, England. The station intercepted satellite communications over the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. Soon afterwards, the US National Security Agency (NSA) built a second signal station at Yakima, near Seattle, for the interception of satellite communications over the Pacific Ocean. In 1981, GCHQ and the NSA started the construction of the first global wide area network (WAN). Soon after Australia, Canada, and New Zealand joined the ECHELON system. The report to the European Parliament of 2001 states: \"If UKUSA states operate listening stations in the relevant regions of the earth, in principle they can intercept all telephone, fax, and data traffic transmitted via such satellites.\"\nMost reports on ECHELON focus on satellite interception. Testimony before the European Parliament indicated that separate but similar UKUSA systems are in place to monitor communication through undersea cables, microwave transmissions, and other lines. The report to the European Parliament points out that interception of private communications by foreign intelligence services is not necessarily limited to the US or British foreign intelligence services. The role of satellites in point-to-point voice and data communications has largely been supplanted by fiber optics. In 2006, 99% of the world's long-distance voice and data traffic was carried over optical-fiber. The proportion of international communications accounted for by satellite links is said to have decreased substantially to an amount between 0.4% and 5% in Central Europe. Even in less-developed parts of the world, communications satellites are used largely for point-to-multipoint applications, such as video. Thus, the majority of communications can no longer be intercepted by earth stations; they can only be collected by tapping cables and intercepting line-of-sight microwave signals, which is possible only to a limited extent.\nConcerns.\nBritish journalist Duncan Campbell and New Zealand journalist Nicky Hager said in the 1990s that the United States was exploiting ECHELON traffic for industrial espionage, rather than military and diplomatic purposes. Examples alleged by the journalists include the gear-less wind turbine technology designed by the German firm Enercon and the speech technology developed by the Belgian firm Lernout &amp; Hauspie.\nIn 2001, the Temporary Committee on the ECHELON Interception System recommended to the European Parliament that citizens of member states routinely use cryptography in their communications to protect their privacy, because economic espionage with ECHELON has been conducted by the US intelligence agencies.\nAmerican author James Bamford provides an alternative view, highlighting that legislation prohibits the use of intercepted communications for commercial purposes, although he does not elaborate on how intercepted communications are used as part of an all-source intelligence process.\nIn its report, the committee of the European Parliament stated categorically that the Echelon network was being used to intercept not only military communications, but also private and business ones. In its epigraph to the report, the parliamentary committee quoted Juvenal, \"\"Sed quis custodiet ipsos custodes\". (\"But who will watch the watchers\"). James Bamford, in \"The Guardian\" in May 2001, warned that if Echelon were to continue unchecked, it could become a \"cyber secret police, without courts, juries, or the right to a defence\".\nAlleged examples of espionage conducted by the members of the \"Five Eyes\" include:\nWorkings.\nThe first United States satellite ground station for the ECHELON collection program was built in 1971 at a military firing and training center near Yakima, Washington. The facility, which was codenamed JACKKNIFE, was an investment of ca. 21.3 million dollars and had around 90 people. Satellite traffic was intercepted by a 30-meter single-dish antenna. The station became fully operational on 4 October 1974. It was connected with NSA headquarters at Fort Meade by a 75-baud secure Teletype orderwire channel.\nIn 1999 the Australian Senate Joint Standing Committee on Treaties was told by Professor Desmond Ball that the Pine Gap facility was used as a ground station for a satellite-based interception network. The satellites were said to be large radio dishes between 20 and 100 meters in diameter in geostationary orbits. The original purpose of the network was to monitor the telemetry from 1970s , air defence and other radars' capabilities, satellites' ground stations' transmissions and ground-based microwave communications.\nExamples of industrial espionage.\nIn 1999, Enercon, a German company and leading manufacturer of wind energy equipment, developed a breakthrough generator for wind turbines. After applying for a US patent, it had learned that Kenetech, an American rival, had submitted an almost identical patent application shortly before. By the statement of a former NSA employee, it was later discovered that the NSA had secretly intercepted and monitored Enercon's data communications and conference calls and passed information regarding the new generator to Kenetech. As German intelligence services are forbidden from engaging in industrial or economic espionage, German companies are frequently complaining that this leaves them defenceless against industrial espionage from the United States. According to Wolfgang Hoffmann, a former manager at Bayer, German intelligence services know which companies are being targeted by US intelligence agencies, but refuse to inform the companies involved."}
{"id": "9284", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9284", "title": "Equation", "text": "In mathematics, an equation is a statement that asserts the equality of two expressions, which are connected by the equals sign \"=\". The word \"equation\" and its cognates in other languages may have subtly different meanings; for example, in French an \"\u00e9quation\" is defined as containing one or more variables, while in English, any equality is an equation.\n\"Solving\" an equation containing variables consists of determining which values of the variables make the equality true. The variables for which the equation has to be solved are also called unknowns, and the values of the unknowns that satisfy the equality are called solutions of the equation. There are two kinds of equations: identities and conditional equations. An identity is true for all values of the variable. A conditional equation is only true for particular values of the variables.\nAn equation is written as two expressions, connected by an equals sign (\"=\"). The expressions on the two sides of the equals sign are called the \"left-hand side\" and \"right-hand side\" of the equation. Very often the right-hand side of an equation is assumed to be zero. Assuming this does not reduce the generality, as this can be realized by subtracting the right-hand side from both sides.\nThe most common type of equation is a polynomial equation (commonly called also an \"algebraic equation\") in which the two sides are polynomials.\nThe sides of a polynomial equation contain one or more terms. For example, the equation \nhas left-hand side formula_2, which has four terms, and right-hand side formula_3, consisting of just one term. The names of the variables suggest that and are unknowns, and that , , and are parameters, but this is normally fixed by the context (in some contexts, may be a parameter, or , , and may be ordinary variables).\nAn equation is analogous to a scale into which weights are placed. When equal weights of something (e.g., grain) are placed into the two pans, the two weights cause the scale to be in balance and are said to be equal. If a quantity of grain is removed from one pan of the balance, an equal amount of grain must be removed from the other pan to keep the scale in balance. More generally, an equation remains in balance if the same operation is performed on its both sides.\nIn Cartesian geometry, equations are used to describe geometric figures. As the equations that are considered, such as implicit equations or parametric equations, have infinitely many solutions, the objective is now different: instead of giving the solutions explicitly or counting them, which is impossible, one uses equations for studying properties of figures. This is the starting idea of algebraic geometry, an important area of mathematics.\nAlgebra studies two main families of equations: polynomial equations and, among them, the special case of linear equations. When there is only one variable, polynomial equations have the form \"P\"(\"x\")\u00a0=\u00a00, where \"P\" is a polynomial, and linear equations have the form \"ax\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"b\"\u00a0=\u00a00, where \"a\" and \"b\" are parameters. To solve equations from either family, one uses algorithmic or geometric techniques that originate from linear algebra or mathematical analysis. Algebra also studies Diophantine equations where the coefficients and solutions are integers. The techniques used are different and come from number theory. These equations are difficult in general; one often searches just to find the existence or absence of a solution, and, if they exist, to count the number of solutions.\nDifferential equations are equations that involve one or more functions and their derivatives. They are \"solved\" by finding an expression for the function that does not involve derivatives. Differential equations are used to model processes that involve the rates of change of the variable, and are used in areas such as physics, chemistry, biology, and economics.\nThe \"=\" symbol, which appears in every equation, was invented in 1557 by Robert Recorde, who considered that nothing could be more equal than parallel straight lines with the same length.\nIntroduction.\nAnalogous illustration.\nAn equation is analogous to a weighing scale, balance, or seesaw.\nEach side of the equation corresponds to one side of the balance. Different quantities can be placed on each side: if the weights on the two sides are equal, the scale balances, and in analogy, the equality that represents the balance is also balanced (if not, then the lack of balance corresponds to an inequality represented by an inequation).\nIn the illustration, \"x\", \"y\" and \"z\" are all different quantities (in this case real numbers) represented as circular weights, and each of \"x\", \"y\", and \"z\" has a different weight. Addition corresponds to adding weight, while subtraction corresponds to removing weight from what is already there. When equality holds, the total weight on each side is the same.\nParameters and unknowns.\nEquations often contain terms other than the unknowns. These other terms, which are assumed to be \"known\", are usually called \"constants\", \"coefficients\" or \"parameters\".\nAn example of an equation involving \"x\" and \"y\" as unknowns and the parameter \"R\" is\nWhen \"R \"is chosen to have the value of 2 (\"R \"= 2), this equation would be recognized in Cartesian coordinates as the equation for the circle of radius of 2 around the origin. Hence, the equation with \"R\" unspecified is the general equation for the circle.\nUsually, the unknowns are denoted by letters at the end of the alphabet, \"x\", \"y\", \"z\", \"w\", ..., while coefficients (parameters) are denoted by letters at the beginning, \"a\", \"b\", \"c\", \"d\", ... . For example, the general quadratic equation is usually written \"ax\"2\u00a0+\u00a0\"bx\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"c\"\u00a0=\u00a00.\nThe process of finding the solutions, or, in case of parameters, expressing the unknowns in terms of the parameters, is called solving the equation. Such expressions of the solutions in terms of the parameters are also called \"solutions\".\nA system of equations is a set of \"simultaneous equations\", usually in several unknowns for which the common solutions are sought. Thus, a \"solution to the system\" is a set of values for each of the unknowns, which together form a solution to each equation in the system. For example, the system\nhas the unique solution \"x\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u22121, \"y\"\u00a0=\u00a01.\nIdentities.\nAn identity is an equation that is true for all possible values of the variable(s) it contains. Many identities are known in algebra and calculus. In the process of solving an equation, an identity is often used to simplify an equation, making it more easily solvable.\nIn algebra, an example of an identity is the difference of two squares:\nwhich is true for all \"x\" and \"y\".\nTrigonometry is an area where many identities exist; these are useful in manipulating or solving trigonometric equations. Two of many that involve the sine and cosine functions are:\nand\nwhich are both true for all values of \"\u03b8\".\nFor example, to solve for the value of \"\u03b8\" that satisfies the equation:\nwhere \"\u03b8\" is limited to between 0 and 45 degrees, one may use the above identity for the product to give:\nyielding the following solution for \"\u03b8:\"\nSince the sine function is a periodic function, there are infinitely many solutions if there are no restrictions on \"\u03b8\". In this example, restricting \"\u03b8\" to be between 0 and 45 degrees would restrict the solution to only one number.\nProperties.\nTwo equations or two systems of equations are \"equivalent\", if they have the same set of solutions. The following operations transform an equation or a system of equations into an equivalent one \u2013 provided that the operations are meaningful for the expressions they are applied to:\nIf some function is applied to both sides of an equation, the resulting equation has the solutions of the initial equation among its solutions, but may have further solutions called extraneous solutions. For example, the equation formula_12 has the solution formula_13 Raising both sides to the exponent of 2 (which means applying the function formula_14 to both sides of the equation) changes the equation to formula_15, which not only has the previous solution but also introduces the extraneous solution, formula_16 Moreover, if the function is not defined at some values (such as 1/\"x\", which is not defined for \"x\" = 0), solutions existing at those values may be lost. Thus, caution must be exercised when applying such a transformation to an equation.\nThe above transformations are the basis of most elementary methods for equation solving, as well as some less elementary one, like Gaussian elimination.\nAlgebra.\nPolynomial equations.\nIn general, an \"algebraic equation\" or polynomial equation is an equation of the form\nwhere \"P\" and \"Q\" are polynomials with coefficients in some field (e.g., rational numbers, real numbers, complex numbers). An algebraic equation is \"univariate\" if it involves only one variable. On the other hand, a polynomial equation may involve several variables, in which case it is called \"multivariate\" (multiple variables, x, y, z, etc.). The term \"polynomial equation\" is usually preferred to \"algebraic equation\".\nFor example,\nis a univariate algebraic (polynomial) equation with integer coefficients and\nis a multivariate polynomial equation over the rational numbers.\nSome (but not all) polynomial equations with rational coefficients have a solution that is an algebraic expression, with a finite number of operations involving just those coefficients (i.e., it can be solved algebraically). This can be done for all such equations of degree one, two, three, or four; but for equations of degree five or more, it can be solved for some equations but, as the Abel\u2013Ruffini theorem demonstrates, not for all. \nA large amount of research has been devoted to compute efficiently accurate approximations of the real or complex solutions of a univariate algebraic equation (see Root finding of polynomials) and of the common solutions of several multivariate polynomial equations (see System of polynomial equations).\nSystems of linear equations.\nA system of linear equations (or \"linear system\") is a collection of linear equations involving the same set of variables. For example,\nis a system of three equations in the three variables . A solution to a linear system is an assignment of numbers to the variables such that all the equations are simultaneously satisfied. A solution to the system above is given by\nsince it makes all three equations valid. The word \"system\" indicates that the equations are to be considered collectively, rather than individually.\nIn mathematics, the theory of linear systems is the basis and a fundamental part of linear algebra, a subject which is used in most parts of modern mathematics. Computational algorithms for finding the solutions are an important part of numerical linear algebra, and play a prominent role in physics, engineering, chemistry, computer science, and economics. A system of non-linear equations can often be approximated by a linear system (see linearization), a helpful technique when making a mathematical model or computer simulation of a relatively complex system.\nGeometry.\nAnalytic geometry.\nIn Euclidean geometry, it is possible to associate a set of coordinates to each point in space, for example by an orthogonal grid. This method allows one to characterize geometric figures by equations. A plane in three-dimensional space can be expressed as the solution set of an equation of the form formula_23, where formula_24 and formula_25 are real numbers and formula_26 are the unknowns that correspond to the coordinates of a point in the system given by the orthogonal grid. The values formula_24 are the coordinates of a vector perpendicular to the plane defined by the equation. A line is expressed as the intersection of two planes, that is as the solution set of a single linear equation with values in formula_28 or as the solution set of two linear equations with values in formula_29\nA conic section is the intersection of a cone with equation formula_30 and a plane. In other words, in space, all conics are defined as the solution set of an equation of a plane and of the equation of a cone just given. This formalism allows one to determine the positions and the properties of the focuses of a conic.\nThe use of equations allows one to call on a large area of mathematics to solve geometric questions. The Cartesian coordinate system transforms a geometric problem into an analysis problem, once the figures are transformed into equations; thus the name analytic geometry. This point of view, outlined by Descartes, enriches and modifies the type of geometry conceived of by the ancient Greek mathematicians.\nCurrently, analytic geometry designates an active branch of mathematics. Although it still uses equations to characterize figures, it also uses other sophisticated techniques such as functional analysis and linear algebra.\nCartesian equations.\nA Cartesian coordinate system is a coordinate system that specifies each point uniquely in a plane by a pair of numerical coordinates, which are the signed distances from the point to two fixed perpendicular directed lines, that are marked using the same unit of length.\nOne can use the same principle to specify the position of any point in three-dimensional space by the use of three Cartesian coordinates, which are the signed distances to three mutually perpendicular planes (or, equivalently, by its perpendicular projection onto three mutually perpendicular lines).\nThe invention of Cartesian coordinates in the 17th century by Ren\u00e9 Descartes (Latinized name: \"Cartesius\") revolutionized mathematics by providing the first systematic link between Euclidean geometry and algebra. Using the Cartesian coordinate system, geometric shapes (such as curves) can be described by Cartesian equations: algebraic equations involving the coordinates of the points lying on the shape. For example, a circle of radius 2 in a plane, centered on a particular point called the origin, may be described as the set of all points whose coordinates \"x\" and \"y\" satisfy the equation .\nParametric equations.\nA parametric equation for a curve expresses the coordinates of the points of the curve as functions of a variable, called a parameter. For example,\nare parametric equations for the unit circle, where \"t\" is the parameter. Together, these equations are called a parametric representation of the curve.\nThe notion of \"parametric equation\" has been generalized to surfaces, manifolds and algebraic varieties of higher dimension, with the number of parameters being equal to the dimension of the manifold or variety, and the number of equations being equal to the dimension of the space in which the manifold or variety is considered (for curves the dimension is \"one\" and \"one\" parameter is used, for surfaces dimension \"two\" and \"two\" parameters, etc.).\nNumber theory.\nDiophantine equations.\nA Diophantine equation is a polynomial equation in two or more unknowns for which only the integer solutions are sought (an integer solution is a solution such that all the unknowns take integer values). A linear Diophantine equation is an equation between two sums of monomials of degree zero or one. An example of linear Diophantine equation is where \"a\", \"b\", and \"c\" are constants. An exponential Diophantine equation is one for which exponents of the terms of the equation can be unknowns.\nDiophantine problems have fewer equations than unknown variables and involve finding integers that work correctly for all equations. In more technical language, they define an algebraic curve, algebraic surface, or more general object, and ask about the lattice points on it.\nThe word \"Diophantine\" refers to the Hellenistic mathematician of the 3rd century, Diophantus of Alexandria, who made a study of such equations and was one of the first mathematicians to introduce symbolism into algebra. The mathematical study of Diophantine problems that Diophantus initiated is now called Diophantine analysis.\nAlgebraic and transcendental numbers.\nAn algebraic number is a number that is a solution of a non-zero polynomial equation in one variable with rational coefficients (or equivalently \u2014 by clearing denominators \u2014 with integer coefficients). Numbers such as that are not algebraic are said to be transcendental. Almost all real and complex numbers are transcendental.\nAlgebraic geometry.\nAlgebraic geometry is a branch of mathematics, classically studying solutions of polynomial equations. Modern algebraic geometry is based on more abstract techniques of abstract algebra, especially commutative algebra, with the language and the problems of geometry.\nThe fundamental objects of study in algebraic geometry are algebraic varieties, which are geometric manifestations of solutions of systems of polynomial equations. Examples of the most studied classes of algebraic varieties are: plane algebraic curves, which include lines, circles, parabolas, ellipses, hyperbolas, cubic curves like elliptic curves and quartic curves like lemniscates, and Cassini ovals. A point of the plane belongs to an algebraic curve if its coordinates satisfy a given polynomial equation. Basic questions involve the study of the points of special interest like the singular points, the inflection points and the points at infinity. More advanced questions involve the topology of the curve and relations between the curves given by different equations.\nDifferential equations.\nA differential equation is a mathematical equation that relates some function with its derivatives. In applications, the functions usually represent physical quantities, the derivatives represent their rates of change, and the equation defines a relationship between the two. Because such relations are extremely common, differential equations play a prominent role in many disciplines including physics, engineering, economics, and biology.\nIn pure mathematics, differential equations are studied from several different perspectives, mostly concerned with their solutions \u2014 the set of functions that satisfy the equation. Only the simplest differential equations are solvable by explicit formulas; however, some properties of solutions of a given differential equation may be determined without finding their exact form.\nIf a self-contained formula for the solution is not available, the solution may be numerically approximated using computers. The theory of dynamical systems puts emphasis on qualitative analysis of systems described by differential equations, while many numerical methods have been developed to determine solutions with a given degree of accuracy.\nOrdinary differential equations.\nAn ordinary differential equation or ODE is an equation containing a function of one independent variable and its derivatives. The term \"ordinary\" is used in contrast with the term partial differential equation, which may be with respect to \"more than\" one independent variable.\nLinear differential equations, which have solutions that can be added and multiplied by coefficients, are well-defined and understood, and exact closed-form solutions are obtained. By contrast, ODEs that lack additive solutions are nonlinear, and solving them is far more intricate, as one can rarely represent them by elementary functions in closed form: Instead, exact and analytic solutions of ODEs are in series or integral form. Graphical and numerical methods, applied by hand or by computer, may approximate solutions of ODEs and perhaps yield useful information, often sufficing in the absence of exact, analytic solutions.\nPartial differential equations.\nA partial differential equation (PDE) is a differential equation that contains unknown multivariable functions and their partial derivatives. (This is in contrast to ordinary differential equations, which deal with functions of a single variable and their derivatives.) PDEs are used to formulate problems involving functions of several variables, and are either solved by hand, or used to create a relevant computer model.\nPDEs can be used to describe a wide variety of phenomena such as sound, heat, electrostatics, electrodynamics, fluid flow, elasticity, or quantum mechanics. These seemingly distinct physical phenomena can be formalised similarly in terms of PDEs. Just as ordinary differential equations often model one-dimensional dynamical systems, partial differential equations often model multidimensional systems. PDEs find their generalisation in stochastic partial differential equations.\nTypes of equations.\nEquations can be classified according to the types of operations and quantities involved. Important types include:"}
{"id": "9285", "revid": "71835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9285", "title": "Ethical naturalism", "text": "Ethical naturalism (also called moral naturalism or naturalistic cognitivistic definism) is the meta-ethical view which claims that:\nOverview.\nIt is important to distinguish the versions of ethical naturalism which have received the most sustained philosophical interest, for example, Cornell realism, from the position that \"the way things are is always the way they ought to be\", which few ethical naturalists hold. Ethical naturalism does, however, reject the fact-value distinction: it suggests that inquiry into the natural world can increase our moral knowledge in just the same way it increases our scientific knowledge. Indeed, proponents of ethical naturalism have argued that humanity needs to invest in the science of morality, a broad and loosely defined field that uses evidence from biology, primatology, anthropology, psychology, neuroscience, and other areas to classify and describe moral behavior.\nEthical naturalism encompasses any reduction of ethical properties, such as 'goodness', to non-ethical properties; there are many different examples of such reductions, and thus many different varieties of ethical naturalism. Hedonism, for example, is the view that goodness is ultimately just pleasure.\nCriticisms.\nEthical naturalism has been criticized most prominently by ethical non-naturalist G. E. Moore, who formulated the open-question argument. Garner and Rosen say that a common definition of \"natural property\" is one \"which can be discovered by sense observation or experience, experiment, or through any of the available means of science.\" They also say that a good definition of \"natural property\" is problematic but that \"it is only in criticism of naturalism, or in an attempt to distinguish between naturalistic and nonnaturalistic definist theories, that such a concept is needed.\" R. M. Hare also criticised ethical naturalism because of its fallacious definition of the terms 'good' or 'right' explaining how value-terms being part of our prescriptive moral language are not reducible to descriptive terms: \"Value-terms have a special function in language, that of commending; and so they plainly cannot be defined in terms of other words which themselves do not perform this function\".\nMoral relativism.\nWhen it comes to the moral questions that we might ask, it can be difficult to argue that there is not necessarily some level of meta-ethical relativism \u2013 and failure to address this matter is criticized as ethnocentrism. \nAs a broad example of relativism, we would no doubt see very different moral systems in an alien race that can only survive by occasionally ingesting one another. As a narrow example, there would be further specific moral opinions for each individual of that species.\nSome forms of moral realism are compatible with some degree of meta-ethical relativism. This argument rests on the assumption that one can have a \"moral\" discussion on various scales; that is, what is \"good\" for: a certain part of your being (leaving open the possibility of conflicting motives), you as a single individual, your family, your society, your species, your type of species. For example, a moral universalist (and certainly an absolutist) might argue that, just as one can discuss what is 'good and evil' at an individual's level, so too can one make certain \"moral\" propositions with truth values relative at the level of the species. In other words, the moral relativist need not deem \"all\" moral propositions as necessarily subjective. The answer to \"is free speech normally good for human societies?\" is relative in a sense, but the moral realist would argue that an individual can be incorrect in this matter. This may be the philosophical equivalent of the more pragmatic arguments made by some scientists.\nMoral nihilism.\nMoral nihilists maintain that there are no such entities as objective values or objective moral facts. Proponents of moral science like Ronald A. Lindsay have counter-argued that their way of understanding \"morality\" as a practical enterprise is the way we ought to have understood it in the first place. He holds the position that the alternative seems to be the elaborate philosophical reduction of the word \"moral\" into a vacuous, useless term. Lindsay adds that it is important to reclaim the specific word \"morality\" because of the connotations it holds with many individuals.\nMorality as a science.\nAuthor Sam Harris has argued that we overestimate the relevance of many arguments against the science of morality, arguments he believes scientists happily and rightly disregard in other domains of science like physics. For example, scientists may find themselves attempting to argue against philosophical skeptics, when Harris says they should be practically asking \u2013 as they would in any other domain \u2013 \"why would we listen to a solipsist in the first place?\" This, Harris contends, is part of what it means to practice a science of morality.\nIn modern times, many thinkers discussing the fact\u2013value distinction and the is\u2013ought problem have settled on the idea that one cannot derive \"ought\" from \"is\". Conversely, Harris maintains that the fact-value distinction is a confusion, proposing that values are really a certain kind of fact. Specifically, Harris suggests that values amount to empirical statements about \"the flourishing of conscious creatures in a society\". He argues that there are objective answers to moral questions, even if some are difficult or impossible to possess in practice. In this way, he says, science can tell us what to value. Harris adds that we do not demand absolute certainty from predictions in physics, so we should not demand that of a science studying morality (see \"The Moral Landscape\").\nPhysicist Sean Carroll believes that conceiving of morality as a science could be a case of scientific imperialism and insists that what is \"good for conscious creatures\" is not an adequate working definition of \"moral\". In opposition, Vice President at the Center for Inquiry, John Shook, claims that this working definition is more than adequate for science at present, and that disagreement should not immobilize the scientific study of ethics."}
{"id": "9286", "revid": "40347300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9286", "title": "Ethical non-naturalism", "text": "Ethical non-naturalism is the meta-ethical view which claims that:\nThis makes ethical non-naturalism a non-definist form of moral realism, which is in turn a form of cognitivism. Ethical non-naturalism stands in opposition to ethical naturalism, which claims that moral terms and properties are reducible to non-moral terms and properties, as well as to all forms of moral anti-realism, including ethical subjectivism (which denies that moral propositions refer to objective facts), error theory (which denies that any moral propositions are true), and non-cognitivism (which denies that moral sentences express propositions at all).\nDefinitions and examples.\nAccording to G. E. Moore, \"Goodness is a simple, undefinable, non-natural property.\" To call goodness \"non-natural\" does not mean that it is supernatural or divine. It does mean, however, that goodness cannot be reduced to natural properties such as needs, wants or pleasures. Moore also stated that a reduction of ethical properties to a divine command would be the same as stating their naturalness. This would be an example of what he referred to as \"the naturalistic fallacy.\"\nMoore claimed that goodness is \"indefinable\", i.e., it cannot be defined in any other terms. This is the central claim of non-naturalism. Thus, the meaning of sentences containing the word \"good\" cannot be explained entirely in terms of sentences not containing the word \"good.\" One cannot substitute words referring to pleasure, needs or anything else in place of \"good.\"\nSome properties, such as hardness, roundness and dampness, are clearly natural properties. We encounter them in the real world and can perceive them. On the other hand, other properties, such as being good and being right, are not so obvious. A great novel is considered to be a good thing; goodness may be said to be a property of that novel. Paying one's debts and telling the truth are generally held to be right things to do; rightness may be said to be a property of certain human actions.\nHowever, these two types of property are quite different. Those natural properties, such as hardness and roundness, can be perceived and encountered in the real world. On the other hand, it is not immediately clear how to physically see, touch or measure the goodness of a novel or the rightness of an action.\nA difficult question.\nMoore did not consider goodness and rightness to be natural properties, i.e., they cannot be defined in terms of any natural properties. How, then, can we know that anything is good and how can we distinguish good from bad? \nMoral epistemology, the part of epistemology (and/or ethics) that studies how we know moral facts and how moral beliefs are justified, has proposed an answer. British epistemologists, following Moore, suggested that humans have a special faculty, a faculty of moral intuition, which tells us what is good and bad, right and wrong. \nEthical intuitionists assert that, if we see a good person or a right action, and our faculty of moral intuition is sufficiently developed and unimpaired, we simply intuit that the person is good or that the action is right. Moral intuition is supposed to be a mental process different from other, more familiar faculties like sense-perception, and that moral judgments are its outputs. When someone judges something to be good, or some action to be right, then the person is using the faculty of moral intuition. The faculty is attuned to those non-natural properties. Perhaps the best ordinary notion that approximates moral intuition would be the idea of a conscience.\nAnother argument for non-naturalism.\nMoore also introduced what is called the open-question argument, a position he later rejected. \nSuppose a definition of \"good\" is \"pleasure-causing.\" In other words, if something is good, it causes pleasure; if it causes pleasure, then it is, by definition, good. Moore asserted, however, that we could always ask, \"But are pleasure-causing things good?\" This would always be an open question. There is no foregone conclusion that, indeed, pleasure-causing things are good. \nIn his initial argument, Moore concluded that any similar definition of goodness could be criticized in the same way."}
{"id": "9288", "revid": "41803976", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9288", "title": "Elvis Presley", "text": "Elvis Aaron Presley (January 8, 1935\u00a0\u2013 August 16, 1977), also known simply as Elvis, was an American singer, musician and actor. He is regarded as one of the most significant cultural icons of the 20th century and is often referred to as the \"King of Rock and Roll\". His energized interpretations of songs and sexually provocative performance style, combined with a singularly potent mix of influences across color lines during a transformative era in race relations, led him to both great success and initial controversy.\nPresley was born in Tupelo, Mississippi, and relocated to Memphis, Tennessee with his family when he was 13 years old. His music career began there in 1954, recording at Sun Records with producer Sam Phillips, who wanted to bring the sound of African-American music to a wider audience. Presley, on rhythm acoustic guitar, and accompanied by lead guitarist Scotty Moore and bassist Bill Black, was a pioneer of rockabilly, an uptempo, backbeat-driven fusion of country music and rhythm and blues. In 1955, drummer D. J. Fontana joined to complete the lineup of Presley's classic quartet and RCA Victor acquired his contract in a deal arranged by Colonel Tom Parker, who would manage him for more than two decades. Presley's first RCA single, \"Heartbreak Hotel\", was released in January 1956 and became a number-one hit in the United States. With a series of successful network television appearances and chart-topping records, he became the leading figure of the newly popular sound of rock and roll.\nIn November 1956, Presley made his film debut in \"Love Me Tender\". Drafted into military service in 1958, Presley relaunched his recording career two years later with some of his most commercially successful work. He held few concerts, however, and guided by Parker, proceeded to devote much of the 1960s to making Hollywood films and soundtrack albums, most of them critically derided. In 1968, following a seven-year break from live performances, he returned to the stage in the acclaimed television comeback special \"Elvis\", which led to an extended Las Vegas concert residency and a string of highly profitable tours. In 1973, Presley gave the first concert by a solo artist to be broadcast around the world, \"Aloha from Hawaii\". Years of prescription drug abuse severely compromised his health, and he died suddenly in 1977 at his Graceland estate at the age of 42.\nWith his rise from poverty to significant fame, Presley's success seemed to epitomize the American Dream. He is the best-selling solo music artist of all time, and was commercially successful in many genres, including pop, country, R&amp;B, adult contemporary, and gospel. He won three Grammy Awards, received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award at age 36, and has been inducted into multiple music halls of fame. Presley holds several records; the most RIAA certified gold and platinum albums, the most albums charted on the \"Billboard\" 200, and the most number-one albums by a solo artist on the UK Albums Chart and the most number-one singles by any act on the UK Singles Chart. In 2018, Presley was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Donald Trump.\nLife and career.\n1935\u20131953: Early years.\nChildhood in Tupelo.\nElvis Aaron Presley was born on January 8, 1935, in Tupelo, Mississippi, to Vernon Elvis (April 10, 1916 \u2013 June 26, 1979) and Gladys Love (\"n\u00e9e\" Smith; April 25, 1912 \u2013 August 14, 1958) Presley in a two-room shotgun house that his father built for the occasion. Elvis's identical twin brother, Jesse Garon Presley, was delivered 35 minutes before him, stillborn. Presley became close to both parents and formed an especially close bond with his mother. The family attended an Assembly of God church, where he found his initial musical inspiration.\nPresley's father, Vernon, was of German or Scottish origin. Through his mother, Presley was Scotch-Irish, with some French Norman ancestry. His mother, Gladys, and the rest of the family, apparently believed that her great-great-grandmother, Morning Dove White, was Cherokee; this was confirmed by Elvis's granddaughter Riley Keough in 2017. Elaine Dundy, in her biography, supports the belief\u2014although one genealogy researcher has contested it on multiple grounds. Gladys was regarded by relatives and friends as the dominant member of the small family.\nVernon moved from one odd job to the next, evincing little ambition. The family often relied on help from neighbors and government food assistance. In 1938, they lost their home after Vernon was found guilty of altering a check written by his landowner and sometime-employer. He was jailed for eight months, while Gladys and Elvis moved in with relatives.\nIn September 1941, Presley entered first grade at East Tupelo Consolidated, where his teachers regarded him as \"average\". He was encouraged to enter a singing contest after impressing his schoolteacher with a rendition of Red Foley's country song \"Old Shep\" during morning prayers. The contest, held at the Mississippi\u2013Alabama Fair and Dairy Show on October 3, 1945, was his first public performance. The ten-year-old Presley was dressed as a cowboy; he stood on a chair to reach the microphone and sang \"Old Shep\". He recalled placing fifth. A few months later, Presley received his first guitar for his birthday; he had hoped for something else\u2014by different accounts, either a bicycle or a rifle. Over the following year, he received basic guitar lessons from two of his uncles and the new pastor at the family's church. Presley recalled, \"I took the guitar, and I watched people, and I learned to play a little bit. But I would never sing in public. I was very shy about it.\"\nIn September 1946, Presley entered in a new school, Milam, for sixth grade; he was regarded as a loner. The following year, he began bringing his guitar to school on a daily basis. He played and sang during lunchtime, and was often teased as a \"trashy\" kid who played hillbilly music. By then, the family was living in a largely black neighborhood. Presley was a devotee of Mississippi Slim's show on the Tupelo radio station WELO. He was described as \"crazy about music\" by Slim's younger brother, who was one of Presley's classmates and often took him into the station. Slim supplemented Presley's guitar instruction by demonstrating chord techniques. When his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 was twelve years old, Slim scheduled him for two on-air performances. Presley was overcome by stage fright the first time, but succeeded in performing the following week.\nTeenage life in Memphis.\nIn November 1948, the family moved to Memphis, Tennessee. After residing for nearly a year in rooming houses, they were granted a two-bedroom apartment in the public housing complex known as the Lauderdale Courts. Enrolled at L. C. Humes High School, Presley received only a C in music in eighth grade. When his music teacher told him that he had no aptitude for singing, he brought in his guitar the next day and sang a recent hit, \"Keep Them Cold Icy Fingers Off Me\", to prove otherwise. A classmate later recalled that the teacher \"agreed that Elvis was right when he said that she didn't appreciate his kind of singing\". He was usually too shy to perform openly, and was occasionally bullied by classmates who viewed him as a \"mama's boy\". In 1950, he began practicing guitar regularly under the tutelage of Lee Denson, a neighbor two and a half years his senior. They and three other boys\u2014including two future rockabilly pioneers, brothers Dorsey and Johnny Burnette\u2014formed a loose musical collective that played frequently around the Courts. That September, he began working as an usher at Loew's State Theater. Other jobs followed: Precision Tool, Loew's again, and MARL Metal Products.\nDuring his junior year, Presley began to stand out more among his classmates, largely because of his appearance: he grew his sideburns and styled his hair with rose oil and Vaseline. In his free time, he would head down to Beale Street, the heart of Memphis's thriving blues scene, and gaze longingly at the wild, flashy clothes in the windows of Lansky Brothers. By his senior year, he was wearing those clothes. Overcoming his reticence about performing outside the Lauderdale Courts, he competed in Humes' Annual \"Minstrel\" show in April 1953. Singing and playing guitar, he opened with \"Till I Waltz Again with You\", a recent hit for Teresa Brewer. Presley recalled that the performance did much for his reputation: \"I wasn't popular in school\u00a0... I failed music\u2014only thing I ever failed. And then they entered me in this talent show\u00a0... when I came onstage I heard people kind of rumbling and whispering and so forth, 'cause nobody knew I even sang. It was amazing how popular I became in school after that.\"\nPresley, who received no formal music training and could not read music, studied and played by ear. He also frequented record stores that provided jukeboxes and listening booths to customers. He knew all of Hank Snow's songs, and he loved records by other country singers such as Roy Acuff, Ernest Tubb, Ted Daffan, Jimmie Rodgers, Jimmie Davis, and Bob Wills. The Southern gospel singer Jake Hess, one of his favorite performers, was a significant influence on his ballad-singing style. He was a regular audience member at the monthly All-Night Singings downtown, where many of the white gospel groups that performed reflected the influence of African-American spiritual music. He adored the music of black gospel singer Sister Rosetta Tharpe. Like some of his peers, he may have attended blues venues\u2014of necessity, in the segregated South, only on nights designated for exclusively white audiences. He certainly listened to the regional radio stations, such as WDIA-AM, that played \"race records\": spirituals, blues, and the modern, backbeat-heavy sound of rhythm and blues. Many of his future recordings were inspired by local African-American musicians such as Arthur Crudup and Rufus Thomas. B.B. King recalled that he had known Presley before he was popular when they both used to frequent Beale Street. By the time he graduated from high school in June 1953, Presley had already singled out music as his future.\n1953\u20131956: First recordings.\nSam Phillips and Sun Records.\nIn August 1953, Presley checked into the offices of Sun Records. He aimed to pay for a few minutes of studio time to record a two-sided acetate disc: \"My Happiness\" and \"That's When Your Heartaches Begin\". He later claimed that he intended the record as a birthday gift for his mother, or that he was merely interested in what he \"sounded like\", although there was a much cheaper, amateur record-making service at a nearby general store. Biographer Peter Guralnick argued that he chose Sun in the hope of being discovered. Asked by receptionist Marion Keisker what kind of singer he was, Presley responded, \"I sing all kinds.\" When she pressed him on who he sounded like, he repeatedly answered, \"I don't sound like nobody.\" After he recorded, Sun boss Sam Phillips asked Keisker to note down the young man's name, which she did along with her own commentary: \"Good ballad singer. Hold.\"\nIn January 1954, Presley cut a second acetate at Sun Records\u2014\"I'll Never Stand in Your Way\" and \"It Wouldn't Be the Same Without You\"\u2014but again nothing came of it. Not long after, he failed an audition for a local vocal quartet, the Songfellows. He explained to his father, \"They told me I couldn't sing.\" Songfellow Jim Hamill later claimed that he was turned down because he did not demonstrate an ear for harmony at the time. In April, Presley began working for the Crown Electric company as a truck driver. His friend Ronnie Smith, after playing a few local gigs with him, suggested he contact Eddie Bond, leader of Smith's professional band, which had an opening for a vocalist. Bond rejected him after a tryout, advising Presley to stick to truck driving \"because you're never going to make it as a singer\".\nPhillips, meanwhile, was always on the lookout for someone who could bring to a broader audience the sound of the black musicians on whom Sun focused. As Keisker reported, \"Over and over I remember Sam saying, 'If I could find a white man who had the Negro sound and the Negro feel, I could make a billion dollars.'\" In June, he acquired a demo recording by Jimmy Sweeney of a ballad, \"Without You\", that he thought might suit the teenage singer. Presley came by the studio but was unable to do it justice. Despite this, Phillips asked Presley to sing as many numbers as he knew. He was sufficiently affected by what he heard to invite two local musicians, guitarist Winfield \"Scotty\" Moore and upright bass player Bill Black, to work something up with Presley for a recording session.\nThe session held the evening of July 5, proved entirely unfruitful until late in the night. As they were about to abort and go home, Presley took his guitar and launched into a 1946 blues number, Arthur Crudup's \"That's All Right\". Moore recalled, \"All of a sudden, Elvis just started singing this song, jumping around and acting the fool, and then Bill picked up his bass, and he started acting the fool, too, and I started playing with them. Sam, I think, had the door to the control booth open\u00a0... he stuck his head out and said, 'What are you doing?' And we said, 'We don't know.' 'Well, back up,' he said, 'try to find a place to start, and do it again.'\" Phillips quickly began taping; this was the sound he had been looking for. Three days later, popular Memphis DJ Dewey Phillips played \"That's All Right\" on his \"Red, Hot, and Blue\" show. Listeners began phoning in, eager to find out who the singer was. The interest was such that Phillips played the record repeatedly during the remaining two hours of his show. Interviewing Presley on-air, Phillips asked him what high school he attended to clarify his color for the many callers who had assumed that he was black. During the next few days, the trio recorded a bluegrass number, Bill Monroe's \"Blue Moon of Kentucky\", again in a distinctive style and employing a jury rigged echo effect that Sam Phillips dubbed \"slapback\". A single was pressed with \"That's All Right\" on the A-side and \"Blue Moon of Kentucky\" on the reverse.\nEarly live performances and RCA Victor contract.\nThe trio played publicly for the first time on July 17 at the Bon Air club\u2014Presley still sporting his child-size guitar. At the end of the month, they appeared at the Overton Park Shell, with Slim Whitman headlining. A combination of his strong response to rhythm and nervousness at playing before a large crowd led Presley to shake his legs as he performed: his wide-cut pants emphasized his movements, causing young women in the audience to start screaming. Moore recalled, \"During the instrumental parts, he would back off from the mike and be playing and shaking, and the crowd would just go wild\". Black, a natural showman, whooped and rode his bass, hitting double licks that Presley would later remember as \"really a wild sound, like a jungle drum or something\".\nSoon after, Moore and Black left their old band, the Starlite Wranglers, to play with Presley regularly, and DJ/promoter Bob Neal became the trio's manager. From August through October, they played frequently at the Eagle's Nest club and returned to Sun Studio for more recording sessions, and Presley quickly grew more confident on stage. According to Moore, \"His movement was a natural thing, but he was also very conscious of what got a reaction. He'd do something one time and then he would expand on it real quick.\" Presley made what would be his only appearance on Nashville's \"Grand Ole Opry\" stage on October 2; after a polite audience response, \"Opry\" manager Jim Denny told Phillips that his singer was \"not bad\" but did not suit the program.\n\"Louisiana Hayride\", radio commercial, and first television performances.\nIn November 1954, Presley performed on \"Louisiana Hayride\"\u2014the \"Opry\"s chief, and more adventurous, rival. The Shreveport-based show was broadcast to 198 radio stations in 28 states. Presley had another attack of nerves during the first set, which drew a muted reaction. A more composed and energetic second set inspired an enthusiastic response. House drummer D. J. Fontana brought a new element, complementing Presley's movements with accented beats that he had mastered playing in strip clubs. Soon after the show, the \"Hayride\" engaged Presley for a year's worth of Saturday-night appearances. Trading in his old guitar for $8 (and seeing it promptly dispatched to the garbage), he purchased a Martin instrument for $175, and his trio began playing in new locales, including Houston, Texas and Texarkana, Arkansas.\nMany fledgling performers, like Minnie Pearl, Johnny Horton, and Johnny Cash, sang the praises of \"Louisiana Hayride\" sponsor, Southern Maid Donuts, including Elvis Presley, who developed a lifelong love of doughnuts. Presley made his singular product endorsement commercial for the doughnut company, which was never released, recording a radio jingle, \"in exchange for a box of hot glazed doughnuts.\"\nElvis made his first television appearance on the KSLA-TV television broadcast of \"Louisiana Hayride\". Soon after, he failed an audition for \"Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scouts\" on the CBS television network. By early 1955, Presley's regular \"Hayride\" appearances, constant touring, and well-received record releases had made him a regional star, from Tennessee to West Texas. In January, Neal signed a formal management contract with Presley and brought him to the attention of Colonel Tom Parker, whom he considered the best promoter in the music business. Parker\u2014who claimed to be from West Virginia (he was actually Dutch)\u2014had acquired an honorary colonel's commission from country singer turned Louisiana governor Jimmie Davis. Having successfully managed top country star Eddy Arnold, Parker was working with the new number-one country singer, Hank Snow. Parker booked Presley on Snow's February tour. When the tour reached Odessa, Texas, a 19-year-old Roy Orbison saw Presley for the first time: \"His energy was incredible, his instinct was just amazing.\u00a0... I just didn't know what to make of it. There was just no reference point in the culture to compare it.\" By August, Sun had released ten sides credited to \"Elvis Presley, Scotty and Bill\"; on the latest recordings, the trio were joined by a drummer. Some of the songs, like \"That's All Right\", were in what one Memphis journalist described as the \"R&amp;B idiom of negro field jazz\"; others, like \"Blue Moon of Kentucky\", were \"more in the country field\", \"but there was a curious blending of the two different musics in both\". This blend of styles made it difficult for Presley's music to find radio airplay. According to Neal, many country-music disc jockeys would not play it because he sounded too much like a black artist and none of the rhythm-and-blues stations would touch him because \"he sounded too much like a hillbilly.\" The blend came to be known as rockabilly. At the time, Presley was variously billed as \"The King of Western Bop\", \"The Hillbilly Cat\", and \"The Memphis Flash\".\nPresley renewed Neal's management contract in August 1955, simultaneously appointing Parker as his special adviser. The group maintained an extensive touring schedule throughout the second half of the year. Neal recalled, \"It was almost frightening, the reaction that came to Elvis from the teenaged boys. So many of them, through some sort of jealousy, would practically hate him. There were occasions in some towns in Texas when we'd have to be sure to have a police guard because somebody'd always try to take a crack at him. They'd get a gang and try to waylay him or something.\" The trio became a quartet when \"Hayride\" drummer Fontana joined as a full member. In mid-October, they played a few shows in support of Bill Haley, whose \"Rock Around the Clock\" track had been a number-one hit the previous year. Haley observed that Presley had a natural feel for rhythm, and advised him to sing fewer ballads.\nAt the Country Disc Jockey Convention in early November, Presley was voted the year's most promising male artist. Several record companies had by now shown interest in signing him. After three major labels made offers of up to $25,000, Parker and Phillips struck a deal with RCA Victor on November 21 to acquire Presley's Sun contract for an unprecedented $40,000. Presley, at 20, was still a minor, so his father signed the contract. Parker arranged with the owners of Hill &amp; Range Publishing, Jean and Julian Aberbach, to create two entities, Elvis Presley Music and Gladys Music, to handle all the new material recorded by Presley. Songwriters were obliged to forgo one-third of their customary royalties in exchange for having him perform their compositions. By December, RCA had begun to heavily promote its new singer, and before month's end had reissued many of his Sun recordings.\n1956\u20131958: Commercial breakout and controversy.\nFirst national TV appearances and debut album.\nOn January 10, 1956, Presley made his first recordings for RCA in Nashville. Extending Presley's by-now customary backup of Moore, Black, Fontana, and \"Hayride\" pianist Floyd Cramer\u2014who had been performing at live club dates with Presley\u2014RCA enlisted guitarist Chet Atkins and three background singers, including Gordon Stoker of the popular Jordanaires quartet, to fill in the sound. The session produced the moody, unusual \"Heartbreak Hotel\", released as a single on January 27. Parker finally brought Presley to national television, booking him on CBS's \"Stage Show\" for six appearances over two months. The program, produced in New York, was hosted on alternate weeks by big band leaders and brothers Tommy and Jimmy Dorsey. After his first appearance, on January 28, Presley stayed in town to record at RCA's New York studio. The sessions yielded eight songs, including a cover of Carl Perkins' rockabilly anthem \"Blue Suede Shoes\". In February, Presley's \"I Forgot to Remember to Forget\", a Sun recording initially released the previous August, reached the top of the \"Billboard\" country chart. Neal's contract was terminated, and, on March 2, Parker became Presley's manager.\nRCA released Presley's self-titled debut album on March 23. Joined by five previously unreleased Sun recordings, its seven recently recorded tracks were of a broad variety. There were two country songs and a bouncy pop tune. The others would centrally define the evolving sound of rock and roll: \"Blue Suede Shoes\"\u2014\"an improvement over Perkins' in almost every way\", according to critic Robert Hilburn\u2014and three R&amp;B numbers that had been part of Presley's stage repertoire for some time, covers of Little Richard, Ray Charles, and The Drifters. As described by Hilburn, these \"were the most revealing of all. Unlike many white artists\u00a0... who watered down the gritty edges of the original R&amp;B versions of songs in the '50s, Presley reshaped them. He not only injected the tunes with his own vocal character but also made guitar, not piano, the lead instrument in all three cases.\" It became the first rock and roll album to top the \"Billboard\" chart, a position it held for 10 weeks. While Presley was not an innovative guitarist like Moore or contemporary African-American rockers Bo Diddley and Chuck Berry, cultural historian Gilbert B. Rodman argued that the album's cover image, \"of Elvis having the time of his life on stage \"with a guitar in his hands\" played a crucial role in positioning the guitar\u00a0... as the instrument that best captured the style and spirit of this new music.\"\n\"Milton Berle Show\" and \"Hound Dog\".\nOn April 3, Presley made the first of two appearances on NBC's \"Milton Berle Show\". His performance, on the deck of the USS \"Hancock\" in San Diego, California, prompted cheers and screams from an audience of sailors and their dates. A few days later, a flight taking Presley and his band to Nashville for a recording session left all three badly shaken when an engine died and the plane almost went down over Arkansas. Twelve weeks after its original release, \"Heartbreak Hotel\" became Presley's first number-one pop hit. In late April, Presley began a two-week residency at the New Frontier Hotel and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip. The shows were poorly received by the conservative, middle-aged hotel guests\u2014\"like a jug of corn liquor at a champagne party\", wrote a critic for \"Newsweek.\" Amid his Vegas tenure, Presley, who had serious acting ambitions, signed a seven-year contract with Paramount Pictures. He began a tour of the Midwest in mid-May, taking in 15 cities in as many days. He had attended several shows by Freddie Bell and the Bellboys in Vegas and was struck by their cover of \"Hound Dog\", a hit in 1953 for blues singer Big Mama Thornton by songwriters Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller. It became the new closing number of his act. After a show in La Crosse, Wisconsin, an urgent message on the letterhead of the local Catholic diocese's newspaper was sent to FBI director J. Edgar Hoover. It warned that \"Presley is a definite danger to the security of the United States.\u00a0... [His] actions and motions were such as to rouse the sexual passions of teenaged youth.\u00a0... After the show, more than 1,000 teenagers tried to gang into Presley's room at the auditorium.\u00a0... Indications of the harm Presley did just in La Crosse were the two high school girls\u00a0... whose abdomen and thigh had Presley's autograph.\"\nThe second \"Milton Berle Show\" appearance came on June 5 at NBC's Hollywood studio, amid another hectic tour. Berle persuaded Presley to leave his guitar backstage, advising, \"Let 'em see you, son.\" During the performance, Presley abruptly halted an uptempo rendition of \"Hound Dog\" with a wave of his arm and launched into a slow, grinding version accentuated with energetic, exaggerated body movements. Presley's gyrations created a storm of controversy. Television critics were outraged: Jack Gould of \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"Mr. Presley has no discernible singing ability.\u00a0... His phrasing, if it can be called that, consists of the stereotyped variations that go with a beginner's aria in a bathtub.\u00a0... His one specialty is an accented movement of the body\u00a0... primarily identified with the repertoire of the blond bombshells of the burlesque runway.\" Ben Gross of the New York \"Daily News\" opined that popular music \"has reached its lowest depths in the 'grunt and groin' antics of one Elvis Presley.\u00a0... Elvis, who rotates his pelvis\u00a0... gave an exhibition that was suggestive and vulgar, tinged with the kind of animalism that should be confined to dives and bordellos\". Ed Sullivan, whose own variety show was the nation's most popular, declared him \"unfit for family viewing\". To Presley's displeasure, he soon found himself being referred to as \"Elvis the Pelvis\", which he called \"one of the most childish expressions I ever heard, comin' from an adult.\"\n\"Steve Allen Show\" and first Sullivan appearance.\nThe Berle shows drew such high ratings that Presley was booked for a July 1 appearance on NBC's \"Steve Allen Show\" in New York. Allen, no fan of rock and roll, introduced a \"new Elvis\" in a white bow tie and black tails. Presley sang \"Hound Dog\" for less than a minute to a basset hound wearing a top hat and bow tie. As described by television historian Jake Austen, \"Allen thought Presley was talentless and absurd\u00a0... [he] set things up so that Presley would show his contrition\". Allen later wrote that he found Presley's \"strange, gangly, country-boy charisma, his hard-to-define cuteness, and his charming eccentricity intriguing\" and simply worked him into the customary \"comedy fabric\" of his program. Just before the final rehearsal for the show, Presley told a reporter, \"I'm holding down on this show. I don't want to do anything to make people dislike me. I think TV is important so I'm going to go along, but I won't be able to give the kind of show I do in a personal appearance.\" Presley would refer back to the Allen show as the most ridiculous performance of his career. Later that night, he appeared on \"Hy Gardner Calling\", a popular local TV show. Pressed on whether he had learned anything from the criticism to which he was being subjected, Presley responded, \"No, I haven't, I don't feel like I'm doing anything wrong.\u00a0... I don't see how any type of music would have any bad influence on people when it's only music.\u00a0... I mean, how would rock 'n' roll music make anyone rebel against their parents?\"\nThe next day, Presley recorded \"Hound Dog\", along with \"Any Way You Want Me\" and \"Don't Be Cruel\". The Jordanaires sang harmony, as they had on \"The Steve Allen Show\"; they would work with Presley through the 1960s. A few days later, Presley made an outdoor concert appearance in Memphis, at which he announced, \"You know, those people in New York are not gonna change me none. I'm gonna show you what the real Elvis is like tonight.\" In August, a judge in Jacksonville, Florida, ordered Presley to tame his act. Throughout the following performance, he largely kept still, except for wiggling his little finger suggestively in mockery of the order. The single pairing \"Don't Be Cruel\" with \"Hound Dog\" ruled the top of the charts for 11 weeks\u2014a mark that would not be surpassed for 36 years. Recording sessions for Presley's second album took place in Hollywood during the first week of September. Leiber and Stoller, the writers of \"Hound Dog\", contributed \"Love Me\".\nAllen's show with Presley had, for the first time, beaten CBS's \"Ed Sullivan Show\" in the ratings. Sullivan, despite his June pronouncement, booked Presley for three appearances for an unprecedented $50,000. The first, on September 9, 1956, was seen by approximately 60 million viewers\u2014a record 82.6 percent of the television audience. Actor Charles Laughton hosted the show, filling in while Sullivan was recovering from a car accident. Presley appeared in two segments that night from CBS Television City in Los Angeles. According to Elvis legend, Presley was shot only from the waist up. Watching clips of the Allen and Berle shows with his producer, Sullivan had opined that Presley \"got some kind of device hanging down below the crotch of his pants\u2014so when he moves his legs back and forth you can see the outline of his cock. ... I think it's a Coke bottle. ... We just can't have this on a Sunday night. This is a family show!\" Sullivan publicly told \"TV Guide\", \"As for his gyrations, the whole thing can be controlled with camera shots.\" In fact, Presley was shown head-to-toe in the first and second shows. Though the camerawork was relatively discreet during his debut, with leg-concealing closeups when he danced, the studio audience reacted in customary style: screaming. Presley's performance of his forthcoming single, the ballad \"Love Me Tender\", prompted a record-shattering million advance orders. More than any other single event, it was this first appearance on \"The Ed Sullivan Show\" that made Presley a national celebrity of barely precedented proportions.\nAccompanying Presley's rise to fame, a cultural shift was taking place that he both helped inspire and came to symbolize. Igniting the \"biggest pop craze since Glenn Miller and Frank Sinatra\u00a0... Presley brought rock'n'roll into the mainstream of popular culture\", writes historian Marty Jezer. \"As Presley set the artistic pace, other artists followed.\u00a0... Presley, more than anyone else, gave the young a belief in themselves as a distinct and somehow unified generation\u2014the first in America ever to feel the power of an integrated youth culture.\"\nCrazed crowds and film debut.\nThe audience response at Presley's live shows became increasingly fevered. Moore recalled, \"He'd start out, 'You ain't nothin' but a Hound Dog,' and they'd just go to pieces. They'd always react the same way. There'd be a riot every time.\" At the two concerts he performed in September at the Mississippi\u2013Alabama Fair and Dairy Show, 50 National Guardsmen were added to the police security to ensure that the crowd would not cause a ruckus. \"Elvis\", Presley's second album, was released in October and quickly rose to number one on the billboard. The album includes \"Old Shep\", which he sang at the talent show in 1945, and which now marked the first time he played piano on an RCA session. According to Guralnick, one can hear \"in the halting chords and the somewhat stumbling rhythm both the unmistakable emotion and the equally unmistakable valuing of emotion over technique.\" Assessing the musical and cultural impact of Presley's recordings from \"That's All Right\" through \"Elvis\", rock critic Dave Marsh wrote that \"these records, more than any others, contain the seeds of what rock &amp; roll was, has been and most likely what it may foreseeably become.\"\nPresley returned to the Sullivan show at its main studio in New York, hosted this time by its namesake, on October 28. After the performance, crowds in Nashville and St. Louis burned him in effigy. His first motion picture, \"Love Me Tender\", was released on November 21. Though he was not top-billed, the film's original title\u2014\"The Reno Brothers\"\u2014was changed to capitalize on his latest number-one record: \"Love Me Tender\" had hit the top of the charts earlier that month. To further take advantage of Presley's popularity, four musical numbers were added to what was originally a straight acting role. The film was panned by critics but did very well at the box office. Presley would receive top billing on every subsequent film he made.\nOn December 4, Presley dropped into Sun Records where Carl Perkins and Jerry Lee Lewis were recording and had an impromptu jam session, along with Johnny Cash. Though Phillips no longer had the right to release any Presley material, he made sure that the session was captured on tape. The results, none officially released for 25 years, became known as the \"Million Dollar Quartet\" recordings. The year ended with a front-page story in \"The Wall Street Journal\" reporting that Presley merchandise had brought in $22\u00a0million on top of his record sales, and \"Billboard\"s declaration that he had placed more songs in the top 100 than any other artist since records were first charted. In his first full year at RCA, one of the music industry's largest companies, Presley had accounted for over 50 percent of the label's singles sales.\nLeiber and Stoller collaboration and draft notice.\nPresley made his third and final \"Ed Sullivan Show\" appearance on January 6, 1957\u2014on this occasion indeed shot only down to the waist. Some commentators have claimed that Parker orchestrated an appearance of censorship to generate publicity. In any event, as critic Greil Marcus describes, Presley \"did not tie himself down. Leaving behind the bland clothes he had worn on the first two shows, he stepped out in the outlandish costume of a pasha, if not a harem girl. From the make-up over his eyes, the hair falling in his face, the overwhelmingly sexual cast of his mouth, he was playing Rudolph Valentino in \"The Sheik\", with all stops out.\" To close, displaying his range and defying Sullivan's wishes, Presley sang a gentle black spiritual, \"Peace in the Valley\". At the end of the show, Sullivan declared Presley \"a real decent, fine boy\".\nTwo days later, the Memphis draft board announced that Presley would be classified 1-A and would probably be drafted sometime that year.\nEach of the three Presley singles released in the first half of 1957 went to number one: \"Too Much\", \"All Shook Up\", and \"(Let Me Be Your) Teddy Bear\". Already an international star, he was attracting fans even where his music was not officially released. Under the headline \"Presley Records a Craze in Soviet\", \"The New York Times\" reported that pressings of his music on discarded X-ray plates were commanding high prices in Leningrad. Between film shoots and recording sessions, 22-year old Presley also found time to purchase an 18-room mansion Graceland on March 19, 1957 for the amount of $102,500. The mansion, which was about 9 miles (14\u00a0km) south of downtown Memphis, was for himself and his parents. Leading up to the purchase, Elvis recorded \"Loving You\"\u2014the soundtrack to his second film, which was released in July. It was Presley's third straight number-one album. The title track was written by Leiber and Stoller, who were then retained to write four of the six songs recorded at the sessions for \"Jailhouse Rock\", Presley's next film. The songwriting team effectively produced the \"Jailhouse\" sessions and developed a close working relationship with Presley, who came to regard them as his \"good-luck charm\". \"He was fast,\" said Leiber. \"Any demo you gave him he knew by heart in ten minutes.\" The title track was yet another number-one hit, as was the \"Jailhouse Rock\" EP.\nPresley undertook three brief tours during the year, continuing to generate a crazed audience response. A Detroit newspaper suggested that \"the trouble with going to see Elvis Presley is that you're liable to get killed.\" Villanova students pelted him with eggs in Philadelphia, and in Vancouver the crowd rioted after the end of the show, destroying the stage. Frank Sinatra, who had inspired both the swooning and screaming of teenage girls in the 1940s, condemned the new musical phenomenon. In a magazine article, he decried rock and roll as \"brutal, ugly, degenerate, vicious.\u00a0... It fosters almost totally negative and destructive reactions in young people. It smells phoney and false. It is sung, played and written, for the most part, by cretinous goons.\u00a0... This rancid-smelling aphrodisiac I deplore.\" Asked for a response, Presley said, \"I admire the man. He has a right to say what he wants to say. He is a great success and a fine actor, but I think he shouldn't have said it.\u00a0... This is a trend, just the same as he faced when he started years ago.\"\nLeiber and Stoller were again in the studio for the recording of \"Elvis' Christmas Album\". Toward the end of the session, they wrote a song on the spot at Presley's request: \"Santa Claus Is Back in Town\", an innuendo-laden blues. The holiday release stretched Presley's string of number-one albums to four and would become the best-selling Christmas album ever in the United States, with eventual sales of over 20 million worldwide. After the session, Moore and Black\u2014drawing only modest weekly salaries, sharing in none of Presley's massive financial success\u2014resigned. Though they were brought back on a per diem basis a few weeks later, it was clear that they had not been part of Presley's inner circle for some time. On December 20, Presley received his draft notice. He was granted a deferment to finish the forthcoming \"King Creole\", in which $350,000 had already been invested by Paramount and producer Hal Wallis. A couple of weeks into the new year, \"Don't\", another Leiber and Stoller tune, became Presley's tenth number-one seller. It had been only 21 months since \"Heartbreak Hotel\" had brought him to the top for the first time. Recording sessions for the \"King Creole\" soundtrack were held in Hollywood in mid-January 1958. Leiber and Stoller provided three songs and were again on hand, but it would be the last time they and Presley worked closely together. As Stoller recalled, Presley's manager and entourage sought to wall him off: \"He was removed. ... They kept him separate.\" A brief soundtrack session on February 11 marked another ending\u2014it was the final occasion on which Black was to perform with Presley. He died in 1965.\n1958\u20131960: Military service and mother's death.\nOn March 24, 1958, Presley was drafted into the U.S. Army as a private at Fort Chaffee, near Fort Smith, Arkansas. His arrival was a major media event. Hundreds of people descended on Presley as he stepped from the bus; photographers then accompanied him into the fort. Presley announced that he was looking forward to his military stint, saying that he did not want to be treated any differently from anyone else: \"The Army can do anything it wants with me.\"\nPresley commenced basic training at Fort Hood, Texas. During a two-week leave in early June, he recorded five songs in Nashville. In early August, his mother was diagnosed with hepatitis, and her condition rapidly worsened. Presley was granted emergency leave to visit her and arrived in Memphis on August 12. Two days later, she died of heart failure at the age of 46. Presley was devastated and never the same; their relationship had remained extremely close\u2014even into his adulthood, they would use baby talk with each other and Presley would address her with pet names.\nAfter training, Presley joined the 3rd Armored Division in Friedberg, Germany, on October 1. While on maneuvers, Presley was introduced to amphetamines by a sergeant. He became \"practically evangelical about their benefits\", not only for energy but for \"strength\" and weight loss as well, and many of his friends in the outfit joined him in indulging. The Army also introduced Presley to karate, which he studied seriously, training with J\u00fcrgen Seydel. It became a lifelong interest, which he later included in his live performances. Fellow soldiers have attested to Presley's wish to be seen as an able, ordinary soldier, despite his fame, and to his generosity. He donated his Army pay to charity, purchased TV sets for the base, and bought an extra set of fatigues for everyone in his outfit.\nWhile in Friedberg, Presley met 14-year-old Priscilla Beaulieu. They would eventually marry after a seven-and-a-half-year courtship. In her autobiography, Priscilla said that Presley was concerned that his 24-month spell as a GI would ruin his career. In Special Services, he would have been able to give musical performances and remain in touch with the public, but Parker had convinced him that to gain popular respect, he should serve his country as a regular soldier. Media reports echoed Presley's concerns about his career, but RCA producer Steve Sholes and Freddy Bienstock of Hill and Range had carefully prepared for his two-year hiatus. Armed with a substantial amount of unreleased material, they kept up a regular stream of successful releases. Between his induction and discharge, Presley had ten top 40 hits, including \"Wear My Ring Around Your Neck\", the best-selling \"Hard Headed Woman\", and \"One Night\" in 1958, and \"(Now and Then There's) A Fool Such as I\" and the number-one \"A Big Hunk o' Love\" in 1959. RCA also generated four albums compiling old material during this period, most successfully \"Elvis' Golden Records\" (1958), which hit number three on the LP chart.\n1960\u20131968: Focus on films.\n\"Elvis Is Back\".\nPresley returned to the United States on March 2, 1960, and was honorably discharged three days later with the rank of sergeant. The train that carried him from New Jersey to Tennessee was mobbed all the way, and Presley was called upon to appear at scheduled stops to please his fans. On the night of March 20, he entered RCA's Nashville studio to cut tracks for a new album along with a single, \"Stuck on You\", which was rushed into release and swiftly became a number-one hit. Another Nashville session two weeks later yielded a pair of his best-selling singles, the ballads \"It's Now or Never\" and \"Are You Lonesome Tonight?\", along with the rest of \"Elvis Is Back!\" The album features several songs described by Greil Marcus as full of Chicago blues \"menace, driven by Presley's own super-miked acoustic guitar, brilliant playing by Scotty Moore, and demonic sax work from Boots Randolph. Elvis' singing wasn't sexy, it was pornographic.\" As a whole, the record \"conjured up the vision of a performer who could be all things\", according to music historian John Robertson: \"a flirtatious teenage idol with a heart of gold; a tempestuous, dangerous lover; a gutbucket blues singer; a sophisticated nightclub entertainer; [a] raucous rocker\". Released only days after recording was complete, it reached number two on the album chart.\nPresley returned to television on May 12 as a guest on \"\"\u2014ironic for both stars, given Sinatra's earlier excoriation of rock and roll. Also known as \"Welcome Home Elvis\", the show had been taped in late March, the only time all year Presley performed in front of an audience. Parker secured an unheard-of $125,000 fee for eight minutes of singing. The broadcast drew an enormous viewership.\n\"G.I. Blues\", the soundtrack to Presley's first film since his return, was a number-one album in October. His first LP of sacred material, \"His Hand in Mine\", followed two months later. It reached number 13 on the U.S. pop chart and number 3 in the UK, remarkable figures for a gospel album. In February 1961, Presley performed two shows for a benefit event in Memphis, on behalf of 24 local charities. During a luncheon preceding the event, RCA presented him with a plaque certifying worldwide sales of over 75 million records. A 12-hour Nashville session in mid-March yielded nearly all of Presley's next studio album, \"Something for Everybody\". As described by John Robertson, it exemplifies the Nashville sound, the restrained, cosmopolitan style that would define country music in the 1960s. Presaging much of what was to come from Presley himself over the next half-decade, the album is largely \"a pleasant, unthreatening pastiche of the music that had once been Elvis' birthright\". It would be his sixth number-one LP. Another benefit concert, raising money for a Pearl Harbor memorial, was staged on March 25, in Hawaii. It was to be Presley's last public performance for seven years.\nLost in Hollywood.\nParker had by now pushed Presley into a heavy film making schedule, focused on formulaic, modestly budgeted musical comedies. Presley, at first, insisted on pursuing higher roles, but when two films in a more dramatic vein\u2014\"Flaming Star\" (1960) and \"Wild in the Country\" (1961)\u2014were less commercially successful, he reverted to the formula. Among the 27 films he made during the 1960s, there were a few further exceptions. His films were almost universally panned; critic Andrew Caine dismissed them as a \"pantheon of bad taste\". Nonetheless, they were virtually all profitable. Hal Wallis, who produced nine of them, declared, \"A Presley picture is the only sure thing in Hollywood.\"\nOf Presley's films in the 1960s, 15 were accompanied by soundtrack albums and another 5 by soundtrack EPs. The films' rapid production and release schedules\u2014he frequently starred in three a year\u2014affected his music. According to Jerry Leiber, the soundtrack formula was already evident before Presley left for the Army: \"three ballads, one medium-tempo [number], one up-tempo, and one break blues boogie\". As the decade wore on, the quality of the soundtrack songs grew \"progressively worse\". Julie Parrish, who appeared in \"Paradise, Hawaiian Style\" (1966), says that he disliked many of the songs chosen for his films. The Jordanaires' Gordon Stoker describes how Presley would retreat from the studio microphone: \"The material was so bad that he felt like he couldn't sing it.\" Most of the film albums featured a song or two from respected writers such as the team of Doc Pomus and Mort Shuman. But by and large, according to biographer Jerry Hopkins, the numbers seemed to be \"written on order by men who never really understood Elvis or rock and roll\". Regardless of the songs' quality, it has been argued that Presley generally sang them well, with commitment. Critic Dave Marsh heard the opposite: \"Presley isn't trying, probably the wisest course in the face of material like 'No Room to Rumba in a Sports Car' and 'Rock-A-Hula Baby'.\"\nIn the first half of the decade, three of Presley's soundtrack albums were ranked number one on the pop charts, and a few of his most popular songs came from his films, such as \"Can't Help Falling in Love\" (1961) and \"Return to Sender\" (1962). (\"Viva Las Vegas\", the title track to the 1964 film, was a minor hit as a B-side, and became truly popular only later.) But, as with artistic merit, the commercial returns steadily diminished. During a five-year span\u20141964 through 1968\u2014Presley had only one top-ten hit: \"Crying in the Chapel\" (1965), a gospel number recorded back in 1960. As for non-film albums, between the June 1962 release of \"Pot Luck\" and the November 1968 release of the soundtrack to the television special that signaled his comeback, only one LP of new material by Presley was issued: the gospel album \"How Great Thou Art\" (1967). It won him his first Grammy Award, for Best Sacred Performance. As Marsh described, Presley was \"arguably the greatest white gospel singer of his time [and] really the last rock &amp; roll artist to make gospel as vital a component of his musical personality as his secular songs\".\nShortly before Christmas 1966, more than seven years since they first met, Presley proposed to Priscilla Beaulieu. They were married on May 1, 1967, in a brief ceremony in their suite at the Aladdin Hotel in Las Vegas. The flow of formulaic films and assembly-line soundtracks rolled on. It was not until October 1967, when the \"Clambake\" soundtrack LP registered record low sales for a new Presley album, that RCA executives recognized a problem. \"By then, of course, the damage had been done\", as historians Connie Kirchberg and Marc Hendrickx put it. \"Elvis was viewed as a joke by serious music lovers and a has-been to all but his most loyal fans.\"\n1968\u20131973: Comeback.\n\"Elvis\": the '68 Comeback Special.\nPresley's only child, Lisa Marie, was born on February 1, 1968, during a period when he had grown deeply unhappy with his career. Of the eight Presley singles released between January 1967 and May 1968, only two charted in the top 40, and none higher than number 28. His forthcoming soundtrack album, \"Speedway\", would rank at number 82 on the \"Billboard\" chart. Parker had already shifted his plans to television, where Presley had not appeared since the Sinatra Timex show in 1960. He maneuvered a deal with NBC that committed the network to both finance a theatrical feature and broadcast a Christmas special.\nRecorded in late June in Burbank, California, the special, simply called \"Elvis\", aired on December 3, 1968. Later known as the '68 Comeback Special, the show featured lavishly staged studio productions as well as songs performed with a band in front of a small audience\u2014Presley's first live performances since 1961. The live segments saw Presley dressed in tight black leather, singing and playing guitar in an uninhibited style reminiscent of his early rock and roll days. Director and co-producer Steve Binder had worked hard to produce a show that was far from the hour of Christmas songs Parker had originally planned. The show, NBC's highest-rated that season, captured 42 percent of the total viewing audience. Jon Landau of \"Eye\" magazine remarked, \"There is something magical about watching a man who has lost himself find his way back home. He sang with the kind of power people no longer expect of rock 'n' roll singers. He moved his body with a lack of pretension and effort that must have made Jim Morrison green with envy.\" Dave Marsh calls the performance one of \"emotional grandeur and historical resonance\".\nBy January 1969, the single \"If I Can Dream\", written for the special, reached number 12. The soundtrack album rose into the top ten. According to friend Jerry Schilling, the special reminded Presley of what \"he had not been able to do for years, being able to choose the people; being able to choose what songs and not being told what had to be on the soundtrack.\u00a0... He was out of prison, man.\" Binder said of Presley's reaction, \"I played Elvis the 60-minute show, and he told me in the screening room, 'Steve, it's the greatest thing I've ever done in my life. I give you my word I will never sing a song I don't believe in.\n\"From Elvis in Memphis\" and the International.\nBuoyed by the experience of the Comeback Special, Presley engaged in a prolific series of recording sessions at American Sound Studio, which led to the acclaimed \"From Elvis in Memphis\". Released in June 1969, it was his first secular, non-soundtrack album from a dedicated period in the studio in eight years. As described by Dave Marsh, it is \"a masterpiece in which Presley immediately catches up with pop music trends that had seemed to pass him by during the movie years. He sings country songs, soul songs and rockers with real conviction, a stunning achievement.\" The album featured the hit single \"In the Ghetto\", issued in April, which reached number three on the pop chart\u2014Presley's first non-gospel top ten hit since \"Bossa Nova Baby\" in 1963. Further hit singles were culled from the American Sound sessions: \"Suspicious Minds\", \"Don't Cry Daddy\", and \"Kentucky Rain\".\nPresley was keen to resume regular live performing. Following the success of the Comeback Special, offers came in from around the world. The London Palladium offered Parker $28,000 for a one-week engagement. He responded, \"That's fine for me, now how much can you get for Elvis?\" In May, the brand new International Hotel in Las Vegas, boasting the largest showroom in the city, announced that it had booked Presley. He was scheduled to perform 57 shows over four weeks beginning July 31. Moore, Fontana, and the Jordanaires declined to participate, afraid of losing the lucrative session work they had in Nashville. Presley assembled new, top-notch accompaniment, led by guitarist James Burton and including two gospel groups, The Imperials and Sweet Inspirations. Costume designer Bill Belew, responsible for the intense leather styling of the Comeback Special, created a new stage look for Presley, inspired by Presley's passion for karate. Nonetheless, he was nervous: his only previous Las Vegas engagement, in 1956, had been dismal. Parker, who intended to make Presley's return the show business event of the year, oversaw a major promotional push. For his part, hotel owner Kirk Kerkorian arranged to send his own plane to New York to fly in rock journalists for the debut performance.\nPresley took to the stage without introduction. The audience of 2,200, including many celebrities, gave him a standing ovation before he sang a note and another after his performance. A third followed his encore, \"Can't Help Falling in Love\" (a song that would be his closing number for much of the 1970s). At a press conference after the show, when a journalist referred to him as \"The King\", Presley gestured toward Fats Domino, who was taking in the scene. \"No,\" Presley said, \"that's the real king of rock and roll.\" The next day, Parker's negotiations with the hotel resulted in a five-year contract for Presley to play each February and August, at an annual salary of $1\u00a0million. \"Newsweek\" commented, \"There are several unbelievable things about Elvis, but the most incredible is his staying power in a world where meteoric careers fade like shooting stars.\" \"Rolling Stone\" called Presley \"supernatural, his own resurrection.\" In November, Presley's final non-concert film, \"Change of Habit\", opened. The double album \"From Memphis to Vegas/From Vegas to Memphis\" came out the same month; the first LP consisted of live performances from the International, the second of more cuts from the American Sound sessions. \"Suspicious Minds\" reached the top of the charts\u2014Presley's first U.S. pop number-one in over seven years, and his last.\nCassandra Peterson, later television's Elvira, met Presley during this period in Las Vegas, where she was working as a showgirl. She recalled of their encounter, \"He was so anti-drug when I met him. I mentioned to him that I smoked marijuana, and he was just appalled. He said, 'Don't ever do that again. Presley was not only deeply opposed to recreational drugs, he also rarely drank. Several of his family members had been alcoholics, a fate he intended to avoid.\nBack on tour and meeting Nixon.\nPresley returned to the International early in 1970 for the first of the year's two-month-long engagements, performing two shows a night. Recordings from these shows were issued on the album \"On Stage\". In late February, Presley performed six attendance-record\u2013breaking shows at the Houston Astrodome. In April, the single \"The Wonder of You\" was issued\u2014a number one hit in the UK, it topped the U.S. adult contemporary chart, as well. MGM filmed rehearsal and concert footage at the International during August for the documentary \"\". Presley was performing in a jumpsuit, which would become a trademark of his live act. During this engagement, he was threatened with murder unless $50,000 was paid. Presley had been the target of many threats since the 1950s, often without his knowledge. The FBI took the threat seriously and security was stepped up for the next two shows. Presley went onstage with a Derringer in his right boot and a .45 pistol in his waistband, but the concerts succeeded without any incidents.\nThe album, \"That's the Way It Is\", produced to accompany the documentary and featuring both studio and live recordings, marked a stylistic shift. As music historian John Robertson noted, \"The authority of Presley's singing helped disguise the fact that the album stepped decisively away from the American-roots inspiration of the Memphis sessions towards a more middle-of-the-road sound. With country put on the back burner, and soul and R&amp;B left in Memphis, what was left was very classy, very clean white pop\u2014perfect for the Las Vegas crowd, but a definite retrograde step for Elvis.\" After the end of his International engagement on September 7, Presley embarked on a week-long concert tour, largely of the South, his first since 1958. Another week-long tour, of the West Coast, followed in November.\nOn December 21, 1970, Presley engineered a meeting with President Richard Nixon at the White House, where he expressed his patriotism and explained how he believed he could reach out to the hippies to help combat the drug culture he and the president abhorred. He asked Nixon for a Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs badge, to add to similar items he had begun collecting and to signify official sanction of his patriotic efforts. Nixon, who apparently found the encounter awkward, expressed a belief that Presley could send a positive message to young people and that it was, therefore, important that he \"retain his credibility\". Presley told Nixon that The Beatles, whose songs he regularly performed in concert during the era, exemplified what he saw as a trend of anti-Americanism. Presley and his friends previously had a four-hour get-together with The Beatles at his home in Bel Air, California in August 1965. On hearing reports of the meeting, Paul McCartney later said that he \"felt a bit betrayed. ... The great joke was that we were taking [illegal] drugs, and look what happened to him\", a reference to Presley's early death, linked to prescription drug abuse.\nThe U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce named Presley one of its annual Ten Most Outstanding Young Men of the Nation on January 16, 1971. Not long after, the City of Memphis named the stretch of Highway 51 South on which Graceland is located \"Elvis Presley Boulevard\". The same year, Presley became the first rock and roll singer to be awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award (then known as the Bing Crosby Award) by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, the Grammy Award organization. Three new, non-film Presley studio albums were released in 1971, as many as had come out over the previous eight years. Best received by critics was \"Elvis Country\", a concept record that focused on genre standards. The biggest seller was \"Elvis Sings the Wonderful World of Christmas\", \"the truest statement of all\", according to Greil Marcus. \"In the midst of ten painfully genteel Christmas songs, every one sung with appalling sincerity and humility, one could find Elvis tom-catting his way through six blazing minutes of 'Merry Christmas Baby,' a raunchy old Charles Brown blues. ... If [Presley's] sin was his lifelessness, it was his sinfulness that brought him to life\".\nMarriage breakdown and \"Aloha from Hawaii\".\nMGM again filmed Presley in April 1972, this time for \"Elvis on Tour\", which went on to win the Golden Globe Award for Best Documentary Film that year. His gospel album \"He Touched Me\", released that month, would earn him his second competitive Grammy Award, for Best Inspirational Performance. A 14-date tour commenced with an unprecedented four consecutive sold-out shows at New York's Madison Square Garden. The evening concert on July 10 was recorded and issued in an LP form a week later. \"\" became one of Presley's biggest-selling albums. After the tour, the single \"Burning Love\" was released\u2014Presley's last top ten hit on the U.S. pop chart. \"The most exciting single Elvis has made since 'All Shook Up',\" wrote rock critic Robert Christgau. \"Who else could make 'It's coming closer, the flames are now licking my body' sound like an assignation with James Brown's backup band?\"\nPresley and his wife, meanwhile, had become increasingly distant, barely cohabiting. In 1971, an affair he had with Joyce Bova resulted\u2014unbeknownst to him\u2014in her pregnancy and an abortion. He often raised the possibility of her moving into Graceland, saying that he was likely to leave Priscilla. The Presleys separated on February 23, 1972, after Priscilla disclosed her relationship with Mike Stone, a karate instructor Presley had recommended to her. Priscilla related that when she told him, Presley \"grabbed\u00a0... and forcefully made love to\" her, declaring, \"This is how a real man makes love to his woman.\" She later stated in an interview that she regretted her choice of words in describing the incident, and said it had been an overstatement. Five months later, Presley's new girlfriend, Linda Thompson, a songwriter and one-time Memphis beauty queen, moved in with him. Presley and his wife filed for divorce on August 18. According to Joe Moscheo of the Imperials, the failure of Presley's marriage \"was a blow from which he never recovered.\" At a rare press conference that June, a reporter had asked Presley whether he was satisfied with his image. Presley replied, \"Well, the image is one thing and the human being another\u00a0... it's very hard to live up to an image.\"\nIn January 1973, Presley performed two benefit concerts for the Kui Lee Cancer Fund in connection with a groundbreaking TV special, \"Aloha from Hawaii\", which would be the first concert by a solo artist to be aired globally. The first show served as a practice run and backup should technical problems affect the live broadcast two days later. On January 14, \"Aloha from Hawaii\" aired live via satellite to prime-time audiences in Japan, South Korea, Thailand, the Philippines, Australia, and New Zealand, as well as to U.S. servicemen based across Southeast Asia. In Japan, where it capped a nationwide Elvis Presley Week, it smashed viewing records. The next night, it was simulcast to 28 European countries, and in April an extended version finally aired in the U.S., where it won a 57 percent share of the TV audience. Over time, Parker's claim that it was seen by one billion or more people would be broadly accepted, but that figure appeared to have been sheer invention. Presley's stage costume became the most recognized example of the elaborate concert garb with which his latter-day persona became closely associated. As described by Bobbie Ann Mason, \"At the end of the show, when he spreads out his American Eagle cape, with the full stretched wings of the eagle studded on the back, he becomes a god figure.\" The accompanying double album, released in February, went to number one and eventually sold over 5 million copies in the United States. It proved to be Presley's last U.S. number-one pop album during his lifetime.\nAt a midnight show the same month, four men rushed onto the stage in an apparent attack. Security men came to Presley's defense, and he ejected one invader from the stage himself. Following the show, he became obsessed with the idea that the men had been sent by Mike Stone to kill him. Though they were shown to have been only overexuberant fans, he raged, \"There's too much pain in me\u00a0... Stone [must] die.\" His outbursts continued with such intensity that a physician was unable to calm him, despite administering large doses of medication. After another two full days of raging, Red West, his friend and bodyguard, felt compelled to get a price for a contract killing and was relieved when Presley decided, \"Aw hell, let's just leave it for now. Maybe it's a bit heavy.\"\n1973\u20131977: Health deterioration and death.\nMedical crises and last studio sessions.\nPresley's divorce was finalized on October 9, 1973. By then, his health was in major and serious decline. Twice during the year, he overdosed on barbiturates, spending three days in a coma in his hotel suite after the first incident. Towards the end of 1973, he was hospitalized, semi-comatose from the effects of a pethidine addiction. According to his primary care physician, Dr. George C. Nichopoulos, Presley \"felt that by getting drugs from a doctor, he wasn't the common everyday junkie getting something off the street\". Since his comeback, he had staged more live shows with each passing year, and 1973 saw 168 concerts, his busiest schedule ever. Despite his failing health, in 1974, he undertook another intensive touring schedule.\nPresley's condition declined precipitously in September. Keyboardist Tony Brown remembered Presley's arrival at a University of Maryland concert: \"He fell out of the limousine, to his knees. People jumped to help, and he pushed them away like, 'Don't help me.' He walked on stage and held onto the mic for the first thirty minutes like it was a post. Everybody's looking at each other like, 'Is the tour gonna happen'?\" Guitarist John Wilkinson recalled, \"He was all gut. He was slurring. He was so fucked up.\u00a0... It was obvious he was drugged. It was obvious there was something terribly wrong with his body. It was so bad the words to the songs were barely intelligible.\u00a0... I remember crying. He could barely get through the introductions.\" Wilkinson recounted that a few nights later in Detroit, \"I watched him in his dressing room, just draped over a chair, unable to move. So often I thought, 'Boss, why don't you just cancel this tour and take a year off\u00a0...?' I mentioned something once in a guarded moment. He patted me on the back and said, 'It'll be all right. Don't you worry about it. Presley continued to play to sellout crowds. Cultural critic Marjorie Garber wrote that he was now widely seen as a garish pop crooner: \"In effect, he had become Liberace. Even his fans were now middle-aged matrons and blue-haired grandmothers.\"\nOn July 13, 1976, Vernon Presley\u2014who had become deeply involved in his son's financial affairs\u2014fired \"Memphis Mafia\" bodyguards Red West (Presley's friend since the 1950s), Sonny West, and David Hebler, citing the need to \"cut back on expenses\". Presley was in Palm Springs at the time, and some suggested that he was too cowardly to face the three himself. Another associate of Presley's, John O'Grady, argued that the bodyguards were dropped because their rough treatment of fans had prompted too many lawsuits. However, Presley's stepbrother, David Stanley, claimed that the bodyguards were fired because they were becoming more outspoken about Presley's drug dependency.\nRCA, which had enjoyed a steady stream of product from Presley for over a decade, grew anxious as his interest in spending time in the studio waned. After a December 1973 session that produced 18 songs, enough for almost two albums, he did not enter the studio in 1974. Parker sold RCA yet another concert record, \"Elvis Recorded Live on Stage in Memphis\". Recorded on March 20, it included a version of \"How Great Thou Art\" that would win Presley his third and final competitive Grammy Award. (All three of his competitive Grammy wins\u2014out of 14 total nominations\u2014were for gospel recordings.) Presley returned to the studio in Hollywood in March 1975, but Parker's attempts to arrange another session toward the end of the year were unsuccessful. In 1976, RCA sent a mobile studio to Graceland that made possible two full-scale recording sessions at Presley's home. Even in that comfortable context, the recording process became a struggle for him.\nDespite concerns from his label and manager, between July 1973 and October 1976 Presley recorded virtually the entire contents of six albums. Though he was no longer a major presence on the pop charts, five of those albums entered the top five of the country chart, and three went to number one: \"Promised Land\" (1975), \"From Elvis Presley Boulevard, Memphis, Tennessee\" (1976), and \"Moody Blue\" (1977). Similarly, his singles in this era did not prove to be major pop hits, but Presley remained a significant force in the country and adult contemporary markets. Eight studio singles from this period released during his lifetime were top ten hits on one or both charts, four in 1974 alone. \"My Boy\" was a number-one adult contemporary hit in 1975, and \"Moody Blue\" topped the country chart and reached the second spot on the adult contemporary chart in 1976. Perhaps his most critically acclaimed recording of the era came that year, with what Greil Marcus described as his \"apocalyptic attack\" on the soul classic \"Hurt\". \"If he felt the way he sounded\", Dave Marsh wrote of Presley's performance, \"the wonder isn't that he had only a year left to live but that he managed to survive that long.\"\nFinal months and death.\nPresley and Linda Thompson split in November 1976, and he took up with a new girlfriend, Ginger Alden. He proposed to Alden and gave her an engagement ring two months later, though several of his friends later claimed that he had no serious intention of marrying again. Journalist Tony Scherman wrote that by early 1977, \"Presley had become a grotesque caricature of his sleek, energetic former self. Hugely overweight, his mind dulled by the pharmacopia he daily ingested, he was barely able to pull himself through his abbreviated concerts.\" In Alexandria, Louisiana, he was on stage for less than an hour, and \"was impossible to understand\". On March 31, Presley failed to perform in Baton Rouge, unable to get out of his hotel bed; a total of four shows had to be canceled and rescheduled. Despite the accelerating deterioration of his health, he stuck to most touring commitments. According to Guralnick, fans \"were becoming increasingly voluble about their disappointment, but it all seemed to go right past Presley, whose world was now confined almost entirely to his room and his spiritualism books.\" A cousin, Billy Smith, recalled how Presley would sit in his room and chat for hours, sometimes recounting favorite Monty Python sketches and his own past escapades, but more often gripped by paranoid obsessions that reminded Smith of Howard Hughes.\n\"Way Down\", Presley's last single issued during his career, was released on June 6. That month, CBS filmed two concerts for a TV special, \"Elvis in Concert\", to be aired in October. In the first, shot in Omaha on June 19, Presley's voice, Guralnick writes, \"is almost unrecognizable, a small, childlike instrument in which he talks more than sings most of the songs, casts about uncertainly for the melody in others, and is virtually unable to articulate or project\". Two days later, in Rapid City, South Dakota, \"he looked healthier, seemed to have lost a little weight, and sounded better, too\", though, by the conclusion of the performance, his face was \"framed in a helmet of blue-black hair from which sweat sheets down over pale, swollen cheeks\". His final concert was held in Indianapolis at Market Square Arena, on June 26.\nThe book \"\", co-written by the three bodyguards fired the previous year, was published on August 1. It was the first expos\u00e9 to detail Presley's years of drug misuse. He was devastated by the book and tried unsuccessfully to halt its release by offering money to the publishers. By this point, he suffered from multiple ailments: glaucoma, high blood pressure, liver damage, and an enlarged colon, each magnified\u2014and possibly caused\u2014by drug abuse.\nOn the evening of Tuesday, August 16, 1977, Presley was scheduled to fly out of Memphis to begin another tour. That afternoon, Ginger Alden discovered him in an unresponsive state on a bathroom floor. According to her eyewitness account, \"Elvis looked as if his entire body had completely frozen in a seated position while using the toilet and then had fallen forward, in that fixed position, directly in front of it. ... It was clear that, from the time whatever hit him to the moment he had landed on the floor, Elvis hadn't moved.\" Attempts to revive him failed, and his death was officially pronounced the next day at 3:30\u00a0p.m. at the Baptist Memorial Hospital.\nPresident Jimmy Carter issued a statement that credited Presley with having \"permanently changed the face of American popular culture\". Thousands of people gathered outside Graceland to view the open casket. One of Presley's cousins, Billy Mann, accepted $18,000 to secretly photograph the corpse; the picture appeared on the cover of the \"National Enquirer\"s biggest-selling issue ever. Alden struck a $105,000 deal with the \"Enquirer\" for her story, but settled for less when she broke her exclusivity agreement. Presley left her nothing in his will.\nPresley's funeral was held at Graceland on Thursday, August 18. Outside the gates, a car plowed into a group of fans, killing two women and critically injuring a third. About 80,000 people lined the processional route to Forest Hill Cemetery, where Presley was buried next to his mother. Within a few weeks, \"Way Down\" topped the country and UK singles chart. Following an attempt to steal Presley's body in late August, the remains of both Presley and his mother were reburied in Graceland's Meditation Garden on October 2.\nCause of death.\nWhile an autopsy, undertaken the same day Presley died, was still in progress, Memphis medical examiner Jerry Francisco announced that the immediate cause of death was cardiac arrest. Asked if drugs were involved, he declared that \"drugs played no role in Presley's death\". In fact, \"drug use was heavily implicated\" in Presley's death, writes Guralnick. The pathologists conducting the autopsy thought it possible, for instance, that he had suffered \"anaphylactic shock brought on by the codeine pills he had gotten from his dentist, to which he was known to have had a mild allergy\". A pair of lab reports filed two months later strongly suggested that polypharmacy was the primary cause of death; one reported \"fourteen drugs in Elvis' system, ten in significant quantity\". In 1979, forensic pathologist Cyril Wecht conducted a review of the reports and concluded that a combination of central nervous system depressants had resulted in Presley's accidental death. Forensic historian and pathologist Michael Baden viewed the situation as complicated: \"Elvis had had an enlarged heart for a long time. That, together with his drug habit, caused his death. But he was difficult to diagnose; it was a judgment call.\"\nThe competence and ethics of two of the centrally involved medical professionals were seriously questioned. Francisco had offered a cause of death before the autopsy was complete; claimed the underlying ailment was cardiac arrhythmia, a condition that can be determined only in someone who is still alive; and denied drugs played any part in Presley's death before the toxicology results were known. Allegations of a cover-up were widespread. While a 1981 trial of Presley's main physician, George Nichopoulos, exonerated him of criminal liability for his death, the facts were startling: \"In the first eight months of 1977 alone, he had [prescribed] more than 10,000 doses of sedatives, amphetamines, and narcotics: all in Elvis' name.\" His license was suspended for three months. It was permanently revoked in the 1990s after the Tennessee Medical Board brought new charges of over-prescription.\nIn 1994, the Presley autopsy report was reopened. Joseph Davis, who had conducted thousands of autopsies as Miami-Dade County coroner, declared at its completion, \"There is nothing in any of the data that supports a death from drugs. In fact, everything points to a sudden, violent heart attack.\" More recent research has revealed that Francisco did not speak for the entire pathology team. Other staff \"could say nothing with confidence until they got the results back from the laboratories, if then. That would be a matter of weeks.\" One of the examiners, E. Eric Muirhead, \"could not believe his ears. Francisco had not only presumed to speak for the hospital's team of pathologists, he had announced a conclusion that they had not reached.\u00a0... Early on, a meticulous dissection of the body\u00a0... confirmed [that] Elvis was chronically ill with diabetes, glaucoma, and constipation. As they proceeded, the doctors saw evidence that his body had been wracked over a span of years by a large and constant stream of drugs. They had also studied his hospital records, which included two admissions for drug detoxification and methadone treatments.\" Writer Frank Coffey thought Elvis's death was due to \"a phenomenon called the Valsalva maneuver (essentially straining on the toilet leading to heart stoppage\u2014plausible because Elvis suffered constipation, a common reaction to drug use)\". In similar terms, Dan Warlick, who was present at the autopsy, \"believes Presley's chronic constipation\u2014the result of years of prescription drug abuse and high-fat, high-cholesterol gorging\u2014brought on what's known as Valsalva's maneuver. Put simply, the strain of attempting to defecate compressed the singer's abdominal aorta, shutting down his heart.\"\nHowever, in 2013, Forest Tennant, who had testified as a defense witness in Nichopoulos' trial, described his own analysis of Presley's available medical records. He concluded that Presley's \"drug abuse had led to falls, head trauma, and overdoses that damaged his brain\", and that his death was due in part to a toxic reaction to codeine\u2014exacerbated by an undetected liver enzyme defect\u2014which can cause sudden cardiac arrhythmia. DNA analysis in 2014 of a hair sample purported to be Presley's found evidence of genetic variants that can lead to glaucoma, migraines, and obesity; a crucial variant associated with the heart-muscle disease hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was also identified.\nLater developments.\nBetween 1977 and 1981, six of Presley's posthumously released singles were top-ten country hits.\nGraceland was opened to the public in 1982. Attracting over half a million visitors annually, it became the second most-visited home in the United States, after the White House. It was declared a National Historic Landmark in 2006.\nPresley has been inducted into five music halls of fame: the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame (1986), the Country Music Hall of Fame (1998), the Gospel Music Hall of Fame (2001), the Rockabilly Hall of Fame (2007), and the Memphis Music Hall of Fame (2012). In 1984, he received the W. C. Handy Award from the Blues Foundation and the Academy of Country Music's first Golden Hat Award. In 1987, he received the American Music Awards' Award of Merit.\nA Junkie XL remix of Presley's \"A Little Less Conversation\" (credited as \"Elvis Vs JXL\") was used in a Nike advertising campaign during the 2002 FIFA World Cup. It topped the charts in over 20 countries and was included in a compilation of Presley's number-one hits, \"ELV1S\", which was also an international success. The album returned Presley to the \"Billboard\" summit for the first time in almost three decades.\nIn 2003, a remix of \"Rubberneckin'\", a 1969 recording of Presley's, topped the U.S. sales chart, as did a 50th-anniversary re-release of \"That's All Right\" the following year. The latter was an outright hit in Britain, debuting at number three on the pop chart; it also made the top ten in Canada. In 2005, another three reissued singles, \"Jailhouse Rock\", \"One Night\"/\"I Got Stung\", and \"It's Now or Never\", went to number one in the United Kingdom. They were part of a campaign that saw the re-release of all 18 of Presley's previous chart-topping UK singles. The first, \"All Shook Up\", came with a collectors' box that made it ineligible to chart again; each of the other 17 reissues hit the British top five.\nIn 2005, \"Forbes\" named Presley the top-earning deceased celebrity for the fifth straight year, with a gross income of $45\u00a0million. He was placed second in 2006, returned to the top spot the next two years, and ranked fourth in 2009. The following year, he was ranked second, with his highest annual income ever\u2014$60\u00a0million\u2014spurred by the celebration of his 75th birthday and the launch of Cirque du Soleil's \"Viva Elvis\" show in Las Vegas. In November 2010, \"Viva Elvis: The Album\" was released, setting his voice to newly recorded instrumental tracks. As of mid-2011, there were an estimated 15,000 licensed Presley products, and he was again the second-highest-earning deceased celebrity. Six years later, he ranked fourth with earnings of $35\u00a0million, up $8\u00a0million from 2016 due in part to the opening of a new entertainment complex, Elvis Presley's Memphis, and hotel, The Guest House at Graceland.\nFor much of his adult life, Presley, with his rise from poverty to riches and massive fame, had seemed to epitomize the American Dream. In his final years and even more so after his death, and the revelations about its circumstances, he became a symbol of excess and gluttony. Increasing attention, for instance, was paid to his appetite for the rich, heavy Southern cooking of his upbringing, foods such as chicken-fried steak and biscuits and gravy. In particular, his love of calorie-laden fried peanut butter, banana, and (sometimes) bacon sandwiches, now known as \"Elvis sandwiches\", came to stand for this aspect of his persona. But the Elvis sandwich represents more than just unhealthy overindulgence\u2014as media and culture scholar Robert Thompson describes, the unsophisticated treat also signifies Presley's enduring all-American appeal: \"He wasn't only the king, he was one of us.\"\nSince 1977, there have been numerous alleged sightings of Presley. A long-standing conspiracy theory among some fans is that he faked his death. Adherents cite alleged discrepancies in the death certificate, reports of a wax dummy in his original coffin, and accounts of Presley planning a diversion so he could retire in peace. An unusually large number of fans have domestic shrines devoted to Presley and journey to sites with which he is connected, however faintly. Every August 16, the anniversary of his death, thousands of people gather outside Graceland and celebrate his memory with a candlelight ritual. \"With Elvis, it is not just his music that has survived death\", writes Ted Harrison. \"He himself has been raised, like a medieval saint, to a figure of cultic status. It is as if he has been canonized by acclamation.\"\nArtistry.\nInfluences.\nPresley's earliest musical influence came from gospel. His mother recalled that from the age of two, at the Assembly of God church in Tupelo attended by the family, \"he would slide down off my lap, run into the aisle and scramble up to the platform. There he would stand looking at the choir and trying to sing with them.\" In Memphis, Presley frequently attended all-night gospel singings at the Ellis Auditorium, where groups such as the Statesmen Quartet led the music in a style that, Guralnick suggests, sowed the seeds of Presley's future stage act:\nAs a teenager, Presley's musical interests were wide-ranging, and he was deeply informed about both white and African-American musical idioms. Though he never had any formal training, he had a remarkable memory, and his musical knowledge was already considerable by the time he made his first professional recordings aged 19 in 1954. When Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller met him two years later, they were astonished at his encyclopedic understanding of the blues, and, as Stoller put it, \"He certainly knew a lot more than we did about country music and gospel music.\" At a press conference the following year, he proudly declared, \"I know practically every religious song that's ever been written.\"\nMusicianship.\nPresley received his first guitar when he was 11 years old. He learned to play and sing; he gained no formal musical training but had an innate natural talent and could easily pick up music. Presley played guitar, bass, and piano. While he couldn't read or write music and had no formal lessons, he was a natural musician and played everything by ear. Presley often played an instrument on his recordings and produced his own music. Presley played rhythm acoustic guitar on most of his Sun recordings and his 1950s RCA albums. He played electric bass guitar on \"(You're So Square) Baby I Don't Care\" after his bassist Bill Black had trouble with the instrument. Presley played the bass line including the intro. Presley played piano on songs such as \"Old Shep\" and \"First in Line\" from his 1956 album \"Elvis\". He is credited with playing piano on later albums such as \"From Elvis in Memphis\" and \"Moody Blue\", and on \"Unchained Melody\" which was one of the last songs that he recorded. Presley played lead guitar on one of his successful singles called \"One Night\". Presley also played guitar on one of his successful singles called \"Are You Lonesome Tonight\". In the 68 Comeback Special, Elvis took over on lead electric guitar, the first time he had ever been seen with the instrument in public, playing it on songs such as \"Baby What You Want Me to Do\" and \"Lawdy Miss Clawdy\". Elvis played the back of his guitar on some of his hits such as \"All Shook Up\", \"Don't Be Cruel\", and \"(Let Me Be Your) Teddy Bear\", providing percussion by slapping the instrument to create a beat. The album \"Elvis is Back!\" features Presley playing a lot of acoustic guitar on songs such as \"I Will Be Home Again\" and \"Like a Baby\".\nMusical styles and genres.\nPresley was a central figure in the development of rockabilly, according to music historians. \"Rockabilly crystallized into a recognizable style in 1954 with Elvis Presley's first release, on the Sun label\", writes Craig Morrison. Paul Friedlander describes the defining elements of rockabilly, which he similarly characterizes as \"essentially\u00a0... an Elvis Presley construction\": \"the raw, emotive, and slurred vocal style and emphasis on rhythmic feeling [of] the blues with the string band and strummed rhythm guitar [of] country\". In \"That's All Right\", the Presley trio's first record, Scotty Moore's guitar solo, \"a combination of Merle Travis\u2013style country finger-picking, double-stop slides from acoustic boogie, and blues-based bent-note, single-string work, is a microcosm of this fusion.\" While Katherine Charlton likewise calls Presley \"rockabilly's originator\", Carl Perkins has explicitly stated that \"[Sam] Phillips, Elvis, and I didn't create rockabilly\" and, according to Michael Campbell, \"Bill Haley recorded the first big rockabilly hit.\" In Moore's view, too, \"It had been there for quite a while, really. Carl Perkins was doing basically the same sort of thing up around Jackson, and I know for a fact Jerry Lee Lewis had been playing that kind of music ever since he was ten years old.\"\nAt RCA, Presley's rock and roll sound grew distinct from rockabilly with group chorus vocals, more heavily amplified electric guitars and a tougher, more intense manner. While he was known for taking songs from various sources and giving them a rockabilly/rock and roll treatment, he also recorded songs in other genres from early in his career, from the pop standard \"Blue Moon\" at Sun to the country ballad \"How's the World Treating You?\" on his second LP to the blues of \"Santa Claus Is Back in Town\". In 1957, his first gospel record was released, the four-song EP \"Peace in the Valley\". Certified as a million-seller, it became the top-selling gospel EP in recording history. Presley would record gospel periodically for the rest of his life.\nAfter his return from military service in 1960, Presley continued to perform rock and roll, but the characteristic style was substantially toned down. His first post-Army single, the number-one hit \"Stuck on You\", is typical of this shift. RCA publicity materials referred to its \"mild rock beat\"; discographer Ernst Jorgensen calls it \"upbeat pop\". The number five \"She's Not You\" (1962) \"integrates the Jordanaires so completely, it's practically doo-wop\". The modern blues/R&amp;B sound captured with success on \"Elvis Is Back!\" was essentially abandoned for six years until such 1966\u201367 recordings as \"Down in the Alley\" and \"Hi-Heel Sneakers\". Presley's output during most of the 1960s emphasized pop music, often in the form of ballads such as \"Are You Lonesome Tonight?\", a number-one in 1960. \"It's Now or Never\", which also topped the chart that year, was a classically influenced variation of pop based on the Neapolitan \"'O sole mio\" and concluding with a \"full-voiced operatic cadence\". These were both dramatic numbers, but most of what Presley recorded for his many film soundtracks was in a much lighter vein.\nWhile Presley performed several of his classic ballads for the '68 Comeback Special, the sound of the show was dominated by aggressive rock and roll. He would record few new straight-ahead rock and roll songs thereafter; as he explained, they were \"hard to find\". A significant exception was \"Burning Love\", his last major hit on the pop charts. Like his work of the 1950s, Presley's subsequent recordings reworked pop and country songs, but in markedly different permutations. His stylistic range now began to embrace a more contemporary rock sound as well as soul and funk. Much of \"Elvis in Memphis\", as well as \"Suspicious Minds\", cut at the same sessions, reflected his new rock and soul fusion. In the mid-1970s, many of his singles found a home on country radio, the field where he first became a star.\nVocal style and range.\nThe developmental arc of Presley's singing voice, as described by critic Dave Marsh, goes from \"high and thrilled in the early days, [to] lower and perplexed in the final months.\" Marsh credits Presley with the introduction of the \"vocal stutter\" on 1955's \"Baby Let's Play House\". When on \"Don't Be Cruel\", Presley \"slides into a 'mmmmm' that marks the transition between the first two verses,\" he shows \"how masterful his relaxed style really is.\" Marsh describes the vocal performance on \"Can't Help Falling in Love\" as one of \"gentle insistence and delicacy of phrasing\", with the line Shall I stay' pronounced as if the words are fragile as crystal\".\nJorgensen calls the 1966 recording of \"How Great Thou Art\" \"an extraordinary fulfillment of his vocal ambitions\", as Presley \"crafted for himself an ad-hoc arrangement in which he took every part of the four-part vocal, from [the] bass intro to the soaring heights of the song's operatic climax\", becoming \"a kind of one-man quartet\". Guralnick finds \"Stand By Me\" from the same gospel sessions \"a beautifully articulated, almost nakedly yearning performance,\" but, by contrast, feels that Presley reaches beyond his powers on \"Where No One Stands Alone\", resorting \"to a kind of inelegant bellowing to push out a sound\" that Jake Hess of the Statesmen Quartet had in his command. Hess himself thought that while others might have voices the equal of Presley's, \"he had that certain something that everyone searches for all during their lifetime.\" Guralnick attempts to pinpoint that something: \"The warmth of his voice, his controlled use of both vibrato technique and natural falsetto range, the subtlety and deeply felt conviction of his singing were all qualities recognizably belonging to his talent but just as recognizably not to be achieved without sustained dedication and effort.\"\nMarsh praises his 1968 reading of \"U.S. Male\", \"bearing down on the hard guy lyrics, not sending them up or overplaying them but tossing them around with that astonishingly tough yet gentle assurance that he brought to his Sun records.\" The performance on \"In the Ghetto\" is, according to Jorgensen, \"devoid of any of his characteristic vocal tricks or mannerisms\", instead relying on the exceptional \"clarity and sensitivity of his voice\". Guralnick describes the song's delivery as of \"almost translucent eloquence ... so quietly confident in its simplicity\". On \"Suspicious Minds\", Guralnick hears essentially the same \"remarkable mixture of tenderness and poise\", but supplemented with \"an expressive quality somewhere between stoicism (at suspected infidelity) and anguish (over impending loss)\".\nMusic critic Henry Pleasants observes that \"Presley has been described variously as a baritone and a tenor. An extraordinary compass\u00a0... and a very wide range of vocal color have something to do with this divergence of opinion.\" He identifies Presley as a high baritone, calculating his range as two octaves and a third, \"from the baritone low G to the tenor high B, with an upward extension in falsetto to at least a D-flat. Presley's best octave is in the middle, D-flat to D-flat, granting an extra full step up or down.\" In Pleasants' view, his voice was \"variable and unpredictable\" at the bottom, \"often brilliant\" at the top, with the capacity for \"full-voiced high Gs and As that an opera baritone might envy\". Scholar Lindsay Waters, who figures Presley's range as two-and-a-quarter octaves, emphasizes that \"his voice had an emotional range from tender whispers to sighs down to shouts, grunts, grumbles, and sheer gruffness that could move the listener from calmness and surrender, to fear. His voice can not be measured in octaves, but in decibels; even that misses the problem of how to measure delicate whispers that are hardly audible at all.\" Presley was always \"able to duplicate the open, hoarse, ecstatic, screaming, shouting, wailing, reckless sound of the black rhythm-and-blues and gospel singers\", writes Pleasants, and also demonstrated a remarkable ability to assimilate many other vocal styles.\nPublic image.\nRelationship with the African-American community.\nWhen Dewey Phillips first aired \"That's All Right\" on Memphis' WHBQ, many listeners who contacted the station by phone and telegram to ask for it again assumed that its singer was black. From the beginning of his national fame, Presley expressed respect for African-American performers and their music, and disregard for the norms of segregation and racial prejudice then prevalent in the South. Interviewed in 1956, he recalled how in his childhood he would listen to blues musician Arthur Crudup\u2014the originator of \"That's All Right\"\u2014\"bang his box the way I do now, and I said if I ever got to the place where I could feel all old Arthur felt, I'd be a music man like nobody ever saw.\" \"The Memphis World\", an African-American newspaper, reported that Presley, \"the rock 'n' roll phenomenon\", \"cracked Memphis' segregation laws\" by attending the local amusement park on what was designated as its \"colored night\". Such statements and actions led Presley to be generally hailed in the black community during the early days of his stardom. In contrast, many white adults, according to \"Billboard\"s Arnold Shaw, \"did not like him, and condemned him as depraved. Anti-negro prejudice doubtless figured in adult antagonism. Regardless of whether parents were aware of the Negro sexual origins of the phrase 'rock 'n' roll', Presley impressed them as the visual and aural embodiment of sex.\"\nDespite the largely positive view of Presley held by African Americans, a rumor spread in mid-1957 that he had at some point announced, \"The only thing Negroes can do for me is buy my records and shine my shoes.\" A journalist with the national African-American weekly \"Jet\", Louie Robinson, pursued the story. On the set of \"Jailhouse Rock\", Presley granted Robinson an interview, though he was no longer dealing with the mainstream press. He denied making such a statement: \"I never said anything like that, and people who know me know that I wouldn't have said it. ... A lot of people seem to think I started this business. But rock 'n' roll was here a long time before I came along. Nobody can sing that kind of music like colored people. Let's face it: I can't sing like Fats Domino can. I know that.\" Robinson found no evidence that the remark had ever been made, and on the contrary elicited testimony from many individuals indicating that Presley was anything but racist. Blues singer Ivory Joe Hunter, who had heard the rumor before he visited Graceland one evening, reported of Presley, \"He showed me every courtesy, and I think he's one of the greatest.\" Though the rumored remark was discredited, it was still being used against Presley decades later. The identification of Presley with racism\u2014either personally or symbolically\u2014was expressed in the lyrics of the 1989 rap hit \"Fight the Power\", by Public Enemy: \"Elvis was a hero to most / But he never meant shit to me / Straight-up racist that sucker was / Simple and plain\".\nThe persistence of such attitudes was fueled by resentment over the fact that Presley, whose musical and visual performance idiom owed much to African-American sources, achieved the cultural acknowledgement and commercial success largely denied his black peers. Into the 21st century, the notion that Presley had \"stolen\" black music still found adherents. Notable among African-American entertainers expressly rejecting this view was Jackie Wilson, who argued, \"A lot of people have accused Elvis of stealing the black man's music, when in fact, almost every black solo entertainer copied his stage mannerisms from Elvis.\" Moreover, Presley also acknowledged his debt to African-American musicians throughout his career. Addressing his '68 Comeback Special audience, he said, \"Rock 'n' roll music is basically gospel or rhythm and blues, or it sprang from that. People have been adding to it, adding instruments to it, experimenting with it, but it all boils down to [that].\" Nine years earlier, he had said, \"Rock 'n' roll has been around for many years. It used to be called rhythm and blues.\"\nSex symbol.\nPresley's physical attractiveness and sexual appeal were widely acknowledged. \"He was once beautiful, astonishingly beautiful\", according to critic Mark Feeney. Television director Steve Binder, no fan of Presley's music before he oversaw the '68 Comeback Special, reported, \"I'm straight as an arrow and I got to tell you, you stop, whether you're male or female, to look at him. He was that good looking. And if you never knew he was a superstar, it wouldn't make any difference; if he'd walked in the room, you'd know somebody special was in your presence.\" His performance style, as much as his physical beauty, was responsible for Presley's eroticized image. Writing in 1970, critic George Melly described him as \"the master of the sexual simile, treating his guitar as both phallus and girl\". In his Presley obituary, Lester Bangs credited him as \"the man who brought overt blatant vulgar sexual frenzy to the popular arts in America\". Ed Sullivan's declaration that he perceived a soda bottle in Presley's trousers was echoed by rumors involving a similarly positioned toilet roll tube or lead bar.\nWhile Presley was marketed as an icon of heterosexuality, some cultural critics have argued that his image was ambiguous. In 1959, \"Sight and Sound\"s Peter John Dyer described his onscreen persona as \"aggressively bisexual in appeal\". Brett Farmer places the \"orgasmic gyrations\" of the title dance sequence in \"Jailhouse Rock\" within a lineage of cinematic musical numbers that offer a \"spectacular eroticization, if not homoeroticization, of the male image\". In the analysis of Yvonne Tasker, \"Elvis was an ambivalent figure who articulated a peculiar feminised, objectifying version of white working-class masculinity as aggressive sexual display.\"\nReinforcing Presley's image as a sex symbol were the reports of his dalliances with various Hollywood stars and starlets, from Natalie Wood in the 1950s to Connie Stevens and Ann-Margret in the 1960s to Candice Bergen and Cybill Shepherd in the 1970s. June Juanico of Memphis, one of Presley's early girlfriends, later blamed Parker for encouraging him to choose his dating partners with publicity in mind. Presley never grew comfortable with the Hollywood scene, and most of these relationships were insubstantial.\nEquestrian.\nElvis kept several horses at Graceland, and horses remain important to the Graceland estate. A local former teacher, Alene Alexander, has taken care of the horses at Graceland for 38 years. She and Priscilla Presley have a love for horses and have formed a special friendship. It was because of Priscilla that Elvis brought horses to Graceland.\n\"He got me my first horse as a Christmas present \u2013 Domino,\" said Priscilla Presley. Alexander now serves as Graceland's Ambassador. She is one of three of the original staff members still working at the estate.\nThe horse named \"Palomino Rising Sun\" was Elvis' favorite horse and there are many photographs of him riding him.\nAssociates.\nColonel Parker and the Aberbachs.\nOnce he became Presley's manager, Colonel Tom Parker insisted on exceptionally tight control over his client's career. Early on, he and his Hill and Range allies, the brothers Jean and Julian Aberbach, perceived the close relationship that developed between Presley and songwriters Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller as a serious threat to that control. Parker effectively ended the relationship, deliberately or not, with the new contract he sent Leiber in early 1958. Leiber thought there was a mistake\u2014the sheet of paper was blank except for Parker's signature and a line on which to enter his. \"There's no mistake, boy, just sign it and return it\", Parker directed. \"Don't worry, we'll fill it in later.\" Leiber declined, and Presley's fruitful collaboration with the writing team was over. Other respected songwriters lost interest in or simply avoided writing for Presley because of the requirement that they surrender a third of their usual royalties.\nBy 1967, Parker's contracts gave him 50 percent of most of Presley's earnings from recordings, films, and merchandise. Beginning in February 1972, he took a third of the profit from live appearances; a January 1976 agreement entitled him to half of that as well. Priscilla Presley noted that \"Elvis detested the business side of his career. He would sign a contract without even reading it.\" Presley's friend Marty Lacker regarded Parker as a \"hustler and a con artist. He was only interested in 'now money'\u2014get the buck and get gone.\"\nLacker was instrumental in convincing Presley to record with Memphis producer Chips Moman and his handpicked musicians at American Sound Studio in early 1969. The American Sound sessions represented a significant departure from the control customarily exerted by Hill and Range. Moman still had to deal with the publisher's staff on-site, whose song suggestions he regarded as unacceptable. He was on the verge of quitting until Presley ordered the Hill and Range personnel out of the studio. Although RCA executive Joan Deary was later full of praise for the producer's song choices and the quality of the recordings, Moman, to his fury, received neither credit on the records nor royalties for his work.\nThroughout his entire career, Presley performed in only three venues outside the United States\u2014all of them in Canada, during brief tours there in 1957. In 1968, he remarked, \"Before too long I'm going to make some personal appearance tours. I'll probably start out here in this country and after that, play some concerts abroad, probably starting in Europe. I want to see some places I've never seen before.\" Rumors that he would play overseas for the first time were fueled in 1974 by a million-dollar bid for an Australian tour. Parker was uncharacteristically reluctant, prompting those close to Presley to speculate about the manager's past and the reasons for his evident unwillingness to apply for a passport. After Presley's death, it was revealed that Parker was born Andreas Cornelis van Kuijk in the Netherlands; having immigrated illegally to the U.S., he had reason to fear that if he left the country, he would not be allowed back in again. Parker ultimately squelched any notions Presley had of working abroad, claiming that foreign security was poor and the venues unsuitable for a star of his magnitude.\nParker arguably exercised tightest control over Presley's film career. Hal Wallis said, \"I'd rather try and close a deal with the devil\" than with Parker. Fellow film producer Sam Katzman described him as \"the biggest con artist in the world\". In 1957, Robert Mitchum asked Presley to costar with him in \"Thunder Road\", which Mitchum was producing and writing. According to George Klein, one of his oldest friends, Presley was also offered starring roles in \"West Side Story\" and \"Midnight Cowboy\". In 1974, Barbra Streisand approached Presley to star with her in the remake of \"A Star is Born\". In each case, any ambitions Presley may have had to play such parts were thwarted by his manager's negotiating demands or flat refusals. In Lacker's description, \"The only thing that kept Elvis going after the early years was a new challenge. But Parker kept running everything into the ground.\" The prevailing attitude may have been summed up best by the response Leiber and Stoller received when they brought a serious film project for Presley to Parker and the Hill and Range owners for their consideration. In Leiber's telling, Jean Aberbach warned them to never again \"try to interfere with the business or artistic workings of the process known as Elvis Presley\".\nMemphis Mafia.\nIn the early 1960s, the circle of friends with whom Presley constantly surrounded himself until his death came to be known as the \"Memphis Mafia\". \"Surrounded by the[ir] parasitic presence\", as journalist John Harris puts it, \"it was no wonder that as he slid into addiction and torpor, no-one raised the alarm: to them, Elvis was the bank, and it had to remain open.\" Tony Brown, who played piano for Presley regularly in the last two years of Presley's life, observed his rapidly declining health and the urgent need to address it: \"But we all knew it was hopeless because Elvis was surrounded by that little circle of people\u00a0... all those so-called friends\". In the Memphis Mafia's defense, Marty Lacker has said, \"[Presley] was his own man.\u00a0... If we hadn't been around, he would have been dead a lot earlier.\"\nLarry Geller became Presley's hairdresser in 1964. Unlike others in the Memphis Mafia, he was interested in spiritual questions and recalls how, from their first conversation, Presley revealed his secret thoughts and anxieties: \"I mean there \"has\" to be a purpose\u00a0... there's got to be a reason\u00a0... why I was chosen to be Elvis Presley.\u00a0... I swear to God, no one knows how lonely I get. And how empty I really feel.\" Thereafter, Geller supplied him with books on religion and mysticism, which Presley read voraciously. Presley would be preoccupied by such matters for much of his life, taking trunkloads of books on tour.\nLegacy.\nPresley's rise to national attention in 1956 transformed the field of popular music and had a huge effect on the broader scope of popular culture. As the catalyst for the cultural revolution that was rock and roll, he was central not only to defining it as a musical genre but in making it a touchstone of youth culture and rebellious attitude. With its racially mixed origins\u2014repeatedly affirmed by Presley\u2014rock and roll's occupation of a central position in mainstream American culture facilitated a new acceptance and appreciation of black culture. In this regard, Little Richard said of Presley, \"He was an integrator. Elvis was a blessing. They wouldn't let black music through. He opened the door for black music.\" Al Green agreed: \"He broke the ice for all of us.\" President Jimmy Carter remarked on his legacy in 1977: \"His music and his personality, fusing the styles of white country and black rhythm and blues, permanently changed the face of American popular culture. His following was immense, and he was a symbol to people the world over of the vitality, rebelliousness, and good humor of his country.\" Presley also heralded the vastly expanded reach of celebrity in the era of mass communication: at the age of 21, within a year of his first appearance on American network television, he was regarded as one of the most famous people in the world.\nPresley's name, image, and voice are recognized around the globe. He has inspired a legion of impersonators. In polls and surveys, he is recognized as one of the most important popular music artists and influential Americans. American composer and conductor Leonard Bernstein said, \"Elvis Presley is the greatest cultural force in the twentieth century. He introduced the beat to everything and he changed everything\u2014music, language, clothes. It's a whole new social revolution\u2014the sixties came from it.\" John Lennon said that \"Nothing really affected me until Elvis.\" Bob Dylan described the sensation of first hearing Presley as \"like busting out of jail\".\nOn the 25th anniversary of Presley's death, \"The New York Times\" asserted, \"All the talentless impersonators and appalling black velvet paintings on display can make him seem little more than a perverse and distant memory. But before Elvis was camp, he was its opposite: a genuine cultural force.\u00a0... Elvis' breakthroughs are underappreciated because in this rock-and-roll age, his hard-rocking music and sultry style have triumphed so completely.\" Not only Presley's achievements but his failings as well, are seen by some cultural observers as adding to the power of his legacy, as in this description by Greil Marcus:\nElvis Presley is a supreme figure in American life, one whose presence, no matter how banal or predictable, brooks no real comparisons.\u00a0... The cultural range of his music has expanded to the point where it includes not only the hits of the day, but also patriotic recitals, pure country gospel, and really dirty blues.\u00a0... Elvis has emerged as a great \"artist\", a great \"rocker\", a great \"purveyor of schlock\", a great \"heart throb\", a great \"bore\", a great \"symbol of potency\", a great \"ham\", a great \"nice person\", and, yes, a great American.\nAchievements.\nTo this day, Presley remains the best-selling solo artist, with sales estimates ranging from 600 million to 1\u00a0billion sales.\nPresley holds the records for most songs charting in \"Billboard\"s top 40\u2014115\u2014and top 100: 152, according to chart statistician Joel Whitburn, 139 according to Presley historian Adam Victor. Presley's rankings for top ten and number-one hits vary depending on how the double-sided \"Hound Dog/Don't Be Cruel\" and \"Don't/I Beg of You\" singles, which precede the inception of \"Billboard\"s unified Hot 100 chart, are analyzed. According to Whitburn's analysis, Presley holds the record with 38, tying with Madonna; per \"Billboard\"s current assessment, he ranks second with 36. Whitburn and \"Billboard\" concur that the Beatles hold the record for most number-one hits with 20, and that Mariah Carey is second with 18. Whitburn has Presley also with 18, and thus tied for second; \"Billboard\" has him third with 17. Presley retains the record for cumulative weeks at number one: alone at 80, according to Whitburn and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame; tied with Carey at 79, according to \"Billboard\". He holds the records for most British number-one hits with 21, and top ten hits with 76.\nAs an album artist, Presley is credited by \"Billboard\" with the record for the most albums charting in the \"Billboard\" 200: 129, far ahead of second-place Frank Sinatra's 82. He also holds the record for most time spent at number one on the \"Billboard\" 200: 67 weeks. In 2015 and 2016, two albums setting Presley's vocals against music by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, \"If I Can Dream\" and \"The Wonder of You\", both reached number one in the United Kingdom. This gave him a new record for number-one UK albums by a solo artist with 13, and extended his record for longest span between number-one albums by anybody\u2014Presley had first topped the British chart in 1956 with his self-titled debut.\n, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) credits Presley with 146.5\u00a0million certified album sales in the U.S., third all time behind the Beatles and Garth Brooks. He holds the records for most gold albums (101, nearly twice as many as second-place Barbra Streisand's 51), and most platinum albums (57). His 25 multi-platinum albums is second behind The Beatles' 26. His total of 197 album certification awards (including one diamond award), far outpaces the Beatles' second-best 122. He has the third-most gold singles (54, behind Drake and Taylor Swift), and the eighth-most platinum singles (27).\nIn 2012 the spider \"Paradonea presleyi\" was named in his honor. In 2018, President Donald Trump awarded Presley the Presidential Medal of Freedom posthumously.\nBands.\nPresley worked with many bands and studio musicians over the course of his career. The following is a list and timeline of the most prominent musicians that worked with Presley.\nDiscography.\nA vast number of recordings have been issued under Presley's name. The total number of his original master recordings has been variously calculated as 665 and 711. His career began and he was most successful during an era when singles were the primary commercial medium for pop music. In the case of his albums, the distinction between \"official\" studio records and other forms is often blurred. For most of the 1960s, his recording career focused on soundtrack albums. In the 1970s, his most heavily promoted and best-selling LP releases tended to be concert albums."}
{"id": "9290", "revid": "234882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9290", "title": "Economic subjectivism", "text": ""}
{"id": "9292", "revid": "4770293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9292", "title": "Einstein", "text": ""}
{"id": "9293", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9293", "title": "Establishing Shot", "text": ""}
{"id": "9294", "revid": "656385", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9294", "title": "The Evil Dead", "text": "The Evil Dead (originally released as Book of the Dead) is a 1981 American supernatural horror film written and directed by Sam Raimi, produced by Robert Tapert and executive produced by Raimi, Tapert, and Bruce Campbell, who also starred alongside Ellen Sandweiss, Richard DeManicor, Betsy Baker and Theresa Tilly. The film focuses on five college students vacationing in an isolated cabin in a remote wooded area. After they find an audio tape that, when played, releases a legion of demons and spirits, four members of the group suffer from demonic possession, forcing the fifth member, Ash Williams (Campbell), to survive an onslaught of increasingly gory mayhem.\nRaimi, Tapert, Campbell and their friends produced the short film \"Within the Woods\" as a proof of concept to build the interest of potential investors, which secured US$90,000 to begin work on \"The Evil Dead\". Principal photography took place on location in a remote cabin located in Morristown, Tennessee, in a difficult filming process that proved extremely uncomfortable for the cast and crew; the film's extensive prosthetic makeup effects and stop-motion animations were created by artist Tom Sullivan. The completed film attracted the interest of producer Irvin Shapiro, who helped screen the film at the 1982 Cannes Film Festival. Horror author Stephen King gave a rave review of the film, which resulted in New Line Cinema acquiring its distribution rights.\n\"The Evil Dead\" grossed $2.4 million in the US and between $2.7 and $29.4 million worldwide. Both early and later critical reception were universally positive; in the years since its release, the film has developed a reputation as one of the most significant cult films, cited among the greatest horror films of all time and one of the most successful independent films. It launched the careers of Raimi, Tapert, and Campbell, who have continued to collaborate on several films together, such as Raimi's \"Spider-Man\" trilogy.\n\"The Evil Dead\" spawned a media franchise, beginning with two direct sequels written and directed by Raimi, \"Evil Dead II\" (1987) and \"Army of Darkness\" (1992), a fourth film, \"Evil Dead\" (2013), which serves as a soft reboot and continuation, and a follow-up TV series, \"Ash vs Evil Dead\", which aired from 2015 to 2018; the franchise also includes video games and comic books. The character of Ash Williams is also considered to be a cultural icon.\nPlot.\nFive Michigan State University students \u2013 Ash Williams, his girlfriend Linda, his sister Cheryl, their friend Scott and Scott's girlfriend Shelly \u2013 vacation at an isolated cabin in rural Tennessee. Approaching the cabin, the group notices the porch swing move on its own but suddenly stop as Scott grabs the doorknob. While Cheryl draws a picture of a clock, the clock stops, and she hears a faint, demonic voice tell her to \"join us\". Her hand becomes possessed, turns pale and draws a picture of a book with a demonic face on its cover. Although shaken, she does not mention the incident.\nWhen the cellar trapdoor flies open during dinner, Shelly, Linda, and Cheryl remain upstairs as Ash and Scott investigate the cellar. They find the \"Naturom Demonto\", a Sumerian version of the Egyptian \"Book of the Dead\", along with an archaeologist's tape recorder, and they take the items upstairs. Scott plays a tape of incantations that resurrect a demonic entity. Cheryl yells for Scott to turn off the tape recorder, and a tree branch breaks one of the cabin's windows. Later that evening, an agitated Cheryl goes into the woods to investigate strange noises, where she is attacked and raped by demonically possessed trees. When she manages to escape and returns to the cabin bruised and anguished, Ash agrees to take her back into town, only to discover that the bridge to the cabin has been destroyed. Cheryl panics as she realizes that they are now trapped and the demonic entity will not let them leave. Back at the cabin, Ash listens to more of the tape, learning that the only way to kill the entity is to dismember a possessed host. As Linda and Shelly play spades, Cheryl correctly calls out the cards, succumbs to the entity, and levitates. In a raspy, demonic voice, she demands to know why they disturbed her sleep and threatens to kill everyone. She stabs Linda in the ankle with a pencil and throws Ash into a shelf. Scott knocks Cheryl into the cellar and locks her inside.\nEveryone fights about what to do. Having become paranoid upon seeing Cheryl's demonic transformation, Shelly lies down in her room but is drawn to look out of her window, where a demon crashes through and attacks her, turning her into a Deadite. She attacks Scott before he manages to throw her into the fireplace and then stab her in the back with a Sumerian dagger, apparently killing her. When she reanimates, Scott dismembers her with an axe and buries the remains. Shaken by the experience, he leaves to find a way back to town. He shortly returns mortally wounded from the possessed trees, and dies while warning Ash that the trees will not let them escape alive. When Ash checks on Linda, he is horrified to find that she has become possessed. She attacks him, but he stabs her with the Sumerian dagger. Unwilling to dismember her, he buries her instead. She revives and attacks him, forcing him to decapitate her with a shovel and retreat to the cabin.\nBack inside, Ash discovers that Cheryl has escaped the cellar. Cheryl manages to elude Ash for a while, culminating in her attempting to choke Ash. Ash manages to escape her grasp, and then shoots Cheryl in the jaw. As Ash is barricading the door, Scott reanimates into a Deadite. Scott attacks Ash, and inadvertently knocks the Naturom Demonto close to the fireplace. Ash gouges Scott's eyes out and pulls a tree branch from Scott's stomach, causing him to bleed out and fall to the ground. Cheryl breaks through the barricade and knocks Ash to the floor. As Scott and Cheryl continue to attack Ash on the ground, Ash manages to grab the Naturom Demonto and throws it into the fireplace. While the book burns, the Deadites freeze in place, then begin to rapidly decompose. Large appendages burst from both corpses, covering Ash in blood. Dawn breaks, and Ash stumbles outside.\nAs Ash walks away from the cabin, an unseen entity moves rapidly through the forest, rushes through the cabin, and attacks him from behind.\nProduction.\nBackground and writing.\nRaimi and Campbell grew up together, and have been friends from an early age. The duo made several low-budget Super 8 mm film projects together. Several were comedies, including \"Clockwork\" and \"It's Murder!\". Shooting a suspense scene in \"It's Murder!\" inspired them to approach careers in the horror genre; after researching horror cinema at drive-in theaters, Raimi was set on directing a horror film, opting to shoot a proof of concept short film - described by the director as a \"prototype\" - that would attract the interest of financiers, and use the funds raised to shoot a full-length project. The short film that Raimi created was called \"Within the Woods\", which was produced for $1,600. For \"The Evil Dead\" Raimi required over $100,000.\nTo generate funds to produce the film, Raimi approached Phil Gillis, a lawyer to one of his friends. Raimi showed him \"Within the Woods\", and although Gillis was not impressed by the short film, he offered Raimi legal advice on how to produce \"The Evil Dead\". With his advice in mind, Raimi asked a variety of people for donations, and even eventually \"begged\" some. Campbell had to ask several of his own family members, and Raimi asked every individual he thought might be interested. He eventually raised enough money to produce a full-length film, though not the full amount he originally wanted. Raimi said the film cost $375,000.\nWith enough money to produce the film, Raimi and Campbell set out to make what was then titled \"Book of the Dead\", a name inspired by Raimi's interest in the fiction of H. P. Lovecraft. The film was supposed to be a remake of \"Within the Woods\", with higher production values and a full-length running time. Raimi turned 20 just before shooting began, and he considered the project his \"rite of passage\".\nPre-production and casting.\nRaimi asked for help and assistance from several of his friends and past collaborators to make \"The Evil Dead\". Campbell offered to produce the film alongside Tapert, and was subsequently cast as Ash Williams, the main character, since his producing responsibilities made him the only actor willing to stay during the production's entirety. To acquire more actors for the project, Raimi put an ad in \"The Detroit News\". Betsy Baker was one of the actresses who responded, and Ellen Sandweiss, who appeared in \"Within the Woods\", was also cast. The crew consisted almost entirely of Raimi and Campbell's friends and family. The special make-up effects artist for \"Within the Woods\", Tom Sullivan, was brought on to compose the effects after expressing a positive reaction to working with Raimi. He helped create many of the film's foam latex and fake blood effects, and added coffee as an extra ingredient to the traditional fake blood formula of corn syrup and food coloring.\nWithout any formal assistance from location scouts, the cast had to find filming locations on their own. The crew initially attempted to shoot the film in Raimi's hometown of Royal Oak, Michigan, but instead chose Morristown, Tennessee, as it was the only state that expressed enthusiasm for the project. The crew quickly found a remote cabin located several miles away from any other buildings. During pre-production, the 13 crew members had to stay at the cabin, leading to several people sleeping in the same room. The living conditions were notoriously difficult, with several arguments breaking out between crew members.\nSteve Frankel was the only carpenter on set, which made him the art direction's sole contributor. For exterior shots, Frankel had to produce several elaborate props with a circular saw. Otherwise, the cabin mostly remained the way it was found during production. The cabin had no plumbing, but phone lines were connected to it.\nPrincipal photography.\nThe inexperienced crew made filming a \"comedy of errors\". The first day of filming led to them getting lost in the woods during a scene shot on a bridge. Several crew members were injured during the shoot, and because of the cabin's remoteness, securing medical assistance was difficult. One notably gruesome moment on set involved ripping off Baker's eyelashes during removal of her face-mask. Because of the low budget, contact lenses as thick as glass had to be applied to the actors to achieve the \"demonic eyes\" effect. The lenses took 10 minutes to apply, and could only be left on for about 15 minutes because eyes could not \"breathe\" with them applied. Campbell later commented that to get the effect of wearing these lenses, they had to put \"Tupperware\" over their eyes.\nRaimi developed a sense of \"mise en sc\u00e8ne\", coming up with ideas for scenes at a fast rate. He had drawn several crude illustrations to help him break down the flow of scenes. The crew was surprised when Raimi began using dutch angles during shots to build atmosphere during scenes. To accommodate Raimi's style of direction, several elaborate, low-budget rigs had to be built, since the crew could not afford a camera dolly. One involved the \"vas-o-cam\", which relied on a mounted camera that was slid down long wooden platforms to create a more fluid sense of motion.\nA camera trick used to emulate a Steadicam inexpensively was the \"shaky cam\", which involved mounting the camera to a piece of wood and having two camera operators sprint around the swamp. During scenes involving the unseen force in the woods watching the characters, Raimi had to run through the woods with the makeshift rig, jumping over logs and stones. This often proved difficult due to mist in the swamp. The film's final scene was shot with the camera mounted to a bike, while it was quickly driven through the cabin to create a seamless long take.\nRaimi had been a big fan of \"The Three Stooges\" during his youth, which inspired him to use \"Fake Shemps\" during production. In any scene that required a background shot of a character, he used another actor as a substitute if the original actor was preoccupied. During a close-up involving Richard DeManicor's hand opening a curtain, Raimi used his own hand in the scene since it was more convenient. His brother Ted Raimi was used as a \"fake shemp\" in many scenes when the original actor was either busy or preoccupied.\nRaimi enjoyed \"torturing\" his actors. Raimi believed that to capture pain and anger in his actors, he had to abuse them a little at times, saying, \"if everyone was in extreme pain and misery, that would translate into a horror\". Producer Robert Tapert agreed with Raimi, commenting that he \"enjoyed when an actor bleeds.\" While shooting a scene with Campbell running down a hill, Campbell tripped and injured his leg. Raimi enjoyed poking Campbell's injury with a stick he found in the woods. Because of the copious amounts of blood in the film, the crew produced gallons of fake blood with karo syrup. It took Campbell hours to remove the sticky substance from himself. Several actors had inadvertently been stabbed or thrown into objects during production. During the last few days on set the conditions had become so extreme the crew began burning furniture to stay warm. Since at that point only exterior shots needed to be filmed, they burned nearly every piece of furniture left. Several actors went days without showering, and because of the freezing conditions, several caught colds and other illnesses. Campbell later described the filming process as nearly \"twelve weeks of mirthless exercise in agony\", though he allowed that he did manage to have fun while on set. On January 23, 1980, filming was finished and almost every crew member left the set to return home, with Campbell staying with Raimi. While looking over the footage that had been shot, Raimi discovered that a few pickups were required to fill in missing shots. Four days of re-shoots were then done to complete the film. The final moment involved Campbell having \"monster-guts\" splattered on him in the basement.\nEditing.\nAfter the extensive filming process, Raimi had a \"mountain of footage\" that he had to put together. He chose a Detroit editing association, where he met Edna Paul, to cut the film. Paul's assistant was Joel Coen of the Coen brothers, who helped with the film's editing. Paul edited a majority of the film, although Coen edited the shed sequence. Coen had been inspired by Raimi's \"Within the Woods\" and liked the idea of producing a prototype film to help build the interest of investors. Joel used the concept to help make \"Blood Simple\" with his brother Ethan, and he and Raimi became friends following the editing process.\nThe film's first cut ran at around 117 minutes, which Campbell called an impressive achievement in light of the 65-minute length of the screenplay. The cut scenes were to focus on the main character's lamentation of not being able to save the victims from their deaths, but was edited down to make the film less \"grim and depressing\" and to be a more marketable 85 minutes. Raimi was inspired by the fact that Brian De Palma was editing his own film \"Blow Out\" with John Travolta at the same sound facility. One of the most intricate moments during editing was the stop-motion animation sequence where the corpses \"melted\", which took hours to cut properly. The film had unique sounds that required extensive recording from the crew. Several sounds were not recorded properly during shooting, which meant the effects had to be redone in the editing rooms. Dead chickens were stabbed to replicate the sounds of mutilated flesh, and Campbell had to scream into a microphone for several hours.\nMuch like \"Within the Woods\", \"The Evil Dead\" needed to be blown up to 35mm, then the industry standard, to be played at movie theaters. The relatively large budget made this a much simpler process with \"The Evil Dead\" than it had been with the short film.\nPromotion and distribution rights.\nWith the film completed, Raimi and the crew decided to celebrate with a \"big premiere\". They chose to screen the film at Detroit's Redford Theatre, which Campbell had often visited as a child. Raimi opted to have the most theatrical premiere possible, using custom tickets and wind tracks set in the theater, and ordering ambulances outside the theater to build atmosphere. The premiere setup was inspired by horror director William Castle, who would often attempt to scare his audiences by using gimmicks. Local turnout for the premiere exceeded the cast's expectations, with a thousand patrons showing up. The audiences responded enthusiastically to the premiere, which led to Raimi's idea of \"touring\" the film to build hype.\nRaimi showed the film to anyone willing to watch it, booking meetings with distribution agents and anyone with experience in the film industry. Eventually Raimi came across Irvin Shapiro, the man who was responsible for the distribution of George A. Romero's \"Night of the Living Dead\" and other famous horror films. Upon first viewing the film, he joked that while it \"wasn't \"Gone with the Wind\"\", it had commercial potential, and he expressed an interest in distributing it. It was his idea not to use the then-title \"Book of the Dead\", because it made the film sound boring. Raimi brainstormed several ideas, eventually going with \"The Evil Dead\", deemed the \"least worst\" title. Shapiro also advised distributing the film worldwide to garner a larger income, though it required a further financial investment by Raimi, who managed to scrape together what little money he had.\nShapiro was a founder of the Cannes Film Festival, and allowed Raimi to screen the film at the 1982 festival out of competition. Stephen King was present at its screening and gave the film a rave review. \"USA Today\" released an article about King's favorite horror films; the author cited \"The Evil Dead\" as his fifth favorite film of the genre. The film severely affected King, who commented that while watching the film at Cannes, he was \"registering things [he] had never seen in a movie before\". He became one of the film's largest supporters during the early efforts to find a distributor, eventually describing it as the \"most ferociously original film of the year\", a quote used in the film's promotional pieces. King's comments attracted the interest of critics, who otherwise would likely have dismissed the low-budget thriller.\nThe film's press attracted the attention of British film distribution agent Stephen Woolley. Though he considered the film a big risk, Woolley decided to take on the job of releasing the film in the United Kingdom. The film was promoted in an unconventional manner for a film of its budget, receiving marketing on par with that of larger budget films. Dozens of promotional pieces, including film posters and trailers, were showcased in the UK, heavy promotion rarely expended on such a low-budget film. Woolley was impressed by Raimi, whom he called \"charming\", and was an admirer of the film, which led to his taking more risks with the film's promotion than he normally would have.\n\"Fangoria\" started covering the film in late 1982, writing several articles about the film's long production history. Early critical reception at the time was very positive, and along with \"Fangoria\", King, and Shapiro's approval, the film generated an impressive amount of interest before its commercial premiere. New Line Cinema, one of the distributors interested in the film, negotiated an agreement to distribute it domestically. The film had several \"sneak previews\" before its commercial release, including screenings in New York and Detroit. Audience reception at both screenings was widely enthusiastic, and interest was built for the film to such an extent that wider distribution was planned. New Line Cinema wrote Raimi a check large enough to pay off all the investors, and decided to release the film in an unusual manner: simultaneously into both cinemas and onto VHS, with substantial domestic promotion.\nCommercial release.\nTheaters.\nBecause of its large promotional campaign, the film performed above expectations at the box office. However, the initial domestic gross was described as \"disappointing.\" The movie opened in 15 theaters and grossed $108,000 in its opening weekend. Word of mouth later spread, and the film became a \"sleeper hit\". It grossed $2,400,000 domestically, nearly eight times its production budget. Sources differ as to whether it grossed $261,944 overseas, for a worldwide gross of $2,661,944, or $27 million overseas, for a worldwide gross of $29.4 million. Raimi said in 1990 that the film \"did very well overseas and did very poorly domestically\" and that its investors earned a return of \"about five times their initial investment.\"\nRating.\nThe film's release was met with controversy. Raimi made the film as gruesome as possible with neither interest in nor fear of censorship, which led to the film's receiving an X rating and being named a \"video nasty\". Films with this label were quite violent and disturbing, and the rating was often held by pornographic and other X-rated films. While \"The Evil Dead\" was not pornographic in nature, it was considered one of the most violent films of its time, and censors had issues with the film's content, which impacted some of its commercial potential. The film was called the \"number one nasty\" in a nod to its status as both a nasty and the year's bestselling video release. Writer Bruce Kawin described \"The Evil Dead\" as one of the most notorious splatter films of its day, along with \"Cannibal Holocaust\" and \"I Spit on Your Grave\". The film was and is still banned either theatrically or on video in some countries.\nHome media release.\nThe first VHS release of \"The Evil Dead\" was by Thorn EMI in 1983, and Thorn's successor company HBO/Cannon Video later repackaged the film. Former HBO Video's partner Congress Video, a company notable for public domain films, issued its version in 1989.\nIn its first week of video release, the film made \u00a3100,000 in the UK. It quickly became that week's bestselling video release, and later became the year's bestselling video in the UK, out-grossing large-budget horror releases such as \"The Shining\". Its impressive European performance was chalked up to its heavy promotion there and the more open-minded nature of European audiences.\nThe resurgence of \"The Evil Dead\" in the home-video market came through two companies that restored the film from its negatives and issued special editions in 1998: Anchor Bay Entertainment on VHS, and Elite Entertainment on laserdisc. Anchor Bay was responsible for the film's first DVD release on January 19, 1999 , Along with Elite releasing the special collector's edition DVD on March 30, 1999, and between them, Elite and Anchor Bay have released six different DVD versions of \"The Evil Dead\", most notably the 2002 \"Book Of The Dead\" edition, packaged in a latex replica of the \"Necronomicon\" sculpted by Tom Sullivan and the 2007 three disc \"Ultimate Edition\" which contained the widescreen and original full frame versions of the movie. The film's high-definition debut was in a 2010 Blu-ray.\nLionsgate Films released a 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray edition of \"The Evil Dead\" on October 9, 2018.\nReception.\nEarly reception.\nUpon its release, contemporary critical opinion was largely positive. Bob Martin, editor of \"Fangoria\", reviewed the film before its formal premiere and proclaimed that it \"might be the exception to the usual run of low-budget horror films\". He followed up on this praise after the film's premiere, stating: \"Since I started editing this magazine, I have not seen \"any\" new film that I could recommend to our readers with more confidence that it would be loved, embraced and hailed as a new milestone in graphic horror\". The \"Los Angeles Times\" called the film an \"instant classic\", proclaiming it as \"probably the grisliest well-made movie ever.\" In a 1982 review, staff from the trade magazine \"Variety\" wrote that the film \"emerges as the \"nec plus ultra\" of low-budget gore and shock effect\", commenting that the \"powerful\" and inventive camerawork was key to creating a sense of dread.\nBritish press for the film was positive; Kim Newman of \"Monthly Film Bulletin\", Richard Cook of \"NME\", and Julian Petley of \"Film and Filming\" all gave the film good reviews during its early release. Petley and Cook compared the film to other contemporary horror films, writing that the film expressed more imagination and \"youthful enthusiasm\" than an average horror film. Cook described the camera work by Raimi as \"audacious\", stating that the film's visceral nature was greatly helped by the style of direction. Woolley, Newman, and several critics complimented the film for its unexpected use of black comedy, which elevated the film above its genre's potential trappings. All three critics compared the film to the surrealistic work of Georges Franju and Jean Cocteau, noting the cinephilic references to Cocteau's film \"Orpheus\". Writer Lynn Schofield Clark in his novel \"From Angels to Aliens\" compared the film to better-known horror films such as \"The Exorcist\" and \"The Omen\", citing it as a key supernatural thriller.\nLater reception.\nThe review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reports a 95% approval rating and an average rating of 8.04/10 based on an aggregation of 60 reviews. It summarizes the film: \"This classic low-budget horror film combines just the right amount of gore and black humor, giving \"The Evil Dead\" an equal amount of thrills and laughs.\" \"Empire\" magazine stated the film's \"reputation was deserved\", writing that the film was impressive considering its low budget and the cast's inexperience. He commented that the film successfully blended the \"bizarre\" combination of \"Night of the Living Dead\", \"The Texas Chain Saw Massacre\" and \"The Three Stooges\". A reviewer for Film4 rated \"The Evil Dead\" four-and-a-half stars out of five, musing that the film was \"energetic, original and icky\" and concluding that Raimi's \"splat-stick debut is a tight little horror classic that deserves its cult reputation, despite the best efforts of the censors.\"\n\"Slant Magazine\"s Ed Gonzales compared the film to Dario Argento's work, citing Raimi's \"unnerving wide angle work\" as an important factor to the film's atmosphere. He mused that Raimi possessed an \"almost unreal ability to suggest the presence of intangible evil\", which was what prevented the movie from being \"B-movie schlock\". BBC critic Martyn Glanville awarded the film four stars out of five, writing that for Raimi, it served as a better debut film than Tobe Hooper's \"The Texas Chainsaw Massacre\" or Wes Craven's \"The Last House on the Left\". Glanville noted that other than the \"ill-advised trees-that-rape scene\", the film is \"one of the great modern horror films, and even more impressive when one considers its modest production values.\"\nFilmcritic.com's Christopher Null gave the film the same rating as Glanville, writing that \"Raimi's biggest grossout is schlock horror done the right way\" and comparing it to Romero's \"Night of the Living Dead\" in its ability to create stark atmosphere. \"Chicago Reader\" writer Pat Graham commented that the film featured several \"clever\" turns on the standard horror formula, adding that Raimi's \"anything-for-an-effect enthusiasm pays off in lots of formally inventive bits.\" \"Time Out\" critic Stephen Garrett, referred to the make-up effects in the climax as \"amazing\", and commented that although the film was light on character development, it \"blends comic fantasy\" with \"atmospheric horror ... to impressive effect\". The same site later cited the film as the 41st greatest horror movie ever made. Phelim O'Neill of \"The Guardian\" combined \"The Evil Dead\" and its sequel \"Evil Dead II\" and listed them as the 23rd best horror film ever made, announcing that the former film \"stands above its mostly forgotten peers in the 80s horror boom.\" Don Summer, in his book \"Horror Movie Freak\", and writer Kate Egan have both cited the film as a horror classic.\nJ.C. Ma\u00e7ek III of \"PopMatters\" said, \"What is unquestionable is that the Raimis and their pals created a monster in \"The Evil Dead\". It started as a disastrous failure to obtain a big break with a too long, too perilous shoot (note Campbell's changing hairstyle in the various scenes of the one-day plot). The film went through name changes and bannings only to survive as not only 'the ultimate experience in grueling horror' but as an oft-imitated and cashed-in-on classic, with 30 years of positive reviews to prove it.\"\nAftermath.\nWhile \"The Evil Dead\" received favorable critical comment when it was initially released, it failed to establish Raimi's reputation. It was, however, a box-office success, which led to Campbell and Raimi teaming up again for the release of another movie. Joel Coen and his brother Ethan had collaborated as directors and released the film \"Blood Simple\", to critical acclaim. According to Campbell, Ethan, then an accountant, expressed surprise when the duo succeeded. The Coen brothers and Raimi collaborated on a screenplay, which was released shortly after \"The Evil Dead\". The film, \"Crimewave\", was a box-office failure. The film's production was a \"disaster\" according to Campbell, who stated that \"missteps\" like \"Crimewave\" usually lead to the end of a director's career. Other people involved with the film expressed similar disappointment with the project. Fortunately, Raimi had the studio support to make a sequel to \"The Evil Dead\", which he initially decided to make out of desperation.\nSequels.\n\"Evil Dead II\" was filmed and released in 1987, and was also a box-office success. A second sequel was released in 1993, \"Army of Darkness\". A third TV series sequel called Ash vs. Evil Dead was released in 2015 and ended in 2018, it serves as a sequel to the original trilogy. A fourth sequel called Evil Dead Rise starts filming in 2021, possibly be released in 2022. Campbell returned as the lead character Ash Williams in both films and the TV series but will not appear in the upcoming sequel. At that time, Raimi had become a successful director, attracting Hollywood's interest. His 1990 superhero film \"Darkman\" was another box-office success, which led to an increased budget for \"Army of Darkness\". \"Army of Darkness\" had 22.8 times the budget of the original \"Evil Dead\", though it was not considered to be a box-office success like its two predecessors. \"Evil Dead II\" received general acclaim from critics and is often considered to be better than the original, and \"Army of Darkness\" received mostly positive reviews. The series has often attracted attention because each sequel featured more comedic qualities than the last, progressing into \"weirder\" territory with each film.\nUnofficial sequels were also made in Italy\u2014where the film was known as \"La Casa\" (\"The House\")\u2014by Joe D'Amato's Filmirage. In 1988, D'Amato produced two films labeled as sequels to \"Evil Dead II\", Umberto Lenzi's \"Ghosthouse\" (\"La Casa 3\"), and \"Witchery\" (\"La Casa 4\"), starring Linda Blair and David Hasselhoff. In 1990, D'Amato produced his final \"La Casa\" film, \"Beyond Darkness\" (\"La Casa 5\"). \"\" was reissued in Italy as \"La Casa 6\", and \"The Horror Show\" was then released in Italy as \"La Casa 7\".\nLegacy.\n\"The Evil Dead\" and its sequels have become one of the largest cult film trilogies in history. David Lavery, in his book \"The Essential Cult TV Reader\", surmised that Campbell's \"career is a practical guide to becoming a cult idol\". The film launched the careers of Raimi and Campbell, who have since collaborated frequently. Raimi has worked with Campbell in virtually all of his films since, and Campbell has appeared in cameo roles in all three of Raimi's \"Spider-Man\" films, (as well as a very brief appearance at the end of \"Darkman\"), which have become some of the highest-grossing films in history. Though it has often been considered an odd choice for Raimi\u2014a director known for his violent horror films\u2014to direct a family-friendly franchise, the hiring was mostly inspired by Raimi's passion for comic books as a kid. Raimi returned to the horror-comedy genre in 2009 with \"Drag Me to Hell\".\nCritics have often compared Campbell's later performances to his role in \"Evil Dead\", which has been called his defining role. Campbell's performance as Ash has been compared to roles ranging from his performance of Elvis Presley in the film \"Bubba Ho-tep\" to the bigamous demon in \"The X-Files\" episode \"Terms of Endearment\". Campbell's fan base gradually developed after the release of \"Evil Dead II\" and his short-lived series \"The Adventures of Brisco County, Jr.\". He is a regular favorite at most fan conventions and often draws sold-out auditoriums at his public appearances. \"The Evil Dead\" developed a substantial cult following throughout the years, and has often been cited as a defining cult classic.\n\"The Evil Dead\" has spawned a media empire. A video game adaptation of the same name was for the Commodore 64 in 1984, as was a trilogy of survival horror games in the 1990s and early 2000s: ', ' and '. Ted Raimi did voices for the trilogy, and Campbell returned as the voice of Ash. The character Ash became the main character of a comic book franchise. Ash has fought both Freddy Krueger and Jason Voorhees in the \"Freddy vs. Jason vs. Ash\" series, Herbert West in \"Army of Darkness vs. Re-Animator\", zombie versions of the Marvel Comics superheroes in \"Marvel Zombies vs. The Army of Darkness\", and has even saved the life of a fictional Barack Obama in '. In January 2008, Dark Horse Comics began releasing a four-part monthly comic book mini-series, written by Mark Verheiden and drawn by John Bolton, based on \"The Evil Dead\". The film has also inspired a stage musical, \"\", which was produced with the permission of Raimi and Campbell. The musical has run on and off since its inception in 2003.\nA remake of the film was released in 2013, directed by Fede \u00c1lvarez and produced by Raimi and Campbell. It features actress Jane Levy as the main character. Campbell does make a brief, uncredited cameo appearance at the end of the film in a short post-credits scene.\nIn 2015, an ongoing television continuation of the films called \"Ash vs Evil Dead\" premiered on the Starz Network. Sam Raimi wrote and directed the pilot, and served as an executive producer; Campbell reprised his role as Ash during the series' three-season run.\nAfter the film was released, many people began to trespass onto the filming location in Morristown. In 1982, the cabin was burned down by drunken trespassers. Although the cabin is now gone, the chimney remains, which many people now take stones from when they trespass onto the location.\nIn 2020, a video game adaptation called \"\" was announced. It is being developed by Boss Team Games and Saber Interactive is set to be released in 2021 on the PS4, PS5, Xbox One, Xbox Series S/X, Microsoft Windows and Nintendo Switch."}
{"id": "9297", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9297", "title": "Economic calculation problem", "text": "The economic calculation problem is a criticism of using economic planning as a substitute for market-based allocation of the factors of production. It was first proposed by Ludwig von Mises in his 1920 article \"Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth\" and later expanded upon by Friedrich Hayek.\nIn his first article, Mises described the nature of the price system under capitalism and described how individual subjective values are translated into the objective information necessary for rational allocation of resources in society. He argued that economy planning necessarily leads to an irrational and inefficient allocation of resources. In market exchanges, prices reflect the supply and demand of resources, labor and products. In the article, Mises focused his criticism on the inevitable deficiencies of the socialisation of capital goods, but he later went on to elaborate on various different forms of socialism in his book \"Socialism\". He briefly mentioned the problem in the 3rd book of \"\", where he also elaborated on the different types of socialism, namely the \"Hindenburg\" and \"Lenin\" models, which are uniquely different, and showing why, in his view, market socialism still falls prey to the problems that are tied to socialism.\nMises and Hayek argued that economic calculation is only possible by information provided through market prices and that bureaucratic or technocratic methods of allocation lack methods to rationally allocate resources. Mises's analysis centered on price theory while Hayek went with a more feathered analysis of information and entrepreneurship. The debate raged in the 1920s and 1930s and that specific period of the debate has come to be known by economic historians as the socialist calculation debate. Mises' initial criticism received multiple reactions and led to the conception of trial-and-error market socialism, most notably the Lange\u2013Lerner theorem.\nIn the 1920 paper, Mises argued that the pricing systems in socialist economies were necessarily deficient because if a public entity owned all the means of production, no rational prices could be obtained for capital goods as they were merely internal transfers of goods and not \"objects of exchange\", unlike final goods. Therefore, they were unpriced and hence the system would be necessarily irrational as the central planners would not know how to allocate the available resources efficiently. He wrote that \"rational economic activity is impossible in a socialist commonwealth\". Mises developed his critique of socialism more completely in his 1922 book \"Socialism\", arguing that the market price system is an expression of praxeology and can not be replicated by any form of bureaucracy.\nNotable critics of both Mises's original argument and Hayek's newer proposition include Anarcho-Capitalist economist Bryan Caplan, computer programmer and Marxist Paul Cockshott, as well as other communists.\nTheory.\nComparing heterogeneous goods.\nSince capital goods and labor are highly heterogeneous (i.e. they have different characteristics that pertain to physical productivity), economic calculation requires a common basis for comparison for all forms of capital and labour.\nAs a means of exchange, money enables buyers to compare the costs of goods without having knowledge of their underlying factors; the consumer can simply focus on his personal cost-benefit decision. Therefore, the price system is said to promote economically efficient use of resources by agents who may not have explicit knowledge of all of the conditions of production or supply. This is called the signalling function of prices as well as the rationing function which prevents over-use of any resource.\nWithout the market process to fulfill such comparisons, critics of non-market socialism say that it lacks any way to compare different goods and services and would have to rely on calculation in kind. The resulting decisions, it is claimed, would therefore be made without sufficient knowledge to be considered rational.\nRelating utility to capital and consumption goods.\nThe common basis for comparison of capital goods must also be connected to consumer welfare. It must also be able to compare the desired trade-off between present consumption and delayed consumption (for greater returns later on) via investment in capital goods. The use of money as a medium of exchange and unit of account is necessary to solve the first two problems of economic calculation. Mises (1912) applied the marginal utility theory developed by Carl Menger to money.\nMarginal consumer expenditures represent the marginal utility or additional consumer satisfaction expected by consumers as they spend money. This is similar to the equi-marginal principle developed by Alfred Marshall. Consumers equalize the marginal utility (amount of satisfaction) of the last dollar spent on each good. Thus, the exchange of consumer goods establishes prices that represent the marginal utility of consumers and money is representative of consumer satisfaction.\nIf money is also spent on capital goods and labor, then it is possible to make comparisons between capital goods and consumer goods. The exchange of consumer and capital/labor goods does not imply that capital goods are valued accurately, only that it is possible for the valuations of capital goods to be made. These first elements of the calculation critique of socialism are the most basic element, namely economic calculation requires the use of money across all goods. This is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition for successful economic calculation. Without a price mechanism, Mises argues, socialism lacks the means to relate consumer satisfaction to economic activity. The incentive function of prices allows diffuse interests, like the interests of every household in cheap, high quality shoes to compete with the concentrated interests of the cobblers in expensive, poor quality shoes. Without it, a panel of experts set up to \"rationalise production\", likely closely linked to the cobblers for expertise, would tend to support the cobblers interests in a \"conspiracy against the public\". However, if this happens to all industries, everyone would be worse off than if they had been subject to the rigours of market competition.\nThe Mises theory of money and calculation conflicts directly with Marxist labour theory of value. Marxist theory allows for the possibility that labour content can serve as a common means of valuing capital goods, a position now out of favour with economists following the success of the theory of marginal utility.\nEntrepreneurship.\nThe third condition for economic calculation is the existence of genuine entrepreneurship and market rivalry.\nAccording to Israel Kirzner (1973) and Don Lavoie (1985), entrepreneurs reap profits by supplying unfulfilled needs in all markets. Thus, entrepreneurship brings prices closer to marginal costs. The adjustment of prices in markets towards equilibrium (where supply and demand equal) gives them greater utilitarian significance. The activities of entrepreneurs make prices more accurate in terms of how they represent the marginal utility of consumers. Prices act as guides to the planning of production. Those who plan production use prices to decide which lines of production should be expanded or curtailed.\nEntrepreneurs lack the profit motive to take risks under socialism and so are far less likely to attempt to supply consumer demands. Without the price system to match consumer utility to incentives for production, or even indicate those utilities \"without providing incentives\", state planners are much less likely to invest in new ideas to satisfy consumers' desires.\nCoherent planning.\nThe fourth condition for successful economic calculation is plan coordination among those who plan production. The problem of planning production is the knowledge problem explained by Hayek (1937, 1945), but first mentioned and illustrated by his mentor Mises in \"Socialism\" (1922), not to be mistaken with \"Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis\" (1951). The planning could either be done in a decentralised fashion, requiring some mechanism to make the individual plans coherent, or centrally, requiring a lot of information.\nWithin capitalism, the overall plan for production is composed of individual plans from capitalists in large and small enterprises. Since capitalists purchase labour and capital out of the same common pool of available yet scarce labor and capital, it is essential that their plans fit together in at least a semi-coherent fashion. Hayek (1937) defined an efficient planning process as one where all decision makers form plans that contain relevant data from the plans from others. Entrepreneurs acquire data on the plans from others through the price system. The price system is an indispensable communications network for plan coordination among entrepreneurs. Increases and decreases in prices inform entrepreneurs about the general economic situation, to which they must adjust their own plans.\nAs for socialism, Mises (1944) and Hayek (1937) insisted that bureaucrats in individual ministries could not coordinate their plans without a price system. If decentralized socialism cannot work, central authorities must plan production. However, central planners face the local knowledge problem in forming a comprehensive plan for production. Mises and Hayek saw centralization as inevitable in socialism. Opponents argued that in principle an economy can be seen as a set of equations. Thus, there should be no need for prices. Using information about available resources and the preferences of people, it should be possible to calculate an optimal solution for resource allocation. Friedrich von Hayek responded that the system of equations required too much information that would not be easily available and the ensuing calculations would be too difficult. This is partly because individuals possess useful knowledge but do not realise its importance, may have no incentive to transmit the information, or may have incentive to transmit false information about their preferences. He contended that the only rational solution is to utilize all the dispersed knowledge in the market place through the use of price signals. The early debates were made before the much greater calculating powers of modern computers became available but also before research on chaos theory. In the 1980s, Alexander Nove argued that the calculations would take millions of years even with the best computers. It may be impossible to make long-term predictions for a highly complex system such as an economy.\nHayek (1935, 1937, 1940, 1945) stressed the knowledge problem of central planning, partly because decentralized socialism seemed indefensible. Part of the reason that Hayek stressed the knowledge problem was also because he was mainly concerned with debating the proposal for market socialism and the Lange model by Oskar R. Lange (1938) and Hayek's student Abba Lerner (1934, 1937, 1938) which was developed in response to the calculation argument. Lange and Lerner conceded that prices were necessary in socialism. Lange and Lerner thought that socialist officials could simulate some markets (mainly spot markets) and the simulation of spot markets was enough to make socialism reasonably efficient. Lange argued that prices can be seen merely as an accounting practice. In principle, claim market socialists, socialist managers of state enterprises could use a price system, as an accounting system, in order to minimize costs and convey information to other managers. However, while this can deal with existing stocks of goods, providing a basis for values can be ascertained, it does not deal with the investment in new capital stocks. Hayek responded by arguing that the simulation of markets in socialism would fail due to a lack of genuine competition and entrepreneurship. Central planners would still have to plan production without the aid of economically meaningful prices. Lange and Lerner also admitted that socialism would lack any simulation of financial markets, and that this would cause problems in planning capital investment.\nHowever, Hayek's argumentation is not only regarding computational complexity for the central planners. He further argues that much of the information individuals have cannot be collected or used by others. First, individuals may have no or little incentive to share their information with central or even local planners. Second, the individual may not be aware that he has valuable information; and when he becomes aware, it is only useful for a limited time, too short for it to be communicated to the central or local planners. Third, the information is useless to other individuals if it is not in a form that allows for meaningful comparisons of value (i.e. money prices as a common basis for comparison). Therefore, Hayek argues, individuals must acquire data through prices in real markets.\nFinancial markets.\nThe fifth condition for successful economic calculation is the existence of well functioning financial markets. Economic efficiency depends heavily upon avoiding errors in capital investment. The costs of reversing errors in capital investment are potentially large. This is not just a matter of rearranging or converting capital goods that are found to be of little use. The time spent reconfiguring the structure of production is time lost in the production of consumer goods. Those who plan capital investment must anticipate future trends in consumer demand if they are to avoid investing too much in some lines of production and too little in other lines of production.\nCapitalists plan production for profit. Capitalists use prices to form expectations that determine the composition of capital accumulation, the pattern of investment across industry. Those who invest in accordance with consumers' desires are rewarded with profits, those who do not are forced to become more efficient or go out of business.\nPrices in futures markets play a special role in economic calculation. Futures markets develop prices for commodities in future time periods. It is in futures markets that entrepreneurs sort out plans for production based on their expectations. Futures markets are a link between entrepreneurial investment decisions and household consumer decisions. Since most goods are not explicitly traded in futures markets, substitute markets are needed. The stock market serves as a \u2018continuous futures market\u2019 that evaluates entrepreneurial plans for production (Lachmann 1978). Generally speaking, the problem of economic calculation is solved in financial markets as Mises argued:\nThe existence of financial markets is a necessary condition for economic calculation. The existence of financial markets itself does not automatically imply that entrepreneurial speculation will tend towards efficiency. Mises argued that speculation in financial markets tends towards efficiency because of a \"trial and error\" process. Entrepreneurs who commit relatively large errors in investment waste their funds over expanding some lines of production at the cost of other more profitable ventures where consumer demand is higher. The entrepreneurs who commit the worst errors by forming the least accurate expectations of future consumer demands incur financial losses. Financial losses remove these inept entrepreneurs from positions of authority in industry.\nEntrepreneurs who commit smaller errors by anticipating consumer demand more correctly attain greater financial success. The entrepreneurs who form the most accurate opinions regarding the future state of markets (i.e. new trends in consumer demands) earn the highest profits and gain greater control of industry. Those entrepreneurs who anticipate future market trends therefore waste the least amount of real capital and find the most favorable terms for finance on markets for financial capital. Minimal waste of real capital goods implies the minimization of the opportunity costs of capital's economic calculation. The value of capital goods is brought into line with the value of future consumer goods through competition in financial markets, because competition for profits among capitalist financiers rewards entrepreneurs who value capital more correctly (i.e. anticipating future prices more correctly) and eliminates capitalists who value capital least correctly. To sum things up, the use of money in trading all goods (capital/labor and consumer) in all markets (spot and financial) combined with profit driven entrepreneurship and Darwinian natural selection in financial markets all combine to make rational economic calculation and allocation the outcome of the capitalist process.\nMises insisted that socialist calculation is impossible because socialism precludes the exchange of capital goods in terms of a generally accepted medium of exchange, or money. Investment in financial markets determines the capital structure of modern industry with some degree of efficiency. The egalitarian nature of socialism prohibits speculation in financial markets. Therefore, Mises concluded that socialism lacks any clear tendency towards improvement in the capital structure of industry.\nExample.\nMises gave the example of choosing between producing wine or oil, making the following point:\nSuch intermediate products would include land, warehouse storage, bottles, barrels, oil, transport, etc. Not only would these things have to be assembled, but they would have to compete with the attainment of other economic goals. Without pricing for capital goods, essentially, Mises is arguing, it is impossible to know what their rational/most efficient use is. Investment is particularly impossible as the potential future outputs cannot be measured by any current standard, let alone a monetary one required for economic calculation. The value consumers have for current consumption over future consumption cannot be expressed, quantified or implemented as investment is independent from savings.\nAnalysis.\nEfficiency of markets.\nSome academics and economists argue that the claim a free market is efficient, or even the most efficient, method of resource allocation is incorrect. Alexander Nove argued that Mises \"tends to spoil his case by the implicit assumption that capitalism and optimum resource allocation go together\" in Mises' \"Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth\". Joan Robinson argued that many prices in modern capitalism are effectively \"administered prices\" created by \"quasi monopolies\", thus challenging the connection between capital markets and rational resource allocation. Robin Hahnel argued that free markets are in fact systematically inefficient because externalities are pervasive and because real-world markets are rarely truly competitive or in equilibrium. Socialist market abolitionists argue that whilst advocates of capitalism and the Austrian School in particular recognize equilibrium prices do not exist, they nonetheless claim that these prices can be used as a rational basis when this is not the case, hence markets are not efficient.\nJoseph Schumpeter argued that large firms generally drive economic advancement through innovation and investment and so their proliferation is not necessarily bad. In countries with protectionist policies, foreign competition cannot fulfill this role, but the threat of potential competition, namely that as companies abuse their position new rivals could emerge and gain customers dissatisfied with the old companies, can still reduce the inefficiencies. Milton Friedman agreed that markets with monopolistic competition are not efficient, but he argued that in countries with free trade the pressure from foreign competition would make monopolies behave in a competitive manner.\nEconomic liberals and libertarian capitalists adamantly oppose any distortion of market structure by the introduction of government influence, asserting that such interference would be a form of central planning or state capitalism, insofar as it would redirect decision making from the private to the public sector. These libertarian capitalist analysts believe that monopolies and big business are not generally the result of a free market, or that they never arise from a free market; rather, they say that such concentration is enabled by governmental grants of franchises or privileges.\nEquilibrium.\nAllin Cottrell, Paul Cockshott and Greg Michaelson argued that the contention that finding a true economic equilibrium is not just hard but impossible for a central planner applies equally well to a market system. As any universal Turing machine can do what any other Turing machine can, a central calculator in principle has no advantage over a system of dispersed calculators, i.e. a market, or vice versa.\nIn some economic models, finding an equilibrium is hard, and finding an Arrow\u2013Debreu equilibrium is PPAD-complete. If the market can find an equilibrium in polynomial time, then the equivalence above can be used to prove that P=PPAD. This line of argument thus attempts to show that any claim to impossibility must necessarily involve a local knowledge problem, because the planning system is no less capable than the market if given full information.\nDon Lavoie makes a local knowledge argument by taking this implication in reverse. The market socialists pointed out the formal similarity between the neoclassical model of Walrasian general equilibrium and that of market socialism which simply replace the Walrasian auctioneer with a planning board. According to Lavoie, this emphasizes the shortcomings of the model. By relying on this formal similarity, the market socialists must adopt the simplifying assumptions of the model. The model assumes that various sorts of information are given to the auctioneer or planning board. However, if not coordinated by a capital market, this information exists in a fundamentally distributed form, unavailable to the planners. If the planners somehow captured this information, it would immediately become stale and relatively useless, unless reality somehow imitated the changeless monotony of the equilibrium model. The existence and usability of this information depends on its creation and situation within a distributed discovery procedure.\nScale of problem.\nOne criticism is that proponents of the theory overstate the strength of their case by describing socialism as impossible rather than inefficient. In explaining why he is not an Austrian School economist, anarcho-capitalist economist Bryan Caplan argues that while the economic calculation problem is a problem for socialism, he denies that Mises has shown it to be fatal or that it is this particular problem that led to the collapse of authoritarian socialist states. Caplan also states the exaggeration of the problem; in his view, Mises did not manage to prove why economic calculation made the socialist economy 'impossible', and even if there were serious doubts about the efficiency of cost benefit analysis, other arguments are plentiful (Caplan gives the example of the incentive problem).\nSteady-state economy.\nJoan Robinson argued that in a steady-state economy there would be an effective abundance of means of production and so markets would not be needed. Mises acknowledged such a theoretical possibility in his original tract when he said the following: \"The static state can dispense with economic calculation. For here the same events in economic life are ever recurring; and if we assume that the first disposition of the static socialist economy follows on the basis of the final state of the competitive economy, we might at all events conceive of a socialist production system which is rationally controlled from an economic point of view.\" However, he contended that stationary conditions never prevail in the real world. Changes in economic conditions are inevitable; and even if they were not, the transition to socialism would be so chaotic as to preclude the existence of such a steady-state from the start.\nThe purpose of the price mechanism is to allow individuals to recognise the opportunity cost of decisions. In a state of abundance, there is no such cost, which is to say that in situations where one need not economize, economics does not apply, e.g. areas with abundant fresh air and water. Otto Neurath and Hillel Ticktin argued that with detailed use of real unit accounting and demand surveys a planned economy could operate without a capital market in a situation of abundance.\nUse of technology.\nIn \"Towards a New Socialism\"'s \"Information and Economics: A Critique of Hayek\" and \"Against Mises\", Paul Cockshott and Allin Cottrell argued that the use of computational technology now simplifies economic calculation and allows central planning to be implemented and sustained. Len Brewster replied to this by arguing that \"Towards a New Socialism\" establishes what is essentially another form of a market economy, making the following point:\nIn response, Cockshott argued that the economic system is sufficiently far removed from a capitalist free-market economy to not count as one, saying:\nCosma Shalizi articulated the problems that come with central planning using supercomputers in a 2012 essay. He cited the sheer complexity of the problem as well as the difficulty of negotiating between preferences as being the central problems with such a system.\nLeigh Phillips and Michal Rozworski released a book in 2019 that argues that multinational corporations like Walmart and Amazon already operate centrally planned economies larger than the Soviet Union, proving that the economic calculation problem is surmountable."}
{"id": "9299", "revid": "41401301", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9299", "title": "Erasmus Darwin", "text": "Erasmus Darwin (12 December 173118 April 1802) was an English physician. One of the key thinkers of the Midlands Enlightenment, he was also a natural philosopher, physiologist, slave-trade abolitionist, inventor, and poet.\nHis poems included much natural history, including a statement of evolution and the relatedness of all forms of life.\nHe was a member of the Darwin\u2013Wedgwood family, which includes his grandsons Charles Darwin and Francis Galton. Darwin was a founding member of the Lunar Society of Birmingham, a discussion group of pioneering industrialists and natural philosophers.\nHe turned down an invitation of George III's to become a physician to the King.\nEarly life and education.\nDarwin was born in 1731 at Elston Hall, Nottinghamshire, near Newark-on-Trent, England, the youngest of seven children of Robert Darwin of Elston (1682\u20131754), a lawyer and physician, and his wife Elizabeth Hill (1702\u201397). The name Erasmus had been used by a number of his family and derives from his ancestor Erasmus Earle, Common Sergent of England under Oliver Cromwell. His siblings were:\nHe was educated at Chesterfield Grammar School, then later at St John's College, Cambridge. He obtained his medical education at the University of Edinburgh Medical School; whether he ever obtained the formal degree of MD is not known.\nDarwin settled in 1756 as a physician at Nottingham, but met with little success and so moved the following year to Lichfield to try to establish a practice there. A few weeks after his arrival, using a novel course of treatment, he restored the health of a young fisherman whose death seemed inevitable. This ensured his success in the new locale. Darwin was a highly successful physician for more than fifty years in the Midlands. George III invited him to be Royal Physician, but Darwin declined.\nIn Lichfield, Darwin wrote \"didactic poetry, developed his system of evolution, and invented amongst other things, a carriage steering mechanism, a manuscript copier and a speaking machine.\nPersonal life.\nDarwin married twice and had 14 children, including two illegitimate daughters by an employee, and, possibly, at least one further illegitimate daughter.\nIn 1757 he married Mary (Polly) Howard (1740\u20131770). They had four sons and one daughter, two of whom (a son and a daughter) died in infancy:\nThe first Mrs. Darwin died in 1770. A governess, Mary Parker, was hired to look after Robert. By late 1771, employer and employee had become intimately involved and together they had two illegitimate daughters:\nSusanna and Mary Jr later established a boarding school for girls. In 1782, Mary Sr (the governess) married Joseph Day (1745\u20131811), a Birmingham merchant, and moved away.\nDarwin may have fathered another child, this time with a married woman. A Lucy Swift gave birth in 1771 to a baby, also named Lucy, who was christened a daughter of her mother and William Swift, but there is reason to believe the father was really Darwin. Lucy Jr. married John Hardcastle in Derby in 1792 and their daughter, Mary, married Francis Boott, the physician.\nIn 1775. Darwin met Elizabeth Pole, daughter of Charles Colyear, 2nd Earl of Portmore, and wife of Colonel Edward Pole (1718\u20131780); but as she was married, Darwin could only make his feelings known for her through poetry. When Edward Pole died, Darwin married Elizabeth and moved to her home, Radbourne Hall, four miles (6\u00a0km) west of Derby. The hall and village are these days known as Radbourne. In 1782, they moved to Full Street, Derby. They had four sons, one of whom died in infancy, and three daughters:\nDarwin's personal appearance is described in unflattering detail in his Biographical Memoirs, printed by the \"Monthly Magazine\" in 1802. Darwin, the description reads, \"was of middle stature, in person gross and corpulent; his features were coarse, and his countenance heavy; if not wholly void of animation, it certainly was by no means expressive. The print of him, from a painting of Mr. Wright, is a good likeness. In his gait and dress he was rather clumsy and slovenly, and frequently walked with his tongue hanging out of his mouth.\"\nFreemasonry.\nDarwin had been a Freemason throughout his life, in the Time Immemorial Lodge of Cannongate Kilwinning, No. 2, of Scotland. Later on, Sir Francis Darwin, one of his sons, was made a Mason in Tyrian Lodge, No. 253, at Derby, in 1807 or 1808. His son Reginald was made a Mason in Tyrian Lodge in 1804. Charles Darwin's name does not appear on the rolls of the Lodge but it is very possible that he, like Francis, was a Mason, as he held many Masonic beliefs such as Deism throughout his life.\nDeath.\nDarwin died suddenly on 18 April 1802, weeks after having moved to Breadsall Priory, just north of Derby. The Monthly Magazine of 1802, in its Biographical Memoirs of the Late Dr. Darwin, reports that \"during the last few years, Dr. Darwin was much subject to inflammation in his breast and lungs; he had a very serious attack of this disease in the course of the last Spring, from which, after repeated bleedings, by himself and a surgeon, he with great difficulty recovered.\"\nDarwin's death, the Biographical Memoirs continues, \"is variously accounted for: it is supposed to have been caused by the cold fit of an inflammatory fever. Dr. Fox, of Derby, considers the disease which occasioned it to have been angina pectoris; but Dr. Garlicke, of the same place, thinks this opinion not sufficiently well founded. Whatever was the disease, it is not improbable, surely, that the fatal event was hastened by the violent fit of passion with which he was seized in the morning.\"\nHis body is buried in All Saints' Church, Breadsall.\nErasmus Darwin is commemorated on one of the Moonstones, a series of monuments in Birmingham.\nWritings.\nBotanical works and the Lichfield Botanical Society.\nDarwin formed 'A Botanical Society, at Lichfield' almost always incorrectly named as the Lichfield Botanical Society (despite the name, composed of only three men, Erasmus Darwin, Sir Brooke Boothby and Mr John Jackson, proctor of Lichfield Cathedral) to translate the works of the Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus from Latin into English. This took seven years. The result was two publications: \"A System of Vegetables\" between 1783 and 1785, and \"The Families of Plants\" in 1787. In these volumes, Darwin coined many of the English names of plants that we use today.\nDarwin then wrote \"The Loves of the Plants,\" a long poem, which was a popular rendering of Linnaeus' works. Darwin also wrote \"Economy of Vegetation\", and together the two were published as \"The Botanic Garden\". Among other writers he influenced were Anna Seward and Maria Jacson.\nZoonomia.\nDarwin's most important scientific work, \"Zoonomia\" (1794\u20131796), contains a system of pathology and a chapter on 'Generation'. In the latter, he anticipated some of the views of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck, which foreshadowed the modern theory of evolution. Erasmus Darwin's works were read and commented on by his grandson Charles Darwin the naturalist. Erasmus Darwin based his theories on David Hartley's psychological theory of associationism. The essence of his views is contained in the following passage, which he follows up with the conclusion that one and the same kind of living filament is and has been the cause of all organic life:\nWould it be too bold to imagine, that in the great length of time, since the earth began to exist, perhaps millions of ages before the commencement of the history of mankind, would it be too bold to imagine, that all warm-blooded animals have arisen from one living filament, which endued with animality, with the power of acquiring new parts, attended with new propensities, directed by irritations, sensations, volitions, and associations; and thus possessing the faculty of continuing to improve by its own inherent activity, and of delivering down those improvements by generation to its posterity, world without end! \nErasmus Darwin also anticipated survival of the fittest in \"Zo\u00f6nomia\" mainly when writing about the \"three great objects of desire\" for every organism: \"lust, hunger, and security.\" A similar \"survival of the fittest\" view in \"Zo\u00f6nomia\" is Erasmus' view on how a species \"should\" propagate itself. Erasmus' idea that \"the strongest and most active animal should propagate the species, which should thence become improved\". Today, this is called the theory of survival of the fittest. His grandson Charles Darwin, much less libidinous and who led more of an invalid life, and who is not known to have illegitimately fathered children, or fathered children he did not plan, acknowledge and raise, posited the different and fuller theory of natural selection. Charles' theory was that natural selection is the inheritance of changed genetic characteristics that are better adaptations to the environment; these are not necessarily based in \"strength\" and \"activity\", which themselves ironically can lead to the overpopulation that results in natural selection yielding nonsurvivors of genetic traits.\nErasmus Darwin was familiar with the earlier proto-evolutionary thinking of James Burnett, Lord Monboddo, and cited him in his 1803 work \"Temple of Nature.\"\nPoem on evolution.\nErasmus Darwin offered the first glimpse of his theory of evolution, obliquely, in a question at the end of a long footnote to his popular poem \"The Loves of the Plants\" (1789), which was republished throughout the 1790s in several editions as \"The Botanic Garden\". His poetic concept was to anthropomorphise the stamen (male) and pistil (female) sexual organs, as bride and groom. In this stanza on the flower Curcuma (also Flax and Turmeric) the \"youths\" are infertile, and he devotes the footnote to other examples of neutered organs in flowers, insect castes, and finally associates this more broadly with many popular and well-known cases of vestigial organs (male nipples, the third and fourth wings of flies, etc.)\nWoo'd with long care, CURCUMA cold and shy\nMeets her fond husband with averted eye:\n\"Four\" beardless youths the obdurate beauty move\nWith soft attentions of Platonic love.\nDarwin's final long poem, \"The Temple of Nature\" was published posthumously in 1803. The poem was originally titled \"The Origin of Society\". It is considered his best poetic work. It centres on his own conception of evolution. The poem traces the progression of life from micro-organisms to civilised society. The poem contains a passage that describes the struggle for existence.\nHis poetry was admired by Wordsworth, while Coleridge was intensely critical, writing, \"I absolutely nauseate Darwin's poem\".\nIt often made reference to his interests in science; for example botany and steam engines.\nEducation of women.\nThe last two leaves of Darwin's \"A plan for the conduct of female education in boarding schools\" (1797) contain a book list, an apology for the work, and an advert for \"Miss Parkers School\".\nThe school advertised on the last page is the one he set up in Ashbourne, Derbyshire for his two illegitimate children, Susanna and Mary.\nDarwin regretted that a good education had not been generally available to women in Britain in his time, and drew on the ideas of Locke, Rousseau, and Genlis in organising his thoughts. Addressing the education of middle-class girls, Darwin argued that amorous romance novels were inappropriate and that they should seek simplicity in dress. He contends that young women should be educated in schools, rather than privately at home, and learn appropriate subjects. These subjects include physiognomy, physical exercise, botany, chemistry, mineralogy, and experimental philosophy. They should familiarise themselves with arts and manufactures through visits to sites like Coalbrookdale, and Wedgwood's potteries; they should learn how to handle money, and study modern languages. Darwin's educational philosophy took the view that men and women should have different capabilities, skills, interests, and spheres of action, where the woman's education was designed to support and serve male accomplishment and financial reward, and to relieve him of daily responsibility for children and the chores of life. In the context of the times, this program may be read as a modernising influence in the sense that the woman was at least to learn about the \"man's world\", although not be allowed to participate in it. The text was written seven years after A Vindication of the Rights of Woman by Mary Wollstonecraft, which has the central argument that women should be educated in a rational manner to give them the opportunity to contribute to society.\nSome women of Darwin's era were receiving more substantial education and participating in the broader world. An example is Susanna Wright, who was raised in Lancashire and became an American colonist associated with the Midlands Enlightenment. It is not known whether Darwin and Wright knew each other, although they definitely knew many people in common. Other women who received substantial education and who participated in the broader world (albeit sometimes anonymously) whom Darwin definitely knew were Maria Jacson and Anna Seward.\nLunar Society.\nThese dates indicate the year in which Darwin became friends with these people, who, in turn, became members of the Lunar Society. The Lunar Society existed from 1765 to 1813.\nBefore 1765:\nAfter 1765:\nDarwin also established a lifelong friendship with Benjamin Franklin, who shared Darwin's support for the American and French revolutions. The Lunar Society was instrumental as an intellectual driving force behind England's Industrial Revolution.\nThe members of the Lunar Society, and especially Darwin, opposed the slave trade. He attacked it in \"The Botanic Garden\" (1789\u20131791), and in \"The Loves of Plants\" (1789), \"The Economy of Vegetation\" (1791), and the \"Phytologia\" (1800).\nOther activities.\nIn addition to the Lunar Society, Erasmus Darwin belonged to the influential Derby Philosophical Society, as did his brother-in-law Samuel Fox (see family tree below). He experimented with the use of air and gases to alleviate infections and cancers in patients. A Pneumatic Institution was established at Clifton in 1799 for clinically testing these ideas. He conducted research into the formation of clouds, on which he published in 1788. He also inspired Robert Weldon's Somerset Coal Canal caisson lock.\nIn 1792, Darwin was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia.\nMary Shelley in her introduction to the 1831 edition of \"Frankenstein\" notes that some unspecified \"experiments of Dr. Darwin\" were part of the evening discussion topics leading up to her inspiration and creation of her novel.\nCosmological speculation.\nContemporary literature dates the cosmological theories of the Big Bang and Big Crunch to the 19th and 20th centuries. However Erasmus Darwin had speculated on these sorts of events in \"The Botanic Garden, A Poem in Two Parts: Part 1, The Economy of Vegetation, 1791:\"\n\"Roll on, ye Stars! exult in youthful prime,Mark with bright curves the printless steps of Time;Near and more near your beamy cars approach,And lessening orbs on lessening orbs encroach; \u2014Flowers of the sky! ye too to age must yield,Frail as your silken sisters of the field.Star after star from Heaven's high arch shall rush,Suns sink on suns, and systems, systems crush,Headlong, extinct, to one dark centre fall,And death and night and chaos mingle all:\u2014 Till o'er the wreck, emerging from the storm,Immortal Nature lifts her changeful form,Mounts from her funeral pyre on wings of flame,And soars and shines, another and the same!\"\nInventions.\nDarwin was the inventor of several devices, though he did not patent any. He believed this would damage his reputation as a doctor, and encouraged his friends to patent their own modifications of his designs.\nRocket engine.\nIn notes dating to 1779, Darwin made a sketch of a simple hydrogen-oxygen rocket engine, with gas tanks connected by plumbing and pumps to an elongated combustion chamber and expansion nozzle, a concept not to be seen again until one century later.\nSurviving houses.\nErasmus Darwin House, his home in Lichfield, is now a museum dedicated to Erasmus Darwin and his life's work. A school in nearby Chasetown recently converted to Academy status and is now known as Erasmus Darwin Academy."}
{"id": "9300", "revid": "7038407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9300", "title": "Ediacaran", "text": "The Ediacaran Period ( ) is a geological period that spans 94 million years from the end of the Cryogenian Period 635 million years ago (Mya), to the beginning of the Cambrian Period 541 Mya. It marks the end of the Proterozoic Eon, and the beginning of the Phanerozoic Eon. It is named after the Ediacara Hills of South Australia.\nThe Ediacaran Period's status as an official geological period was ratified in 2004 by the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS), making it the first new geological period declared in 120 years.\nAlthough the period takes its name from the Ediacara Hills where geologist Reg Sprigg first discovered fossils of the eponymous Ediacaran biota in 1946, the type section is located in the bed of the Enorama Creek within Brachina Gorge in the Flinders Ranges of South Australia, at .\nEdiacaran and Vendian.\nThe Ediacaran Period overlaps, but is shorter than the Vendian Period, a name that was earlier, in 1952, proposed by Russian geologist and paleontologist Boris Sokolov. The Vendian concept was formed stratigraphically top-down, and the lower boundary of the Cambrian became the upper boundary of the Vendian.\nPaleontological substantiation of this boundary was worked out separately for the siliciclastic basin (base of the Baltic Stage of the Eastern European Platform) and for the carbonate basin (base of the Tommotian stage of the Siberian Platform).\nThe lower boundary of the Vendian was suggested to be defined at the base of the Varanger (Laplandian) tillites.\nThe Vendian in its type area consists of large subdivisions such as Laplandian, Redkino, Kotlin and Rovno regional stages with the globally traceable subdivisions and their boundaries, including its lower one.\nThe Redkino, Kotlin and Rovno regional stages have been substantiated in the type area of the Vendian on the basis of the abundant organic-walled microfossils, megascopic algae, metazoan body fossils and ichnofossils.\nThe lower boundary of the Vendian could have a biostratigraphic substantiation as well taking into consideration the worldwide occurrence of the Pertatataka assemblage of giant acanthomorph acritarchs.\nUpper and lower boundaries.\nThe Ediacaran Period (c. 635\u2013541 Mya) represents the time from the end of global Marinoan glaciation to the first appearance worldwide of somewhat complicated trace fossils (\"Treptichnus pedum\" (Seilacher, 1955)).\nAlthough the Ediacaran Period does contain soft-bodied fossils, it is unusual in comparison to later periods because its beginning is not defined by a change in the fossil record. Rather, the beginning is defined at the base of a chemically distinctive carbonate layer that is referred to as a \"cap carbonate\", because it caps glacial deposits.\nThis bed is characterized by an unusual depletion of 13C that indicates a sudden climatic change at the end of the Marinoan ice age. The lower global boundary stratotype section (GSSP) of the Ediacaran is at the base of the cap carbonate (Nuccaleena Formation), immediately above the Elatina diamictite in the Enorama Creek section, Brachina Gorge, Flinders Ranges, South Australia.\nThe GSSP of the upper boundary of the Ediacaran is the lower boundary of the Cambrian on the SE coast of Newfoundland approved by the International Commission on Stratigraphy as a preferred alternative to the base of the Tommotian Stage in Siberia which was selected on the basis of the ichnofossil \"Treptichnus pedum\" (Seilacher, 1955). In the history of stratigraphy it was the first case of usage of bioturbations for the System boundary definition.\nNevertheless, the definitions of the lower and upper boundaries of the Ediacaran on the basis of chemostratigraphy and ichnofossils are disputable.\nCap carbonates generally have a restricted geographic distribution (due to specific conditions of their precipitation) and usually siliciclastic sediments laterally replace the cap carbonates in a rather short distance but cap carbonates do not occur above every tillite elsewhere in the world.\nThe C-isotope chemostratigraphic characteristics obtained for contemporaneous cap carbonates in different parts of the world may be variable in a wide range owing to different degrees of secondary alteration of carbonates, dissimilar criteria used for selection of the least altered samples, and, as far as the C-isotope data are concerned, due to primary lateral variations of \u03b4 l3Ccarb in the upper layer of the ocean.\nFurthermore, Oman presents in its stratigraphic record a large negative carbon isotope excursion, within the Shuram Formation that is clearly away from any glacial evidence strongly questioning systematic association of negative \u03b4 l3Ccarb excursion and glacial events. Also, the Shuram excursion is prolonged and is estimated to last for ~9.0 Myrs.\nAs to the \"Treptichnus pedum\", a reference ichnofossil for the lower boundary of the Cambrian, its usage for the stratigraphic detection of this boundary is always risky, because of the occurrence of very similar trace fossils belonging to the Treptichnids group well below the level of \"T. pedum\" in Namibia, Spain and Newfoundland, and possibly, in the western United States. The stratigraphic range of \"T. pedum\" overlaps the range of the Ediacaran fossils in Namibia, and probably in Spain.\nSubdivisions.\nThe Ediacaran period is not yet formally subdivided, but a proposed scheme recognises an Upper Ediacaran whose base corresponds with the Gaskiers glaciation, a Terminal Ediacaran Stage starting around , a preceding stage beginning around 557 Ma with the earliest widespread Ediacaran biota fossils; two proposed schemes differ on whether the lower strata should be divided into an Early and Middle Ediacaran or not, because it's not clear whether the Shuram excursion (which would divide the Early and Middle) is a separate event from the Gaskiers, or whether the two events are correlated.\nAbsolute dating.\nThe dating of the rock type section of the Ediacaran Period in South Australia has proven uncertain due to lack of overlying igneous material. Therefore, the age range of 635 to 542 million years is based on correlations to other countries where dating has been possible. The base age of approximately 635 million years is based on U\u2013Pb (uranium\u2013lead) isochron dating from Namibia and China.\nApplying this age to the base of the Ediacaran assumes that cap carbonates are laid down synchronously around the world and that the correct cap carbonate layers have been selected in such diverse locales as Australian and Namibia. This is controversial because an age of about 580 million years has been obtained for glacial rocks in Tasmania which some scientists tentatively assign to those just beneath the Ediacaran rocks of the Flinders Ranges. The age of the top is the same as the widely recognised age for the base of the Cambrian Period 542\u00b1 0.3 Mya, producing a misalignment, as the end of the Edicarian Period should mark the start of the Cambrian Period.\nBiota.\nThe fossil record from the Ediacaran Period is sparse, as more easily fossilized hard-shelled animals had yet to evolve. The Ediacaran biota include the oldest definite multicellular organisms (with specialized tissues), the most common types of which resemble segmented worms, fronds, disks, or immobile bags.\nSome hard-shelled agglutinated foraminifera are known from latest Ediacaran sediments of western Siberia.\nEdiacara biota bear little resemblance to modern lifeforms, and their relationship even with the immediately following lifeforms of the Cambrian explosion is rather difficult to interpret. More than 100 genera have been described, and well known forms include \"Arkarua\", \"Charnia\", \"Dickinsonia\", \"Ediacaria\", \"Marywadea\", \"Cephalonega\", \"Pteridinium\", and \"Yorgia\".\nThere is evidence for a mass extinction during this period from early animals changing the environment.\nAstronomical factors.\nThe relative proximity of the Moon at this time meant that tides were stronger and more rapid than they are now. The day was 21.9\u00b10.4 hours, and there were 13.1\u00b10.1 synodic months/year and 400\u00b17 solar days/year.\nDocumentaries.\nA few English language documentaries have featured the Ediacaran period and biota:"}
{"id": "9301", "revid": "37856588", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9301", "title": "Erotica", "text": "Erotica is (in a broad sense) any literary or artistic work that deals substantively with subject matter that is erotically stimulating or sexually arousing but (in a strict sense) is not generally considered to be pornographic. Erotic art may use any artistic form to depict erotic content, including painting, sculpture, drama, film or music. Erotic literature and erotic photography have become genres in their own right.\nCuriosa is erotica and pornography as discrete, collectable items, usually in published or printed form. In the antiquarian book trade, pornographic works are often listed under \"curiosa\", \"erotica\" or \"facetiae\".\nErotica and pornography.\nA distinction is often made between erotica and pornography (as well as the lesser-known genre of sexual entertainment, ribaldry), although some viewers may not distinguish between them. A key distinction, some have argued, is that pornography's objective is the graphic depiction of sexually explicit scenes, while erotica \"seeks to tell a story that involves sexual themes\" that include a more plausible depiction of human sexuality than in pornography. Additionally, works considered degrading or exploitative tend to be classified by those who see them as such, as \"porn\" rather than as \"erotica\" and consequently, pornography is often described as exploitative or degrading. Many countries have laws banning or at least regulating what is considered pornographic material, a situation which generally does not apply to erotica.\nFor the anti-pornography activist Andrea Dworkin, \"Erotica is simply high-class pornography; better produced, better conceived, better executed, better packaged, designed for a better class of consumer.\" Feminist writer Gloria Steinem distinguishes erotica from pornography, writing: \"Erotica is as different from pornography as love is from rape, as dignity is from humiliation, as partnership is from slavery, as pleasure is from pain.\" Steinem's argument hinges on the distinction between reciprocity versus domination, as she writes: \"Blatant or subtle, pornography involves no equal power or mutuality. In fact, much of the tension and drama comes from the clear idea that one person is dominating the other.\""}
{"id": "9302", "revid": "14965160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9302", "title": "Existence", "text": "Existence is the ability of an entity to interact with physical or mental reality. In philosophy, it refers to the ontological property of being.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"existence\" comes from Old French \"existence\", from Medieval Latin .\nContext in philosophy.\nMaterialism holds that the only things that exist are matter and energy, that all things are composed of material, that all actions require energy, and that all phenomena (including consciousness) are the result of the interaction of matter. Dialectical materialism does not make a distinction between being and existence, and defines it as the objective reality of various forms of matter.\nIdealism holds that the only things that exist are thoughts and ideas, while the material world is secondary. In idealism, existence is sometimes contrasted with transcendence, the ability to go beyond the limits of existence. As a form of epistemological idealism, rationalism interprets existence as cognizable and rational, that all things are composed of strings of reasoning, requiring an associated idea of the thing, and all phenomena (including consciousness) are the result of an understanding of the imprint from the noumenal world in which lies beyond the thing-in-itself.\nIn scholasticism, existence of a thing is not derived from its essence but is determined by the creative volition of God, the dichotomy of existence and essence demonstrates that the dualism of the created universe is only resolvable through God. Empiricism recognizes existence of singular facts, which are not derivable and which are observable through empirical experience.\nThe exact definition of existence is one of the most important and fundamental topics of ontology, the philosophical study of the nature of being, existence, or reality in general, as well as of the basic categories of being and their relations. Traditionally listed as a part of the major branch of philosophy known as metaphysics, ontology deals with questions concerning what things or entities exist or can be said to exist, and how such things or entities can be grouped, related within a hierarchy, and subdivided according to similarities and differences.\nHistorical conceptions.\nIn the Western tradition of philosophy, the earliest known comprehensive treatments of the subject are from Plato's \"Phaedo\", \"Republic\", and \"Statesman\" and Aristotle's \"Metaphysics\", though earlier fragmentary writing exists. Aristotle developed a comprehensive theory of being, according to which only individual things, called substances, fully have to be, but other things such as relations, quantity, time, and place (called the categories) have a derivative kind of being, dependent on individual things. In Aristotle's \"Metaphysics\", there are four causes of existence or change in nature: the material cause, the formal cause, the efficient cause and the final cause.\nThe Neo-Platonists and some early Christian philosophers argued about whether existence had any reality except in the mind of God. Some taught that existence was a snare and a delusion, that the world, the flesh, and the devil existed only to tempt weak humankind away from God.\nIn Hindu philosophy, the term Advaita refers to its idea that the true self, Atman, is the same as the highest metaphysical Reality (Brahman). The Upanishads describe the universe, and the human experience, as an interplay of Purusha (the eternal, unchanging principles, consciousness) and Prak\u1e5bti (the temporary, changing material world, nature).The former manifests itself as \u0100tman (Soul, Self), and the latter as M\u0101y\u0101. The Upanishads refer to the knowledge of Atman as \"true knowledge\" (\"Vidya\"), and the knowledge of Maya as \"not true knowledge\" (\"Avidya\", Nescience, lack of awareness, lack of true knowledge).\nThe medieval philosopher Thomas Aquinas argued that God is pure being, and that in God essence and existence are the same. More specifically, what is identical in God, according to Aquinas, is God's essence and God's \"actus essendi\". At about the same time, the nominalist philosopher William of Ockham argued, in Book I of his \"Summa Totius Logicae\" (\"Treatise on all Logic\", written some time before 1327), that Categories are not a form of Being in their own right, but derivative on the existence of individuals.\nDharmic \"middle way\" view.\nThe Indian philosopher Nagarjuna (c. 150\u2013250 CE) largely advanced existence concepts and founded the Madhyamaka school of Mah\u0101y\u0101na Buddhism.\nIn Eastern philosophy, Anicca (Sanskrit \"anitya\") or \"impermanence\" describes existence. It refers to the fact that all conditioned things (sankhara) are in a constant state of flux. In reality there is no thing that ultimately ceases to exist; only the appearance of a thing ceases as it changes from one form to another. Imagine a leaf that falls to the ground and decomposes. While the appearance and relative existence of the leaf ceases, the components that formed the leaf become particulate material that goes on to form new plants. Buddhism teaches a middle way, avoiding the extreme views of eternalism and nihilism. The middle way recognizes there are vast differences between the way things are perceived to exist and the way things really exist. The differences are reconciled in the concept of Shunyata by addressing the existing object's served purpose for the subject's identity in being. What exists is in non-existence, because the subject changes.\nTrailokya elaborates on three kinds of existence, those of desire, form, and formlessness in which there are karmic rebirths. Taken further to the Trikaya doctrine, it describes how the Buddha exists. In this philosophy, it is accepted that Buddha exists in more than one absolute way.\nEarly modern philosophy.\nThe early modern treatment of the subject derives from Antoine Arnauld and Pierre Nicole's \"Logic\", or \"The Art of Thinking\", better known as the \"Port-Royal Logic\", first published in 1662. Arnauld thought that a proposition or judgment consists of taking two different ideas and either putting them together or rejecting them:\nThe two terms are joined by the verb \"is\" (or \"is not\", if the predicate is denied of the subject). Thus every proposition has three components: the two terms, and the \"copula\" that connects or separates them. Even when the proposition has only two words, the three terms are still there. For example, \"God loves humanity\", really means \"God is a lover of humanity\", \"God exists\" means \"God is a thing\".\nThis theory of judgment dominated logic for centuries, but it has some obvious difficulties: it only considers proposition of the form \"All A are B.\", a form logicians call universal. It does not allow propositions of the form \"Some A are B\", a form logicians call existential. If neither A nor B includes the idea of existence, then \"some A are B\" simply adjoins A to B. Conversely, if A or B do include the idea of existence in the way that \"triangle\" contains the idea \"three angles equal to two right angles\", then \"A exists\" is automatically true, and we have an ontological proof of A's existence. (Indeed, Arnauld's contemporary Descartes famously argued so, regarding the concept \"God\" (discourse 4, Meditation 5)). Arnauld's theory was current until the middle of the nineteenth century.\nDavid Hume argued that the claim that a thing exists, when added to our notion of a thing, does not add anything to the concept. For example, if we form a complete notion of Moses, and superadd to that notion the claim that Moses existed, we are not adding anything to the notion of Moses.\nKant also argued that existence is not a \"real\" predicate, but gave no explanation of how this is possible. Indeed, his famous discussion of the subject is merely a restatement of Arnauld's doctrine that in the proposition \"God is omnipotent\", the verb \"is\" signifies the joining or separating of two concepts such as \"God\" and \"omnipotence\".\nSchopenhauer claimed that \u201ceverything that exists for knowledge, and hence the whole of this world, only object in relation to the subject, the perception of the perceiver, in a word, representation.\u201d According to him there can be \"No object without subject\" because \"everything objective is already conditioned as such in manifold ways by the knowing subject with the forms of its knowing, and presupposes these forms...\"\nPredicative nature.\nJohn Stuart Mill (and also Kant's pupil Herbart) argued that the predicative nature of existence was proved by sentences like \"A centaur is a poetic fiction\" or \"A greatest number is impossible\" (Herbart). Franz Brentano challenged this; so also (as is better known) did Frege. Brentano argued that we can join the concept represented by a noun phrase \"an A\" to the concept represented by an adjective \"B\" to give the concept represented by the noun phrase \"a B-A\". For example, we can join \"a man\" to \"wise\" to give \"a wise man\". But the noun phrase \"a wise man\" is not a sentence, whereas \"some man is wise\" is a sentence. Hence the copula must do more than merely join or separate concepts. Furthermore, adding \"exists\" to \"a wise man\", to give the complete sentence \"a wise man exists\" has the same effect as joining \"some man\" to \"wise\" using the copula. So the copula has the same effect as \"exists\". Brentano argued that every categorical proposition can be translated into an existential one without change in meaning and that the \"exists\" and \"does not exist\" of the existential proposition take the place of the copula. He showed this by the following examples:\nFrege developed a similar view (though later) in his great work \"The Foundations of Arithmetic\", as did Charles Sanders Peirce (but Peirce held that ). The Frege-Brentano view is the basis of the dominant position in modern Anglo-American philosophy: that existence is asserted by the existential quantifier (as expressed by Quine's slogan \"To be is to be the value of a variable.\" \u2014 \"On What There Is\", 1948).\nSemantics.\nIn mathematical logic, there are two quantifiers, \"some\" and \"all\", though as Brentano (1838\u20131917) pointed out, we can make do with just one quantifier and negation. The first of these quantifiers, \"some\", is also expressed as \"there exists\". Thus, in the sentence \"There exists a man\", the term \"man\" is asserted to be part of existence. But we can also assert, \"There exists a triangle.\" Is a \"triangle\"\u2014an abstract idea\u2014part of existence in the same way that a \"man\"\u2014a physical body\u2014is part of existence? Do abstractions such as goodness, blindness, and virtue exist in the same sense that chairs, tables, and houses exist? What categories, or kinds of thing, can be the subject or the predicate of a proposition?\nWorse, does \"existence\" exist?\nIn some statements, existence is implied without being mentioned. The statement \"A bridge crosses the Thames at Hammersmith\" cannot just be about a bridge, the Thames, and Hammersmith. It must be about \"existence\" as well. On the other hand, the statement \"A bridge crosses the Styx at Limbo\" has the same form, but while in the first case we understand a real bridge in the real world made of stone or brick, what \"existence\" would mean in the second case is less clear.\nThe nominalist approach is to argue that certain noun phrases can be \"eliminated\" by rewriting a sentence in a form that has the same meaning but does not contain the noun phrase. Thus Ockham argued that \"Socrates has wisdom\", which apparently asserts the existence of a reference for \"wisdom\", can be rewritten as \"Socrates is wise\", which contains only the referring phrase \"Socrates\". This method became widely accepted in the twentieth century by the analytic school of philosophy.\nHowever, this argument may be inverted by realists in arguing that since the sentence \"Socrates is wise\" can be rewritten as \"Socrates has wisdom\", this proves the existence of a hidden referent for \"wise\".\nA further problem is that human beings seem to process information about fictional characters in much the same way that they process information about real people. For example, in the 2008 United States presidential election, a politician and actor named Fred Thompson ran for the Republican Party nomination. In polls, potential voters identified Fred Thompson as a \"law and order\" candidate. Thompson plays a fictional character on the television series \"Law and Order\". The people who make the comment are aware that \"Law and Order\" is fiction, but at some level, they may process fiction as if it were fact, a process included in what is called the Paradox of Fiction. Another example of this is the common experience of actresses who play the villain in a soap opera being accosted in public as if they are to blame for the actions of the characters they play.\nA scientist might make a clear distinction between objects that exist, and assert that all objects that exist are made up of either matter or energy. But in the layperson's worldview, existence includes real, fictional, and even contradictory objects. Thus if we reason from the statement \"Pegasus flies\" to the statement \"Pegasus exists\", we are not asserting that Pegasus is made up of atoms, but rather that Pegasus exists in the worldview of classical myth. When a mathematician reasons from the statement \"ABC is a triangle\" to the statement \"triangles exist\", the mathematician is not asserting that triangles are made up of atoms but rather that triangles exist within a particular mathematical model.\nModern approaches.\nAccording to Bertrand Russell's Theory of Descriptions, the negation operator in a singular sentence can take either wide or narrow scope: we distinguish between \"some S is not P\" (where negation takes \"narrow scope\") and \"it is not the case that 'some S is P'\" (where negation takes \"wide scope\"). The problem with this view is that there appears to be no such scope distinction in the case of proper names. The sentences \"Socrates is not bald\" and \"it is not the case that Socrates is bald\" both appear to have the same meaning, and they both appear to assert or presuppose the existence of someone (Socrates) who is not bald, so that negation takes a narrow scope. However, Russell's theory analyses proper names into a logical structure which makes sense of this problem. According to Russell, Socrates can be analyzed into the form 'The Philosopher of Greece.' In the wide scope, this would then read: It is not the case that there existed a philosopher of Greece who was bald. In the narrow scope, it would read the Philosopher of Greece was not bald.\nAccording to the direct-reference view, an early version of which was originally proposed by Bertrand Russell, and perhaps earlier by Gottlob Frege, a proper name strictly has no meaning when there is no object to which it refers. This view relies on the argument that the semantic function of a proper name is to tell us \"which\" object bears the name, and thus to identify some object. But no object can be identified if none exists. Thus, a proper name must have a bearer if it is to be meaningful.\nExistence in the wide and narrow senses.\nAccording to the \"two sense\" view of existence, which derives from Alexius Meinong, existential statements fall into two classes.\nThe problem is then evaded as follows. \"Pegasus flies\" implies existence in the wide sense, for it implies that \"something\" flies. But it does not imply existence in the narrow sense, for we deny existence in this sense by saying that Pegasus does not exist. In effect, the world of all things divides, on this view, into those (like Socrates, the planet Venus, and New York City) that have existed in the narrow sense, and those (like Sherlock Holmes, the goddess Venus, and Minas Tirith) that do not.\nHowever, common sense suggests the non-existence of such things as fictional characters or places.\nEuropean views.\nInfluenced by the views of Brentano's pupil Alexius Meinong, and by Edmund Husserl, Germanophone and Francophone philosophy took a different direction regarding the question of existence.\nAnti-realist arguments.\nAnti-realism is the view of idealists who are skeptics about the physical world, maintaining either: (1) that nothing exists outside the mind, or (2) that we would have no access to a mind-independent reality even if it may exist. Realists, in contrast, hold that perceptions or sense data are caused by mind-independent objects. An \"anti-realist\" who denies that other minds exist (i. e., a solipsist) is different from an \"anti-realist\" who claims that there is no fact of the matter as to whether or not there are unobservable other minds (i. e., a logical behaviorist)."}
{"id": "9303", "revid": "32904124", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9303", "title": "Economy (disambiguation)", "text": "An economy is an area of the production, distribution, or trade, and consumption of goods and services by different agents in a given geographical location in various countries\nEconomy may also refer to:"}
{"id": "9304", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9304", "title": "Economy/Inflation", "text": ""}
{"id": "9307", "revid": "30483022", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9307", "title": "Demand-pull inflation", "text": "Demand-pull inflation is asserted to arise when aggregate demand in an economy outpaces aggregate supply. It involves inflation rising as real gross domestic product rises and unemployment falls, as the economy moves along the Phillips curve. This is commonly described as \"\"too much money chasing too few goods.\" More accurately, it should be described as involving \"too much money spent chasing too few goods,\"\" since only money that is spent on goods and services can cause inflation. This would not be expected to happen, unless the economy is already at a full employment level. It is the opposite of cost-push inflation.\nHow it happens.\nIn Keynesian theory, increased employment results in increased aggregate demand (AD), which leads to further hiring by firms to increase output. Due to capacity constraints, this increase in output will eventually become so small that the price of the good will rise.\nAt first, unemployment will go down, shifting AD1 to AD2, which increases demand (noted as \"Y\") by (Y2 \u2212 Y1). This increase in demand means more workers are needed, and then AD will be shifted from AD2 to AD3, but this time much less is produced than in the previous shift, but the price level has risen from P2 to P3, a much higher increase in price than in the previous shift. \nThis increase in price is what causes inflation in an overheating economy.\nDemand-pull inflation is in contrast with cost-push inflation, when price and wage increases are being transmitted from one sector to another. \nHowever, these can be considered as different aspects of an overall inflationary process: demand-pull inflation explains how price inflation starts, and cost-push inflation demonstrates why inflation once begun is so difficult to stop."}
{"id": "9308", "revid": "957539885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9308", "title": "Cost-push inflation", "text": "Cost-push inflation is a type of inflation caused by substantial increases in the cost of important goods or services where no suitable alternative is available. Higher prices are then the result, as costs of production increases due to a decreased aggregate supply. It stands in contrast to demand-pull inflation. Both accounts of inflation have at various times been put forward with oftentimes inconclusive evidence as to which explanation is superior. A situation that has been often cited of this was the oil crisis of the 1970s, which some economists see as a major cause of the inflation experienced in the Western world in that decade. It is argued that this inflation resulted from increases in the cost of petroleum imposed by the member states of OPEC. Since petroleum is so important to industrialized economies, a large increase in its price can lead to the increase in the price of most products, raising the price level. Some economists argue that such a change in the price level can raise the inflation rate over longer periods, due to adaptive expectations and the price/wage spiral, so that a supply shock can have persistent effects. "}
{"id": "9309", "revid": "38173635", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9309", "title": "Extractor (mathematics)", "text": "An formula_1 -extractor is a bipartite graph with formula_2 nodes on the left and formula_3 nodes on the right such that each node on the left has formula_4 neighbors (on the right), which has the added property that\nfor any subset formula_5 of the left vertices of size at least formula_6, the distribution on right vertices obtained by choosing a random node in formula_5 and then following a random edge to get a node x on the right side is formula_8-close to the uniform distribution in terms of total variation distance.\nA disperser is a related graph. \nAn equivalent way to view an extractor is as a bivariate function \nin the natural way. With this view it turns out that the extractor property is equivalent to: for any source of randomness formula_10 that gives formula_11 bits with min-entropy formula_12, the distribution formula_13 is formula_8-close to formula_15, where formula_16 denotes the uniform distribution on formula_17.\nExtractors are interesting when they can be constructed with small formula_18 relative to formula_2 and formula_3 is as close to formula_21 (the total randomness in the input sources) as possible.\nExtractor functions were originally researched as a way to \"extract\" randomness from weakly random sources. \"See\" randomness extractor.\nUsing the probabilistic method it is easy to show that extractor graphs with really good parameters exist. The challenge is to find explicit or polynomial time computable examples of such graphs with good parameters. Algorithms that compute extractor (and disperser) graphs have found many applications in computer science."}
{"id": "9310", "revid": "41714358", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9310", "title": "Enterprise resource planning", "text": "Enterprise resource planning (ERP) is the integrated management of main business processes, often in real time and mediated by software and technology. ERP is usually referred to as a category of business management software\u2014typically a suite of integrated applications\u2014that an organization can use to collect, store, manage, and interpret data from many business activities. ERP Systems can be local based or Cloud-based. Cloud based applications are growing in recent days due to information being readily available from any location with internet access.\nERP provides an integrated and continuously updated view of core business processes using common databases maintained by a database management system. ERP systems track business resources\u2014cash, raw materials, production capacity\u2014and the status of business commitments: orders, purchase orders, and payroll. The applications that make up the system share data across various departments (manufacturing, purchasing, sales, accounting, etc.) that provide the data. ERP facilitates information flow between all business functions and manages connections to outside stakeholders.\nEnterprise system software is a multibillion-dollar industry that produces components supporting a variety of business functions. IT investments have, as of 2011, become one of the largest categories of capital expenditure in United States-based businesses. Though early ERP systems focused on large enterprises, smaller enterprises increasingly use ERP systems. In 2019, the global ERP software market grew by 9%, resulting in a worldwide value of approximately $39 billion in total software revenue.\nThe ERP system integrates varied organizational systems and facilitates error-free transactions and production, thereby enhancing the organization's efficiency. However, developing an ERP system differs from traditional system development.\nERP systems run on a variety of computer hardware and network configurations, typically using a database as an information repository.\nOrigin.\nThe Gartner Group first used the acronym ERP in the 1990s to include the capabilities of material requirements planning (MRP), and the later manufacturing resource planning (MRP II), as well as computer-integrated manufacturing. Without replacing these terms, ERP came to represent a larger whole that reflected the evolution of application integration beyond manufacturing.\nNot all ERP packages are developed from a manufacturing core; ERP vendors variously began assembling their packages with finance-and-accounting, maintenance, and human-resource components. By the mid-1990s ERP systems addressed all core enterprise functions. Governments and non\u2013profit organizations also began to use ERP systems. An \"ERP system selection methodology\" is a formal process for selecting an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system. Existing methodologies include:\nExpansion.\nERP systems experienced rapid growth in the 1990s. Because of the year 2000 problem many companies took the opportunity to replace their old systems with ERP.\nERP systems initially focused on automating back office functions that did not directly affect customers and the public. Front office functions, such as customer relationship management (CRM), dealt directly with customers, or e-business systems such as e-commerce, e-government, e-telecom, and e-finance\u2014or supplier relationship management (SRM) became integrated later, when the internet simplified communicating with external parties.\n\"ERP II\" was coined in 2000 in an article by Gartner Publications entitled \"ERP Is Dead\u2014Long Live ERP II\". It describes web\u2013based software that provides real\u2013time access to ERP systems to employees and partners (such as suppliers and customers). The ERP II role expands traditional ERP resource optimization and transaction processing. Rather than just manage buying, selling, etc.\u2014ERP II leverages information in the resources under its management to help the enterprise collaborate with other enterprises.\nERP II is more flexible than the first generation ERP. Rather than confine ERP system capabilities within the organization, it goes beyond the corporate walls to interact with other systems. Enterprise application suite is an alternate name for such systems. ERP II systems are typically used to enable collaborative initiatives such as supply chain management (SCM), customer relationship management (CRM), and business intelligence (BI) among business partner organizations through the use of various e-business technologies.\nDevelopers now make more effort to integrate mobile devices with the ERP system. ERP vendors are extending ERP to these devices, along with other business applications. Technical stakes of modern ERP concern integration\u2014hardware, applications, networking, supply chains. ERP now covers more functions and roles\u2014including decision making, stakeholders' relationships, standardization, transparency, globalization, etc.\nCharacteristics.\nERP systems typically include the following characteristics:\nFunctional areas.\nAn ERP system covers the following common functional areas. In many ERP systems, these are called and grouped together as ERP modules:\nGRP.\nGovernment resource planning (GRP) is the equivalent of an ERP for the public sector and an integrated office automation system for government bodies. The software structure, modularization, core algorithms and main interfaces do not differ from other ERPs, and ERP software suppliers manage to adapt their systems to government agencies.\nBoth system implementations, in private and public organizations, are adopted to improve productivity and overall business performance in organizations, but comparisons (private vs. public) of implementations shows that the main factors influencing ERP implementation success in the public sector are cultural.\nBest practices.\nMost ERP systems incorporate best practices. This means the software reflects the vendor's interpretation of the most effective way to perform each business process. Systems vary in how conveniently the customer can modify these practices. In addition, best practices reduced risk by 71% compared to other software implementations.\nUse of best practices eases compliance with requirements such as IFRS, Sarbanes-Oxley, or Basel II. They can also help comply with de facto industry standards, such as electronic funds transfer. This is because the procedure can be readily codified within the ERP software and replicated with confidence across multiple businesses that share that business requirement.\nConnectivity to plant floor information.\nERP systems connect to real\u2013time data and transaction data in a variety of ways. These systems are typically configured by systems integrators, who bring unique knowledge on process, equipment, and vendor solutions.\nDirect integration\u2014ERP systems have connectivity (communications to plant floor equipment) as part of their product offering. This requires that the vendors offer specific support for the plant floor equipment their customers operate. \nDatabase integration\u2014ERP systems connect to plant floor data sources through staging tables in a database. Plant floor systems deposit the necessary information into the database. The ERP system reads the information in the table. The benefit of staging is that ERP vendors do not need to master the complexities of equipment integration. Connectivity becomes the responsibility of the systems integrator.\nEnterprise appliance transaction modules (EATM)\u2014These devices communicate directly with plant floor equipment and with the ERP system via methods supported by the ERP system. EATM can employ a staging table, web services, or system\u2013specific program interfaces (APIs). An EATM offers the benefit of being an off\u2013the\u2013shelf solution.\nCustom\u2013integration solutions\u2014Many system integrators offer custom solutions. These systems tend to have the highest level of initial integration cost, and can have a higher long term maintenance and reliability costs. Long term costs can be minimized through careful system testing and thorough documentation. Custom\u2013integrated solutions typically run on workstation or server-class computers.\nImplementation.\nERP's scope usually implies significant changes to staff work processes and practices. Generally, three types of services are available to help implement such changes: consulting, customization, and support. Implementation time depends on business size, number of modules, customization, the scope of process changes, and the readiness of the customer to take ownership for the project. Modular ERP systems can be implemented in stages. The typical project for a large enterprise takes about 14 months and requires around 150 consultants. Small projects can require months; multinational and other large implementations can take years. Customization can substantially increase implementation times.\nBesides that, information processing influences various business functions e.g. some large corporations like Wal-Mart use a just in time inventory system. This reduces inventory storage and increases delivery efficiency, and requires up-to-date data. Before 2014, Walmart used a system called Inforem developed by IBM to manage replenishment.\nProcess preparation.\nImplementing ERP typically requires changes in existing business processes. Poor understanding of needed process changes prior to starting implementation is a main reason for project failure. The difficulties could be related to the system, business process, infrastructure, training, or lack of motivation.\nIt is therefore crucial that organizations thoroughly analyze business processes before they deploy an ERP software. Analysis can identify opportunities for process modernization. It also enables an assessment of the alignment of current processes with those provided by the ERP system. Research indicates that risk of business process mismatch is decreased by:\nERP implementation is considerably more difficult (and politically charged) in decentralized organizations, because they often have different processes, business rules, data semantics, authorization hierarchies, and decision centers. This may require migrating some business units before others, delaying implementation to work through the necessary changes for each unit, possibly reducing integration (e.g., linking via Master data management) or customizing the system to meet specific needs.\nA potential disadvantage is that adopting \"standard\" processes can lead to a loss of competitive advantage. While this has happened, losses in one area are often offset by gains in other areas, increasing overall competitive advantage.\nConfiguration.\nConfiguring an ERP system is largely a matter of balancing the way the organization wants the system to work with the way it was designed to work. ERP systems typically include many settings that modify system operations. For example, an organization can select the type of inventory accounting\u2014FIFO or LIFO\u2014to use; whether to recognize revenue by geographical unit, product line, or distribution channel; and whether to pay for shipping costs on customer returns.\nTwo-tier enterprise resource planning.\nTwo-tier ERP software and hardware lets companies run the equivalent of two ERP systems at once: one at the corporate level and one at the division or subsidiary level. For example, a manufacturing company could use an ERP system to manage across the organization using independent global or regional distribution, production or sales centers, and service providers to support the main company's customers. Each independent center (or) subsidiary may have its own business models, workflows, and business processes.\nGiven the realities of globalization, enterprises continuously evaluate how to optimize their regional, divisional, and product or manufacturing strategies to support strategic goals and reduce time-to-market while increasing profitability and delivering value. With two-tier ERP, the regional distribution, production, or sales centers and service providers continue operating under their own business model\u2014separate from the main company, using their own ERP systems. Since these smaller companies' processes and workflows are not tied to main company's processes and workflows, they can respond to local business requirements in multiple locations.\nFactors that affect enterprises' adoption of two-tier ERP systems include:\nCustomization.\nERP systems are theoretically based on industry best practices, and their makers intend that organizations deploy them \"as is\". ERP vendors do offer customers configuration options that let organizations incorporate their own business rules, but gaps in features often remain even after configuration is complete.\nERP customers have several options to reconcile feature gaps, each with their own pros/cons. Technical solutions include rewriting part of the delivered software, writing a homegrown module to work within the ERP system, or interfacing to an external system. These three options constitute varying degrees of system customization\u2014with the first being the most invasive and costly to maintain. Alternatively, there are non-technical options such as changing business practices or organizational policies to better match the delivered ERP feature set. Key differences between customization and configuration include:\nCustomization advantages include that it:\nCustomization disadvantages include that it may:\nExtensions.\nERP systems can be extended with third\u2013party software, often via vendor-supplied interfaces. Extensions offer features such as:\nData migration.\nData migration is the process of moving, copying, and restructuring data from an existing system to the ERP system. Migration is critical to implementation success and requires significant planning. Unfortunately, since migration is one of the final activities before the production phase, it often receives insufficient attention. The following steps can structure migration planning:\nOften, data migration is incomplete because some of the data in the existing system is either incompatible or not needed in the new system. As such, the existing system may need to be kept as an archived database to refer back to once the new ERP system is in place.\nAdvantages.\nThe most fundamental advantage of ERP is that the integration of a myriad of business processes saves time and expense. Management can make decisions faster and with fewer errors. Data becomes visible across the organization. Tasks that benefit from this integration include:\nERP systems centralize business data, which:\nCritical Success Factors.\nCritical success factors are limited number of areas in which results, if satisfactory, will ensure the organization\u2019s successful competitive performance. The CSF method has helped organizations specify their own critical information needs. Achieving satisfactory results in the key areas of critical success factors can ensure competitive advantage leading to improved organizational performance and overcome the challenges faced by organizations. Critical success factors theoretical foundation was improved upon, verified, and validated by several researchers, which underscored the importance of CSFs and its application to ERP project implementations. \nThe application of critical success factors can prevent organizations from making costly mistakes, and the effective usage of CSFs can ensure project success and reduce failures during project implementations. Some of the important critical success factors related to ERP projects are: Know your data, longer and more integrated testing, utilization of the right people, longer stabilization period (hyper-care), clear communication, early buy-in from business, have a Lean Agile program, less customization, ERP projects must be business-driven and not IT-driven.\nPostmodern ERP.\nThe term \"postmodern ERP\" was coined by Gartner in 2013, when it first appeared in the paper series \"Predicts 2014\". According to Gartner's definition of the postmodern ERP strategy, legacy, monolithic and highly customized ERP suites, in which all parts are heavily reliant on each other, should sooner or later be replaced by a mixture of both cloud-based and on-premises applications, which are more loosely coupled and can be easily exchanged if needed.\nThe basic idea is that there should still be a core ERP solution that would cover most important business functions, while other functions will be covered by specialist software solutions that merely extend the core ERP. This concept is similar to the so-called best-of-breed approach to software execution, but it shouldn't be confused with it. While in both cases, applications that make up the whole are relatively loosely connected and quite easily interchangeable, in the case of the latter there is no ERP solution whatsoever. Instead, every business function is covered by a separate software solution.\nThere is, however, no golden rule as to what business functions should be part of the core ERP, and what should be covered by supplementary solutions. According to Gartner, every company must define their own postmodern ERP strategy, based on company's internal and external needs, operations and processes. For example, a company may define that the core ERP solution should cover those business processes that must stay behind the firewall, and therefore, choose to leave their core ERP on-premises. At the same time, another company may decide to host the core ERP solution in the cloud and move only a few ERP modules as supplementary solutions to on-premises.\nThe main benefits that companies will gain from implementing postmodern ERP strategy are speed and flexibility when reacting to unexpected changes in business processes or on the organizational level. With the majority of applications having a relatively loose connection, it is fairly easy to replace or upgrade them whenever necessary. In addition to that, following the examples above, companies can select and combine cloud-based and on-premises solutions that are most suited for their ERP needs. The downside of postmodern ERP is that it will most likely lead to an increased number of software vendors that companies will have to manage, as well as pose additional integration challenges for the central IT."}
{"id": "9311", "revid": "18935077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9311", "title": "Endocrinology", "text": "Endocrinology (from \"endocrine\" + \"-ology\") is a branch of biology and medicine dealing with the endocrine system, its diseases, and its specific secretions known as hormones. It is also concerned with the integration of developmental events proliferation, growth, and differentiation, and the psychological or behavioral activities of metabolism, growth and development, tissue function, sleep, digestion, respiration, excretion, mood, stress, lactation, movement, reproduction, and sensory perception caused by hormones. Specializations include behavioral endocrinology and comparative endocrinology.\nThe endocrine system consists of several glands, all in different parts of the body, that secrete hormones directly into the blood rather than into a duct system. Therefore, endocrine glands are regarded as ductless glands. Hormones have many different functions and modes of action; one hormone may have several effects on different target organs, and, conversely, one target organ may be affected by more than one hormone.\nThe endocrine system.\n Endocrinology is the study of the endocrine system in the human body. This is a system of glands which secrete hormones. Hormones are chemicals that affect the actions of different organ systems in the body. Examples include thyroid hormone, growth hormone, and insulin. The endocrine system involves a number of feedback mechanisms, so that often one hormone (such as thyroid stimulating hormone) will control the action or release of another secondary hormone (such as thyroid hormone). If there is too much of the secondary hormone, it may provide negative feedback to the primary hormone, maintaining homeostasis.\nIn the original 1902 definition by Bayliss and Starling (see below), they specified that, to be classified as a hormone, a chemical must be produced by an organ, be released (in small amounts) into the blood, and be transported by the blood to a distant organ to exert its specific function. This definition holds for most \"classical\" hormones, but there are also paracrine mechanisms (chemical communication between cells within a tissue or organ), autocrine signals (a chemical that acts on the same cell), and intracrine signals (a chemical that acts within the same cell). A neuroendocrine signal is a \"classical\" hormone that is released into the blood by a neurosecretory neuron (see article on neuroendocrinology).\nHormones.\nGriffin and Ojeda identify three different classes of hormones based on their chemical composition:\nAmines.\nAmines, such as norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine (catecholamines), are derived from single amino acids, in this case tyrosine. Thyroid hormones such as 3,5,3\u2019-triiodothyronine (T3) and 3,5,3\u2019,5\u2019-tetraiodothyronine (thyroxine, T4) make up a subset of this class because they derive from the combination of two iodinated tyrosine amino acid residues.\nPeptide and protein.\nPeptide hormones and protein hormones consist of three (in the case of thyrotropin-releasing hormone) to more than 200 (in the case of follicle-stimulating hormone) amino acid residues and can have a molecular mass as large as 31,000 grams per mole. All hormones secreted by the pituitary gland are peptide hormones, as are leptin from adipocytes, ghrelin from the stomach, and insulin from the pancreas.\nSteroid.\nSteroid hormones are converted from their parent compound, cholesterol. Mammalian steroid hormones can be grouped into five groups by the receptors to which they bind: glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, androgens, estrogens, and progestogens. Some forms of vitamin D, such as calcitriol, are steroid-like and bind to homologous receptors, but lack the characteristic fused ring structure of true steroids.\nAs a profession.\nAlthough every organ system secretes and responds to hormones (including the brain, lungs, heart, intestine, skin, and the kidneys), the clinical specialty of endocrinology focuses primarily on the \"endocrine organs\", meaning the organs whose primary function is hormone secretion. These organs include the pituitary, thyroid, adrenals, ovaries, testes, and pancreas.\nAn \"endocrinologist\" is a physician who specializes in treating disorders of the endocrine system, such as diabetes, hyperthyroidism, and many others (see list of diseases).\nWork.\nThe medical specialty of endocrinology involves the diagnostic evaluation of a wide variety of symptoms and variations and the long-term management of disorders of deficiency or excess of one or more hormones.\nThe diagnosis and treatment of endocrine diseases are guided by laboratory tests to a greater extent than for most specialties. Many diseases are investigated through \"excitation/stimulation\" or \"inhibition/suppression\" testing. This might involve injection with a stimulating agent to test the function of an endocrine organ. Blood is then sampled to assess the changes of the relevant hormones or metabolites. An endocrinologist needs extensive knowledge of clinical chemistry and biochemistry to understand the uses and limitations of the investigations.\nA second important aspect of the practice of endocrinology is distinguishing human variation from disease. Atypical patterns of physical development and abnormal test results must be assessed as indicative of disease or not. Diagnostic imaging of endocrine organs may reveal incidental findings called incidentalomas, which may or may not represent disease.\nEndocrinology involves caring for the person as well as the disease. Most endocrine disorders are chronic diseases that need lifelong care. Some of the most common endocrine diseases include diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism and the metabolic syndrome. Care of diabetes, obesity and other chronic diseases necessitates understanding the patient at the personal and social level as well as the molecular, and the physician\u2013patient relationship can be an important therapeutic process.\nApart from treating patients, many endocrinologists are involved in clinical science and medical research, teaching, and hospital management.\nTraining.\nEndocrinologists are specialists of internal medicine or pediatrics. Reproductive endocrinologists deal primarily with problems of fertility and menstrual function\u2014often training first in obstetrics. Most qualify as an internist, pediatrician, or gynecologist for a few years before specializing, depending on the local training system. In the U.S. and Canada, training for board certification in internal medicine, pediatrics, or gynecology after medical school is called residency. Further formal training to subspecialize in adult, pediatric, or reproductive endocrinology is called a fellowship. Typical training for a North American endocrinologist involves 4 years of college, 4 years of medical school, 3 years of residency, and 2 years of fellowship. In the US, adult endocrinologists are board certified by the American Board of Internal Medicine (ABIM) or the American Osteopathic Board of Internal Medicine (AOBIM) in Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism.\nDiseases and medicine.\nDiseases.\nEndocrinology also involves the study of the diseases of the endocrine system. These diseases may relate to too little or too much secretion of a hormone, too little or too much action of a hormone, or problems with receiving the hormone.\nSocieties and organisations.\nBecause endocrinology encompasses so many conditions and diseases, there are many organizations that provide education to patients and the public. The Hormone Foundation is the public education affiliate of The Endocrine Society and provides information on all endocrine-related conditions. Other educational organizations that focus on one or more endocrine-related conditions include the American Diabetes Association, Human Growth Foundation, American Menopause Foundation, Inc., and Thyroid Foundation of America.\nIn North America the principal professional organizations of endocrinologists include The Endocrine Society, the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, the American Diabetes Association, the Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society, and the American Thyroid Association.\nIn Europe, the European Society of Endocrinology (ESE) and the European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology (ESPE) are the main organisations representing professionals in the fields of adult and paediatric endocrinology, respectively.\nIn the United Kingdom, the Society for Endocrinology and the British Society for Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes are the main professional organisations.\nThe European Society for Paediatric Endocrinology is the largest international professional association dedicated solely to paediatric endocrinology. There are numerous similar associations around the world.\nHistory.\nThe earliest study of endocrinology began in China. The Chinese were isolating sex and pituitary hormones from human urine and using them for medicinal purposes by 200 BC. They used many complex methods, such as sublimation of steroid hormones. Another method specified by Chinese texts\u2014the earliest dating to 1110\u2014specified the use of saponin (from the beans of \"Gleditsia sinensis\") to extract hormones, but gypsum (containing calcium sulfate) was also known to have been used.\nAlthough most of the relevant tissues and endocrine glands had been identified by early anatomists, a more humoral approach to understanding biological function and disease was favoured by the ancient Greek and Roman thinkers such as Aristotle, Hippocrates, Lucretius, Celsus, and Galen, according to Freeman et al., and these theories held sway until the advent of germ theory, physiology, and organ basis of pathology in the 19th century.\nIn 1849, Arnold Berthold noted that castrated cockerels did not develop combs and wattles or exhibit overtly male behaviour. He found that replacement of testes back into the abdominal cavity of the same bird or another castrated bird resulted in normal behavioural and morphological development, and he concluded (erroneously) that the testes secreted a substance that \"conditioned\" the blood that, in turn, acted on the body of the cockerel. In fact, one of two other things could have been true: that the testes modified or activated a constituent of the blood or that the testes removed an inhibitory factor from the blood. It was not proven that the testes released a substance that engenders male characteristics until it was shown that the extract of testes could replace their function in castrated animals. Pure, crystalline testosterone was isolated in 1935.\nGraves' disease was named after Irish doctor Robert James Graves, who described a case of goiter with exophthalmos in 1835. The German Karl Adolph von Basedow also independently reported the same constellation of symptoms in 1840, while earlier reports of the disease were also published by the Italians Giuseppe Flajani and Antonio Giuseppe Testa, in 1802 and 1810 respectively, and by the English physician Caleb Hillier Parry (a friend of Edward Jenner) in the late 18th century. Thomas Addison was first to describe Addison's disease in 1849.\nIn 1902 William Bayliss and Ernest Starling performed an experiment in which they observed that acid instilled into the duodenum caused the pancreas to begin secretion, even after they had removed all nervous connections between the two. The same response could be produced by injecting extract of jejunum mucosa into the jugular vein, showing that some factor in the mucosa was responsible. They named this substance \"secretin\" and coined the term \"hormone\" for chemicals that act in this way.\nJoseph von Mering and Oskar Minkowski made the observation in 1889 that removing the pancreas surgically led to an increase in blood sugar, followed by a coma and eventual death\u2014symptoms of diabetes mellitus. In 1922, Banting and Best realized that homogenizing the pancreas and injecting the derived extract reversed this condition.\nNeurohormones were first identified by Otto Loewi in 1921. He incubated a frog's heart (innervated with its vagus nerve attached) in a saline bath, and left in the solution for some time. The solution was then used to bathe a non-innervated second heart. If the vagus nerve on the first heart was stimulated, negative inotropic (beat amplitude) and chronotropic (beat rate) activity were seen in both hearts. This did not occur in either heart if the vagus nerve was not stimulated. The vagus nerve was adding something to the saline solution. The effect could be blocked using atropine, a known inhibitor to heart vagal nerve stimulation. Clearly, something was being secreted by the vagus nerve and affecting the heart. The \"vagusstuff\" (as Loewi called it) causing the myotropic (muscle enhancing) effects was later identified to be acetylcholine and norepinephrine. Loewi won the Nobel Prize for his discovery.\nRecent work in endocrinology focuses on the molecular mechanisms responsible for triggering the effects of hormones. The first example of such work being done was in 1962 by Earl Sutherland. Sutherland investigated whether hormones enter cells to evoke action, or stayed outside of cells. He studied norepinephrine, which acts on the liver to convert glycogen into glucose via the activation of the phosphorylase enzyme. He homogenized the liver into a membrane fraction and soluble fraction (phosphorylase is soluble), added norepinephrine to the membrane fraction, extracted its soluble products, and added them to the first soluble fraction. Phosphorylase activated, indicating that norepinephrine's target receptor was on the cell membrane, not located intracellularly. He later identified the compound as cyclic AMP (cAMP) and with his discovery created the concept of second-messenger-mediated pathways. He, like Loewi, won the Nobel Prize for his groundbreaking work in endocrinology."}
{"id": "9312", "revid": "36529075", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9312", "title": "Endocrine system", "text": "The endocrine system is a messenger system comprising feedback loops of the hormones released by internal glands of an organism directly into the circulatory system, regulating distant target organs. In vertebrates, the hypothalamus is the neural control center for all endocrine systems. In humans, the major endocrine glands are the thyroid gland and the adrenal glands. The study of the endocrine system and its disorders is known as endocrinology. \nGlands that signal each other in sequence are often referred to as an axis, such as the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. In addition to the specialized endocrine organs mentioned above, many other organs that are part of other body systems have secondary endocrine functions, including bone, kidneys, liver, heart and gonads. For example, the kidney secretes the endocrine hormone erythropoietin. Hormones can be amino acid complexes, steroids, eicosanoids, leukotrienes, or prostaglandins.\nThe endocrine system can be contrasted to both exocrine glands, which secrete hormones to the outside of the body, and paracrine signalling between cells over a relatively short distance. Endocrine glands have no ducts, are vascular, and commonly have intracellular vacuoles or granules that store their hormones. In contrast, exocrine glands, such as salivary glands, sweat glands, and glands within the gastrointestinal tract, tend to be much less vascular and have ducts or a hollow lumen.\nEndocrinology is a branch of internal medicine.\nStructure.\nMajor endocrine systems.\nThe human endocrine system consists of several systems that operate via feedback loops. Several important feedback systems are mediated via the hypothalamus and pituitary.\nGlands.\nEndocrine glands are glands of the endocrine system that secrete their products, hormones, directly into interstitial spaces and then absorbed into blood rather than through a duct. The major glands of the endocrine system include the pineal gland, pituitary gland, pancreas, ovaries, testes, thyroid gland, parathyroid gland, hypothalamus and adrenal glands. The hypothalamus and pituitary gland are neuroendocrine organs.\nThe hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary are two out of the three endocrine glands that are important in cell signaling. They are both part of the HPA axis which is known to play a role in cell signaling in the nervous system.\nHypothalamus: The hypothalamus is a key regulator of the autonomic nervous system. The endocrine system has three sets of endocrine outputs which include the magnocellular system, the parvocellular system, and autonomic intervention. The magnocellular is involved in the expression of oxytocin or vasopressin. The parvocellular is involved in controlling the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary.\nAnterior Pituitary: The main role of the anterior pituitary gland is to produce and secret tropic hormones. Some examples of tropic hormones secreted by the anterior pituitary gland include TSH, ACTH, GH, LH, and FSH.\nCells.\nThere are many types of cells that make up the endocrine system and these cells typically make up larger tissues and organs that function within and outside of the endocrine system.\nFunction.\nHormones.\nA hormone is any of a class of signaling molecules produced by cars in glands in multicellular organisms that are transported by the circulatory system to target distant organs to regulate physiology and behaviour. Hormones have diverse chemical structures, mainly of 3 classes: eicosanoids, steroids, and amino acid/protein derivatives (amines, peptides, and proteins). The glands that secrete hormones comprise the endocrine system. The term hormone is sometimes extended to include chemicals produced by cells that affect the same cell (autocrine or intracrine signalling) or nearby cells (paracrine signalling).\nHormones are used to communicate between organs and tissues for physiological regulation and behavioral activities, such as digestion, metabolism, respiration, tissue function, sensory perception, sleep, excretion, lactation, stress, growth and development, movement, reproduction, and mood.\nHormones affect distant cells by binding to specific receptor proteins in the target cell resulting in a change in cell function. This may lead to cell type-specific responses that include rapid changes to the activity of existing proteins, or slower changes in the expression of target genes. Amino acid\u2013based hormones (amines and peptide or protein hormones) are water-soluble and act on the surface of target cells via signal transduction pathways; steroid hormones, being lipid-soluble, move through the plasma membranes of target cells to act within their nuclei.\nCell signalling.\nThe typical mode of cell signalling in the endocrine system is endocrine signaling, that is, using the circulatory system to reach distant target organs. However, there are also other modes, i.e., paracrine, autocrine, and neuroendocrine signaling. Purely neurocrine signaling between neurons, on the other hand, belongs completely to the nervous system.\nAutocrine.\nAutocrine signaling is a form of signaling in which a cell secretes a hormone or chemical messenger (called the autocrine agent) that binds to autocrine receptors on the same cell, leading to changes in the cells.\nParacrine.\nSome endocrinologists and clinicians include the paracrine system as part of the endocrine system, but there is not consensus. Paracrines are slower acting, targeting cells in the same tissue or organ. An example of this is somatostatin which is released by some pancreatic cells and targets other pancreatic cells.\nJuxtacrine.\nJuxtacrine signaling is a type of intercellular communication that is transmitted via oligosaccharide, lipid, or protein components of a cell membrane, and may affect either the emitting cell or the immediately adjacent cells.\nIt occurs between adjacent cells that possess broad patches of closely opposed plasma membrane linked by transmembrane channels known as connexons. The gap between the cells can usually be between only 2 and 4\u00a0nm.\nClinical significance.\nDisease.\nDiseases of the endocrine system are common, including conditions such as diabetes mellitus, thyroid disease, and obesity.\nEndocrine disease is characterized by misregulated hormone release (a productive pituitary adenoma), inappropriate response to signaling (hypothyroidism), lack of a gland (diabetes mellitus type 1, diminished erythropoiesis in chronic kidney failure), or structural enlargement in a critical site such as the thyroid (toxic multinodular goitre). Hypofunction of endocrine glands can occur as a result of loss of reserve, hyposecretion, agenesis, atrophy, or active destruction. Hyperfunction can occur as a result of hypersecretion, loss of suppression, hyperplastic or neoplastic change, or hyperstimulation.\nEndocrinopathies are classified as primary, secondary, or tertiary. Primary endocrine disease inhibits the action of downstream glands. Secondary endocrine disease is indicative of a problem with the pituitary gland. Tertiary endocrine disease is associated with dysfunction of the hypothalamus and its releasing hormones.\nAs the thyroid, and hormones have been implicated in signaling distant tissues to proliferate, for example, the estrogen receptor has been shown to be involved in certain breast cancers. Endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine signaling have all been implicated in proliferation, one of the required steps of oncogenesis.\nOther common diseases that result from endocrine dysfunction include Addison's disease, Cushing's disease and Graves' disease. Cushing's disease and Addison's disease are pathologies involving the dysfunction of the adrenal gland. Dysfunction in the adrenal gland could be due to primary or secondary factors and can result in hypercortisolism or hypocortisolism . Cushing's disease is characterized by the hypersecretion of the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) due to a pituitary adenoma that ultimately causes endogenous hypercortisolism by stimulating the adrenal glands. Some clinical signs of Cushing's disease include obesity, moon face, and hirsutism. Addison's disease is an endocrine disease that results from hypocortisolism caused by adrenal gland insufficiency. Adrenal insufficiency is significant because it is correlated with decreased ability to maintain blood pressure and blood sugar, a defect that can prove to be fatal.\nGraves' disease involves the hyperactivity of the thyroid gland which produces the T3 and T4 hormones. Graves' disease effects range from excess sweating, fatigue, heat intolerance and high blood pressure to swelling of the eyes that causes redness, puffiness and in rare cases reduced or double vision.\nOther animals.\nA neuroendocrine system has been observed in all animals with a nervous system and all vertebrates have a hypothalamus-pituitary axis. All vertebrates have a thyroid, which in amphibians is also crucial for transformation of larvae into adult form. All vertebrates have adrenal gland tissue, with mammals unique in having it organized into layers. All vertebrates have some form of a renin\u2013angiotensin axis, and all tetrapods have aldosterone as a primary mineralocorticoid."}
{"id": "9313", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9313", "title": "Expander graph", "text": "In combinatorics, an expander graph is a sparse graph that has strong connectivity properties, quantified using vertex, edge or spectral expansion. Expander constructions have spawned research in pure and applied mathematics, with several applications to complexity theory, design of robust computer networks, and the theory of error-correcting codes.\nDefinitions.\nIntuitively, an expander graph is a finite, undirected multigraph in which every subset of the vertices that is not \"too large\" has a \"large\" boundary. Different formalisations of these notions give rise to different notions of expanders: \"edge expanders\", \"vertex expanders\", and \"spectral expanders\", as defined below.\nA disconnected graph is not an expander, since the boundary of a connected component is empty. Every connected graph is an expander; however, different connected graphs have different expansion parameters. The complete graph has the best expansion property, but it has largest possible degree. Informally, a graph is a good expander if it has low degree and high expansion parameters.\nEdge expansion.\nThe \"edge expansion\" (also \"isoperimetric number\" or Cheeger constant) \"h\"(\"G\") of a graph \"G\" on \"n\" vertices is defined as\nwhere formula_2\nIn the equation, the minimum is over all nonempty sets \"S\" of at most \"n\"/2 vertices and \u2202\"S\" is the \"edge boundary\" of \"S\", i.e., the set of edges with exactly one endpoint in \"S\".\nVertex expansion.\nThe \"vertex isoperimetric number\" formula_3 (also \"vertex expansion\" or \"magnification\") of a graph \"G\" is defined as\nwhere formula_5 is the \"outer boundary\" of \"S\", i.e., the set of vertices in formula_6 with at least one neighbor in \"S\". In a variant of this definition (called \"unique neighbor expansion\") formula_5 is replaced by the set of vertices in \"V\" with \"exactly\" one neighbor in \"S\".\nThe \"vertex isoperimetric number\" formula_8 of a graph \"G\" is defined as\nwhere formula_10 is the \"inner boundary\" of \"S\", i.e., the set of vertices in \"S\" with at least one neighbor in formula_6.\nSpectral expansion.\nWhen \"G\" is \"d\"-regular, a linear algebraic definition of expansion is possible based on the eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix \"A\" = \"A\"(\"G\") of \"G\", where formula_12 is the number of edges between vertices \"i\" and \"j\". Because \"A\" is symmetric, the spectral theorem implies that \"A\" has \"n\" real-valued eigenvalues formula_13. It is known that all these eigenvalues are in [\u2212\"d\", \"d\"].\nBecause \"G\" is regular, the uniform distribution formula_14 with formula_15 for all \"i\" = 1, ..., \"n\" is the stationary distribution of \"G\". That is, we have \"Au\" = \"du\", and \"u\" is an eigenvector of \"A\" with eigenvalue \u03bb1 = \"d\", where \"d\" is the degree of the vertices of \"G\". The \"spectral gap\" of \"G\" is defined to be \"d\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\u03bb2, and it measures the spectral expansion of the graph \"G\".\nIt is known that \u03bb\"n\" = \u2212\"d\" if and only if \"G\" is bipartite. In many contexts, for example in the expander mixing lemma, a bound on \u03bb2 is not enough, but indeed it is necessary to bound the absolute value of \"all\" the eigenvalues away from \"d\":\nExpander walk sampling.\nThe Chernoff bound states that, when sampling many independent samples from a random variables in the range [\u22121, 1], with high probability the average of our samples is close to the expectation of the random variable. The expander walk sampling lemma, due to and , states that this also holds true when sampling from a walk on an expander graph. This is particularly useful in the theory of derandomization, since sampling according to an expander walk uses many fewer random bits than sampling independently."}
{"id": "9316", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9316", "title": "England", "text": "England is a country that is part of the United Kingdom. It shares land borders with Wales to its west and Scotland to its north. The Irish Sea lies northwest of England and the Celtic Sea to the southwest. England is separated from continental Europe by the North Sea to the east and the English Channel to the south. The country covers five-eighths of the island of Great Britain, which lies in the North Atlantic, and includes over 100 smaller islands, such as the Isles of Scilly and the Isle of Wight.\nThe area now called England was first inhabited by modern humans during the Upper Paleolithic period, but takes its name from the Angles, a Germanic tribe deriving its name from the Anglia peninsula, who settled during the 5th and 6th centuries. England became a unified state in the 10th century and has had a significant cultural and legal impact on the wider world since the Age of Discovery, which began during the 15th century. The English language, the Anglican Church, and English law\u2014the basis for the common law legal systems of many other countries around the world\u2014developed in England, and the country's parliamentary system of government has been widely adopted by other nations. The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century England, transforming its society into the world's first industrialised nation.\nEngland's terrain is chiefly low hills and plains, especially in central and southern England. However, there is upland and mountainous terrain in the north (for example, the Lake District and Pennines) and in the west (for example, Dartmoor and the Shropshire Hills). The capital is London, which has the largest metropolitan area in both the United Kingdom and, prior to Brexit, the European Union. England's population of 56.3\u00a0million comprises 84% of the population of the United Kingdom, largely concentrated around London, the South East, and conurbations in the Midlands, the North West, the North East, and Yorkshire, which each developed as major industrial regions during the 19th century.\nThe Kingdom of England \u2013 which after 1535 included Wales \u2013 ceased being a separate sovereign state on 1 May 1707, when the Acts of Union put into effect the terms agreed in the Treaty of Union the previous year, resulting in a political union with the Kingdom of Scotland to create the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1801, Great Britain was united with the Kingdom of Ireland (through another Act of Union) to become the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. In 1922 the Irish Free State seceded from the United Kingdom, leading to the latter being renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.\nToponymy.\nThe name \"England\" is derived from the Old English name \"Englaland\", which means \"land of the Angles\". The Angles were one of the Germanic tribes that settled in Great Britain during the Early Middle Ages. The Angles came from the Anglia peninsula in the Bay of Kiel area (present-day German state of Schleswig\u2013Holstein) of the Baltic Sea. The earliest recorded use of the term, as \"Engla londe\", is in the late-ninth-century translation into Old English of Bede's \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\". The term was then used in a different sense to the modern one, meaning \"the land inhabited by the English\", and it included English people in what is now south-east Scotland but was then part of the English kingdom of Northumbria. The \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" recorded that the Domesday Book of 1086 covered the whole of England, meaning the English kingdom, but a few years later the \"Chronicle\" stated that King Malcolm III went \"out of Scotlande into Lothian in Englaland\", thus using it in the more ancient sense.\nThe earliest attested reference to the Angles occurs in the 1st-century work by Tacitus, \"Germania\", in which the Latin word \"Anglii\" is used. The etymology of the tribal name itself is disputed by scholars; it has been suggested that it derives from the shape of the Angeln peninsula, an \"angular\" shape. How and why a term derived from the name of a tribe that was less significant than others, such as the Saxons, came to be used for the entire country and its people is not known, but it seems this is related to the custom of calling the Germanic people in Britain \"Angli Saxones\" or English Saxons to distinguish them from continental Saxons (Eald-Seaxe) of Old Saxony between the Weser and Eider rivers in Northern Germany. In Scottish Gaelic, another language which developed on the island of Great Britain, the Saxon tribe gave their name to the word for England (\"Sasunn\"); similarly, the Welsh name for the English language is \"Saesneg\". A romantic name for England is Loegria, related to the Welsh word for England, \"Lloegr\", and made popular by its use in Arthurian legend. \"Albion\" is also applied to England in a more poetic capacity, though its original meaning is the island of Britain as a whole.\nHistory.\nPrehistory and antiquity.\nThe earliest known evidence of human presence in the area now known as England was that of \"Homo antecessor\", dating to approximately 780,000 years ago. The oldest proto-human bones discovered in England date from 500,000\u00a0years ago. Modern humans are known to have inhabited the area during the Upper Paleolithic period, though permanent settlements were only established within the last 6,000 years.\nAfter the last ice age only large mammals such as mammoths, bison and woolly rhinoceros remained. Roughly 11,000\u00a0years ago, when the ice sheets began to recede, humans repopulated the area; genetic research suggests they came from the northern part of the Iberian Peninsula. The sea level was lower than now and Britain was connected by land bridge to Ireland and Eurasia.\nAs the seas rose, it was separated from Ireland 10,000\u00a0years ago and from Eurasia two millennia later.\nThe Beaker culture arrived around 2,500\u00a0BC, introducing drinking and food vessels constructed from clay, as well as vessels used as reduction pots to smelt copper ores. It was during this time that major Neolithic monuments such as Stonehenge and Avebury were constructed. By heating together tin and copper, which were in abundance in the area, the Beaker culture people made bronze, and later iron from iron ores. The development of iron smelting allowed the construction of better ploughs, advancing agriculture (for instance, with Celtic fields), as well as the production of more effective weapons.\nDuring the Iron Age, Celtic culture, deriving from the Hallstatt and La T\u00e8ne cultures, arrived from Central Europe. Brythonic was the spoken language during this time. Society was tribal; according to Ptolemy's \"Geographia\" there were around 20 tribes in the area. Earlier divisions are unknown because the Britons were not literate. Like other regions on the edge of the Empire, Britain had long enjoyed trading links with the Romans. Julius Caesar of the Roman Republic attempted to invade twice in 55\u00a0BC; although largely unsuccessful, he managed to set up a client king from the Trinovantes.\nThe Romans invaded Britain in 43 AD during the reign of Emperor Claudius, subsequently conquering much of Britain, and the area was incorporated into the Roman Empire as Britannia province. The best-known of the native tribes who attempted to resist were the Catuvellauni led by Caratacus. Later, an uprising led by Boudica, Queen of the Iceni, ended with Boudica's suicide following her defeat at the Battle of Watling Street. The author of one study of Roman Britain suggested that from 43 AD to 84 AD, the Roman invaders killed somewhere between 100,000 and 250,000 people from a population of perhaps 2,000,000. This era saw a Greco-Roman culture prevail with the introduction of Roman law, Roman architecture, aqueducts, sewers, many agricultural items and silk. In the 3rd century, Emperor Septimius Severus died at Eboracum (now York), where Constantine was subsequently proclaimed emperor.\nThere is debate about when Christianity was first introduced; it was no later than the 4th century, probably much earlier. According to Bede, missionaries were sent from Rome by Eleutherius at the request of the chieftain Lucius of Britain in 180 AD, to settle differences as to Eastern and Western ceremonials, which were disturbing the church. There are traditions linked to Glastonbury claiming an introduction through Joseph of Arimathea, while others claim through Lucius of Britain. By 410, during the Decline of the Roman Empire, Britain was left exposed by the end of Roman rule in Britain and the withdrawal of Roman army units, to defend the frontiers in continental Europe and partake in civil wars. Celtic Christian monastic and missionary movements flourished: Patrick (5th-century Ireland) and in the 6th century Brendan (Clonfert), Comgall (Bangor), David (Wales), Aiden (Lindisfarne) and Columba (Iona). This period of Christianity was influenced by ancient Celtic culture in its sensibilities, polity, practices and theology. Local \"congregations\" were centred in the monastic community and monastic leaders were more like chieftains, as peers, rather than in the more hierarchical system of the Roman-dominated church.\nMiddle Ages.\nRoman military withdrawals left Britain open to invasion by pagan, seafaring warriors from north-western continental Europe, chiefly the Saxons, Angles, Jutes and Frisians who had long raided the coasts of the Roman province. These groups then began to settle in increasing numbers over the course of the fifth and sixth centuries, initially in the eastern part of the country. Their advance was contained for some decades after the Britons' victory at the Battle of Mount Badon, but subsequently resumed, overrunning the fertile lowlands of Britain and reducing the area under Brittonic control to a series of separate enclaves in the more rugged country to the west by the end of the 6th century. Contemporary texts describing this period are extremely scarce, giving rise to its description as a Dark Age. The nature and progression of the Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain is consequently subject to considerable disagreement; the emerging consensus is that it occurred on a large scale in the south and east but was less substantial to the north and west, where Celtic languages continued to be spoken even in areas under Anglo-Saxon control. Roman-dominated Christianity had, in general, disappeared from the conquered territories, but was reintroduced by missionaries from Rome led by Augustine from 597 onwards. Disputes between the Roman- and Celtic-dominated forms of Christianity ended in victory for the Roman tradition at the Council of Whitby (664), which was ostensibly about tonsures (clerical haircuts) and the date of Easter, but more significantly, about the differences in Roman and Celtic forms of authority, theology, and practice.\nDuring the settlement period the lands ruled by the incomers seem to have been fragmented into numerous tribal territories, but by the 7th century, when substantial evidence of the situation again becomes available, these had coalesced into roughly a dozen kingdoms including Northumbria, Mercia, Wessex, East Anglia, Essex, Kent and Sussex. Over the following centuries, this process of political consolidation continued. The 7th century saw a struggle for hegemony between Northumbria and Mercia, which in the 8th century gave way to Mercian preeminence. In the early 9th century Mercia was displaced as the foremost kingdom by Wessex. Later in that century escalating attacks by the Danes culminated in the conquest of the north and east of England, overthrowing the kingdoms of Northumbria, Mercia and East Anglia. Wessex under Alfred the Great was left as the only surviving English kingdom, and under his successors, it steadily expanded at the expense of the kingdoms of the Danelaw. This brought about the political unification of England, first accomplished under \u00c6thelstan in 927 and definitively established after further conflicts by Eadred in 953. A fresh wave of Scandinavian attacks from the late 10th century ended with the conquest of this united kingdom by Sweyn Forkbeard in 1013 and again by his son Cnut in 1016, turning it into the centre of a short-lived North Sea Empire that also included Denmark and Norway. However, the native royal dynasty was restored with the accession of Edward the Confessor in 1042.\nA dispute over the succession to Edward led to the Norman Conquest in 1066, accomplished by an army led by Duke William of Normandy. The Normans themselves originated from Scandinavia and had settled in Normandy in the late 9th and early 10th centuries. This conquest led to the almost total dispossession of the English elite and its replacement by a new French-speaking aristocracy, whose speech had a profound and permanent effect on the English language.\nSubsequently, the House of Plantagenet from Anjou inherited the English throne under Henry II, adding England to the budding Angevin Empire of fiefs the family had inherited in France including Aquitaine. They reigned for three centuries, some noted monarchs being Richard I, Edward I, Edward III and Henry V. The period saw changes in trade and legislation, including the signing of the \"Magna Carta\", an English legal charter used to limit the sovereign's powers by law and protect the privileges of freemen. Catholic monasticism flourished, providing philosophers, and the universities of Oxford and Cambridge were founded with royal patronage. The Principality of Wales became a Plantagenet fief during the 13th century and the Lordship of Ireland was given to the English monarchy by the Pope.\nDuring the 14th century, the Plantagenets and the House of Valois both claimed to be legitimate claimants to the House of Capet and with it France; the two powers clashed in the Hundred Years' War. The Black Death epidemic hit England; starting in 1348, it eventually killed up to half of England's inhabitants. From 1453 to 1487 civil war occurred between two branches of the royal family \u2013 the Yorkists and Lancastrians \u2013 known as the Wars of the Roses. Eventually it led to the Yorkists losing the throne entirely to a Welsh noble family the Tudors, a branch of the Lancastrians headed by Henry Tudor who invaded with Welsh and Breton mercenaries, gaining victory at the Battle of Bosworth Field where the Yorkist king Richard III was killed.\nEarly modern.\nDuring the Tudor period, the Renaissance reached England through Italian courtiers, who reintroduced artistic, educational and scholarly debate from classical antiquity. England began to develop naval skills, and exploration to the West intensified. Henry VIII broke from communion with the Catholic Church, over issues relating to his divorce, under the Acts of Supremacy in 1534 which proclaimed the monarch head of the Church of England. In contrast with much of European Protestantism, the roots of the split were more political than theological. He also legally incorporated his ancestral land Wales into the Kingdom of England with the 1535\u20131542 acts. There were internal religious conflicts during the reigns of Henry's daughters, Mary I and Elizabeth I. The former took the country back to Catholicism while the latter broke from it again, forcefully asserting the supremacy of Anglicanism. The Elizabethan era is the epoch in the Tudor age of the reign of Queen Elizabeth I (\"the Virgin Queen\"). Historians often depict it as the golden age in English history. Elizabethan England represented the apogee of the English Renaissance and saw the flowering of art, poetry, music and literature. The era is most famous for its drama, theatre and playwrights. England during this period had a centralised, well-organised, and effective government as a result of vast Tudor reforms. \nCompeting with Spain, the first English colony in the Americas was founded in 1585 by explorer Walter Raleigh in Virginia and named Roanoke. The Roanoke colony failed and is known as the lost colony after it was found abandoned on the return of the late-arriving supply ship. With the East India Company, England also competed with the Dutch and French in the East. During the Elizabethan period, England was at war with Spain. An armada sailed from Spain in 1588 as part of a wider plan to invade England and re-establish a Catholic monarchy. The plan was thwarted by bad coordination, stormy weather and successful harrying attacks by an English fleet under Lord Howard of Effingham. This failure did not end the threat: Spain launched two further armadas, in 1596 and 1597, but both were driven back by storms. The political structure of the island changed in 1603, when the King of Scots, James VI, a kingdom which had been a long-time rival to English interests, inherited the throne of England as James I, thereby creating a personal union. He styled himself King of Great Britain, although this had no basis in English law. Under the auspices of King James VI and I the Authorised King James Version of the Holy Bible was published in 1611. It was the standard version of the Bible read by most Protestant Christians for four hundred years until modern revisions were produced in the 20th century.\nBased on conflicting political, religious and social positions, the English Civil War was fought between the supporters of Parliament and those of King Charles I, known colloquially as Roundheads and Cavaliers respectively. This was an interwoven part of the wider multifaceted Wars of the Three Kingdoms, involving Scotland and Ireland. The Parliamentarians were victorious, Charles I was executed and the kingdom replaced by the Commonwealth. Leader of the Parliament forces, Oliver Cromwell declared himself Lord Protector in 1653; a period of personal rule followed. After Cromwell's death and the resignation of his son Richard as Lord Protector, Charles II was invited to return as monarch in 1660, in a move called the Restoration. With the reopening of theatres, fine arts, literature and performing arts flourished throughout the Restoration of \"the Merry Monarch\" Charles II. After the Glorious Revolution of 1688, it was constitutionally established that King and Parliament should rule together, though Parliament would have the real power. This was established with the Bill of Rights in 1689. Among the statutes set down were that the law could only be made by Parliament and could not be suspended by the King, also that the King could not impose taxes or raise an army without the prior approval of Parliament. Also since that time, no British monarch has entered the House of Commons when it is sitting, which is annually commemorated at the State Opening of Parliament by the British monarch when the doors of the House of Commons are slammed in the face of the monarch's messenger, symbolising the rights of Parliament and its independence from the monarch. With the founding of the Royal Society in 1660, science was greatly encouraged.\nIn 1666 the Great Fire of London gutted the City of London but it was rebuilt shortly afterwards with many significant buildings designed by Sir Christopher Wren. In Parliament two factions had emerged \u2013 the Tories and Whigs. Though the Tories initially supported Catholic king James II, some of them, along with the Whigs, during the Revolution of 1688 invited Dutch prince William of Orange to defeat James and ultimately to become William III of England. Some English people, especially in the north, were Jacobites and continued to support James and his sons. Under the Stuart dynasty England expanded in trade, finance and prosperity. Britain developed Europe's largest merchant fleet. After the parliaments of England and Scotland agreed, the two countries joined in political union, to create the Kingdom of Great Britain in 1707. To accommodate the union, institutions such as the law and national churches of each remained separate.\nLate modern and contemporary.\nUnder the newly formed Kingdom of Great Britain, output from the Royal Society and other English initiatives combined with the Scottish Enlightenment to create innovations in science and engineering, while the enormous growth in British overseas trade protected by the Royal Navy paved the way for the establishment of the British Empire. Domestically it drove the Industrial Revolution, a period of profound change in the socioeconomic and cultural conditions of England, resulting in industrialised agriculture, manufacture, engineering and mining, as well as new and pioneering road, rail and water networks to facilitate their expansion and development. The opening of Northwest England's Bridgewater Canal in 1761 ushered in the canal age in Britain. In 1825 the world's first permanent steam locomotive-hauled passenger railway \u2013 the Stockton and Darlington Railway \u2013 opened to the public. \nDuring the Industrial Revolution, many workers moved from England's countryside to new and expanding urban industrial areas to work in factories, for instance at Birmingham and Manchester, dubbed \"Workshop of the World\" and \"Warehouse City\" respectively. Manchester was the world's first industrial city. England maintained relative stability throughout the French Revolution; William Pitt the Younger was British Prime Minister for the reign of George III. The Regency of George IV is noted for its elegance and achievements in the fine arts and architecture. During the Napoleonic Wars, Napoleon planned to invade from the south-east. However this failed to manifest and the Napoleonic forces were defeated by the British: at sea by Lord Nelson, and on land by the Duke of Wellington. The major victory at the Battle of Trafalgar confirmed the naval supremacy Britain had established during the course of the eighteenth century. The Napoleonic Wars fostered a concept of Britishness and a united national British people, shared with the English, Scots and Welsh.\nLondon became the largest and most populous metropolitan area in the world during the Victorian era, and trade within the British Empire \u2013 as well as the standing of the British military and navy \u2013 was prestigious. Technologically, this era saw many innovations that proved key to the United Kingdom's power and prosperity. Political agitation at home from radicals such as the Chartists and the suffragettes enabled legislative reform and universal suffrage. Samuel Hynes described the Edwardian era as a \"leisurely time when women wore picture hats and did not vote, when the rich were not ashamed to live conspicuously, and the sun really never set on the British flag.\"\nPower shifts in east-central Europe led to World War I; hundreds of thousands of English soldiers died fighting for the United Kingdom as part of the Allies. Two decades later, in World War II, the United Kingdom was again one of the Allies. At the end of the Phoney War, Winston Churchill became the wartime Prime Minister. Developments in warfare technology saw many cities damaged by air-raids during the Blitz. Following the war, the British Empire experienced rapid decolonisation, and there was a speeding-up of technological innovations; automobiles became the primary means of transport and Frank Whittle's development of the jet engine led to wider air travel. Residential patterns were altered in England by private motoring, and by the creation of the National Health Service (NHS) in 1948. The UK's NHS provided publicly funded health care to all UK permanent residents free at the point of need, being paid for from general taxation. Combined, these prompted the reform of local government in England in the mid-20th century.\nSince the 20th century there has been significant population movement to England, mostly from other parts of the British Isles, but also from the Commonwealth, particularly the Indian subcontinent. Since the 1970s there has been a large move away from manufacturing and an increasing emphasis on the service industry. As part of the United Kingdom, the area joined a common market initiative called the European Economic Community which became the European Union. Since the late 20th century the administration of the United Kingdom has moved towards devolved governance in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. England and Wales continues to exist as a jurisdiction within the United Kingdom. Devolution has stimulated a greater emphasis on a more English-specific identity and patriotism. There is no devolved English government, but an attempt to create a similar system on a sub-regional basis was rejected by referendum.\nGovernance.\nPolitics.\nEngland is part of the United Kingdom, a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system. There has not been a government of England since 1707, when the Acts of Union 1707, putting into effect the terms of the Treaty of Union, joined England and Scotland to form the Kingdom of Great Britain. Before the union England was ruled by its monarch and the Parliament of England. Today England is governed directly by the Parliament of the United Kingdom, although other countries of the United Kingdom have devolved governments. In the House of Commons which is the lower house of the British Parliament based at the Palace of Westminster, there are 532 Members of Parliament (MPs) for constituencies in England, out of the 650 total. As of the 2019 United Kingdom general election, England is represented by 345 MPs from the Conservative Party, 179 from the Labour Party, seven from the Liberal Democrats, one from the Green Party, and the Speaker of the House, Lindsay Hoyle.\nSince devolution, in which other countries of the United Kingdom \u2013 Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland \u2013 each have their own devolved parliament or assemblies for local issues, there has been debate about how to counterbalance this in England. Originally it was planned that various regions of England would be devolved, but following the proposal's rejection by the North East in a 2004 referendum, this has not been carried out.\nOne major issue is the West Lothian question, in which MPs from Scotland and Wales are able to vote on legislation affecting only England, while English MPs have no equivalent right to legislate on devolved matters. This when placed in the context of England being the only country of the United Kingdom not to have free cancer treatment, prescriptions, residential care for the elderly and free top-up university fees, has led to a steady rise in English nationalism. Some have suggested the creation of a devolved English parliament, while others have proposed simply limiting voting on legislation which only affects England to English MPs.\nLaw.\nThe English law legal system, developed over the centuries, is the basis of common law legal systems used in most Commonwealth countries and the United States (except Louisiana). Despite now being part of the United Kingdom, the legal system of the Courts of England and Wales continued, under the Treaty of Union, as a separate legal system from the one used in Scotland. The general essence of English law is that it is made by judges sitting in courts, applying their common sense and knowledge of legal precedent \u2013 \"stare decisis\" \u2013 to the facts before them.\nThe court system is headed by the Senior Courts of England and Wales, consisting of the Court of Appeal, the High Court of Justice for civil cases, and the Crown Court for criminal cases. The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom is the highest court for criminal and civil cases in England and Wales. It was created in 2009 after constitutional changes, taking over the judicial functions of the House of Lords. A decision of the Supreme Court is binding on every other court in the hierarchy, which must follow its directions. \nThe Secretary of State for Justice is the minister responsible to Parliament for the judiciary, the court system and prisons and probation in England. Crime increased between 1981 and 1995 but fell by 42% in the period 1995\u20132006. The prison population doubled over the same period, giving it one of highest incarceration rate in Western Europe at 147 per 100,000. Her Majesty's Prison Service, reporting to the Ministry of Justice, manages most prisons, housing over 85,000 convicts.\nRegions, counties, and districts.\nThe subdivisions of England consist of up to four levels of subnational division controlled through a variety of types of administrative entities created for the purposes of local government. The highest tier of local government were the nine regions of England: North East, North West, Yorkshire and the Humber, East Midlands, West Midlands, East, South East, South West, and London. These were created in 1994 as Government Offices, used by the UK government to deliver a wide range of policies and programmes regionally, but there are no elected bodies at this level, except in London, and in 2011 the regional government offices were abolished.\nAfter devolution began to take place in other parts of the United Kingdom it was planned that referendums for the regions of England would take place for their own elected regional assemblies as a counterweight. London accepted in 1998: the London Assembly was created two years later. However, when the proposal was rejected by the 2004 North East England devolution referendum in the North East, further referendums were cancelled. The regional assemblies outside London were abolished in 2010, and their functions transferred to respective Regional Development Agencies and a new system of Local authority leaders' boards.\nBelow the regional level, all of England is divided into 48 ceremonial counties. These are used primarily as a geographical frame of reference and have developed gradually since the Middle Ages, with some established as recently as 1974. Each has a Lord Lieutenant and High Sheriff; these posts are used to represent the British monarch locally. Outside Greater London and the Isles of Scilly, England is also divided into 83 metropolitan and non-metropolitan counties; these correspond to areas used for the purposes of local government and may consist of a single district or be divided into several.\nThere are six metropolitan counties based on the most heavily urbanised areas, which do not have county councils. In these areas the principal authorities are the councils of the subdivisions, the metropolitan boroughs. Elsewhere, 27 non-metropolitan \"shire\" counties have a county council and are divided into districts, each with a district council. They are typically, though not always, found in more rural areas. The remaining non-metropolitan counties are of a single district and usually correspond to large towns or sparsely populated counties; they are known as unitary authorities. Greater London has a different system for local government, with 32 London boroughs, plus the City of London covering a small area at the core governed by the City of London Corporation. At the most localised level, much of England is divided into civil parishes with councils; in Greater London only one, Queen's Park, exists after they were abolished in 1965 until legislation allowed their recreation in 2007.\nGeography.\nLandscape and rivers.\nGeographically England includes the central and southern two-thirds of the island of Great Britain, plus such offshore islands as the Isle of Wight and the Isles of Scilly. It is bordered by two other countries of the United Kingdom: to the north by Scotland and to the west by Wales. England is closer than any other part of mainland Britain to the European continent. It is separated from France (Hauts-de-France) by a sea gap, though the two countries are connected by the Channel Tunnel near Folkestone. England also has shores on the Irish Sea, North Sea and Atlantic Ocean.\nThe ports of London, Liverpool, and Newcastle lie on the tidal rivers Thames, Mersey and Tyne respectively. At , the Severn is the longest river flowing through England. It empties into the Bristol Channel and is notable for its Severn Bore (a tidal bore), which can reach in height. However, the longest river entirely in England is the Thames, which is in length.\nThere are many lakes in England; the largest is Windermere, within the aptly named Lake District. Most of England's landscape consists of low hills and plains, with upland and mountainous terrain in the north and west of the country. The northern uplands include the Pennines, a chain of uplands dividing east and west, the Lake District mountains in Cumbria, and the Cheviot Hills, straddling the border between England and Scotland. The highest point in England, at , is Scafell Pike in the Lake District. The Shropshire Hills are near Wales while Dartmoor and Exmoor are two upland areas in the south-west of the country. The approximate dividing line between terrain types is often indicated by the Tees-Exe line.\nIn geological terms, the Pennines, known as the \"backbone of England\", are the oldest range of mountains in the country, originating from the end of the Paleozoic Era around 300\u00a0million years ago. Their geological composition includes, among others, sandstone and limestone, and also coal. There are karst landscapes in calcite areas such as parts of Yorkshire and Derbyshire. The Pennine landscape is high moorland in upland areas, indented by fertile valleys of the region's rivers. They contain two national parks, the Yorkshire Dales and the Peak District. In the West Country, Dartmoor and Exmoor of the Southwest Peninsula include upland moorland supported by granite, and enjoy a mild climate; both are national parks.\nThe English Lowlands are in the central and southern regions of the country, consisting of green rolling hills, including the Cotswold Hills, Chiltern Hills, North and South Downs; where they meet the sea they form white rock exposures such as the cliffs of Dover. This also includes relatively flat plains such as the Salisbury Plain, Somerset Levels, South Coast Plain and The Fens.\nClimate.\nEngland has a temperate maritime climate: it is mild with temperatures not much lower than in winter and not much higher than in summer. The weather is damp relatively frequently and is changeable. The coldest months are January and February, the latter particularly on the English coast, while July is normally the warmest month. Months with mild to warm weather are May, June, September and October. Rainfall is spread fairly evenly throughout the year.\nImportant influences on the climate of England are its proximity to the Atlantic Ocean, its northern latitude and the warming of the sea by the Gulf Stream. Rainfall is higher in the west, and parts of the Lake District receive more rain than anywhere else in the country. Since weather records began, the highest temperature recorded was on 25 July 2019 at the Botanic Garden in Cambridge, while the lowest was on 10 January 1982 in Edgmond, Shropshire.\nNature and wildlife.\nThe fauna of England is similar to that of other areas in the British Isles with a wide range of vertebrate and invertebrate life in a diverse range of habitats.\nNational nature reserves in England are designated by Natural England as key places for wildlife and natural features in England. They were established to protect the most significant areas of habitat and of geological formations. NNRs are managed on behalf of the nation, many by Natural England themselves, but also by non-governmental organisations, including the members of The Wildlife Trusts partnership, the National Trust, and the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds. There are 229 NNRs in England covering 939 square kilometres (363 square miles). Often they contain rare species or nationally important species of plants and animals.\nThe Environment Agency is a non-departmental public body, established in 1995 and sponsored by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs with responsibilities relating to the protection and enhancement of the environment in England. The Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs is the minister responsible for environmental protection, agriculture, fisheries and rural communities in England.\nEngland has a temperate oceanic climate in most areas, lacking extremes of cold or heat, but does have a few small areas of subarctic and warmer areas in the South West. Towards the North of England the climate becomes colder and most of England's mountains and high hills are located here and have a major impact on the climate and thus the local fauna of the areas. Deciduous woodlands are common across all of England and provide a great habitat for much of England's wildlife, but these give way in northern and upland areas of England to coniferous forests (mainly plantations) which also benefit certain forms of wildlife. Some species have adapted to the expanded urban environment, particularly the red fox, which is the most successful urban mammal after the brown rat, and other animals such as common wood pigeon, both of which thrive in urban and suburban areas.\nGrey squirrels introduced from eastern America have forced the decline of the native red squirrel due to competition. Red squirrels are now confined to upland and coniferous-forested areas of England, mainly in the north, south west and Isle of Wight. England's climate is very suitable for lagomorphs and the country has rabbits and brown hares which were introduced in Roman times. Mountain hares which are indigenous have now been re-introduced in Derbyshire. The fauna of England has to cope with varying temperatures and conditions, although not extreme they do pose potential challenges and adaptational measures. English fauna has however had to cope with industrialisation, human population densities amongst the highest in Europe and intensive farming, but as England is a developed nation, wildlife and the countryside have entered the English mindset more and the country is very conscientious about preserving its wildlife, environment and countryside.\nMajor conurbations.\nThe Greater London Built-up Area is by far the largest urban area in England and one of the busiest cities in the world. It is considered a global city and has a population larger than other countries in the United Kingdom besides England itself. Other urban areas of considerable size and influence tend to be in northern England or the English Midlands. There are 50 settlements which have been designated city status in England, while the wider United Kingdom has 66.\nWhile many cities in England are quite large, such as Birmingham, Sheffield, Manchester, Liverpool, Leeds, Newcastle, Bradford, Nottingham, population size is not a prerequisite for city status. Traditionally the status was given to towns with diocesan cathedrals, so there are smaller cities like Wells, Ely, Ripon, Truro and Chichester.\nEconomy.\nEngland's economy is one of the largest and most dynamic in the world, with an average GDP per capita of \u00a328,100 or $36,000. Her Majesty's Treasury, led by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, is responsible for developing and executing the government's public finance policy and economic policy. Usually regarded as a mixed market economy, it has adopted many free market principles, yet maintains an advanced social welfare infrastructure. The official currency in England is the pound sterling, whose ISO 4217 code is GBP. Taxation in England is quite competitive when compared to much of the rest of Europe \u2013 the basic rate of personal tax is 20% on taxable income up to \u00a331,865 above the personal tax-free allowance (normally \u00a310,000), and 40% on any additional earnings above that amount.\nThe economy of England is the largest part of the UK's economy, which has the 18th highest GDP PPP per capita in the world. England is a leader in the chemical and pharmaceutical sectors and in key technical industries, particularly aerospace, the arms industry, and the manufacturing side of the software industry. London, home to the London Stock Exchange, the United Kingdom's main stock exchange and the largest in Europe, is England's financial centre, with 100 of Europe's 500\u00a0largest corporations being based there. London is the largest financial centre in Europe, and is the second largest in the world. Manchester is the largest financial and professional services sector outside London and is the mid tier private equity capital of Europe as well as one of the growing technology hubs of Europe. \nThe Bank of England, founded in 1694 by Scottish banker William Paterson, is the United Kingdom's central bank. Originally established as private banker to the government of England, since 1946 it has been a state-owned institution. The bank has a monopoly on the issue of banknotes in England and Wales, although not in other parts of the United Kingdom. The government has devolved responsibility to the bank's Monetary Policy Committee for managing the monetary policy of the country and setting interest rates.\nEngland is highly industrialised, but since the 1970s there has been a decline in traditional heavy and manufacturing industries, and an increasing emphasis on a more service industry oriented economy. Tourism has become a significant industry, attracting millions of visitors to England each year. The export part of the economy is dominated by pharmaceuticals, cars (although many English marques are now foreign-owned, such as Land Rover, Lotus, Jaguar and Bentley), crude oil and petroleum from the English parts of North Sea oil along with Wytch Farm, aircraft engines and alcoholic beverages. The creative industries accounted for 7 per cent GVA in 2005 and grew at an average of 6 per cent per annum between 1997 and 2005. \nMost of the UK's \u00a330\u00a0billion aerospace industry is primarily based in England. The global market opportunity for UK aerospace manufacturers over the next two decades is estimated at \u00a33.5\u00a0trillion. GKN Aerospace \u2013 an expert in metallic and composite aerostructures is involved in almost every civil and military fixed and rotary wing aircraft in production is based in Redditch.\nBAE Systems makes large sections of the Typhoon Eurofighter at its sub-assembly plant in Salmesbury and assembles the aircraft for the RAF at its Warton plant, near Preston. It is also a principal subcontractor on the F35 Joint Strike Fighter \u2013 the world's largest single defence project \u2013 for which it designs and manufactures a range of components including the aft fuselage, vertical and horizontal tail and wing tips and fuel system. It also manufactures the Hawk, the world's most successful jet training aircraft.\nRolls-Royce PLC is the world's second-largest aero-engine manufacturer. Its engines power more than 30 types of commercial aircraft, and it has more 30,000 engines currently in service across both the civil and defence sectors. With a workforce of over 12,000 people, Derby has the largest concentration of Rolls-Royce employees in the UK. Rolls-Royce also produces low-emission power systems for ships; makes critical equipment and safety systems for the nuclear industry and powers offshore platforms and major pipelines for the oil and gas industry. The pharmaceutical industry plays an important role in the economy, and the UK has the third-highest share of global pharmaceutical R&amp;D expenditures.\nMuch of the UK's space industry is centred on EADS Astrium, based in Stevenage and Portsmouth. The company builds the buses \u2013 the underlying structure onto which the payload and propulsion systems are built \u2013 for most of the European Space Agency's spacecraft, as well as commercial satellites. The world leader in compact satellite systems, Surrey Satellite Technology, is also part of Astrium. Reaction Engines Limited, the company planning to build Skylon, a single-stage-to-orbit spaceplane using their SABRE rocket engine, a combined-cycle, air-breathing rocket propulsion system is based Culham. The UK space industry was worth \u00a39.1bn in 2011 and employed 29,000 people. It is growing at a rate of 7.5 per cent annually, according to its umbrella organisation, the UK Space Agency. In 2013, the British Government pledged \u00a360 million to the Skylon project: this investment will provide support at a \"crucial stage\" to allow a full-scale prototype of the SABRE engine to be built.\nAgriculture is intensive, highly mechanised and efficient by European standards, producing 60% of food needs with only 2% of the labour force. Two-thirds of production is devoted to livestock, the other to arable crops. The main crops that are grown are wheat, barley, oats, potatoes, sugar beets. England retains a significant, though much reduced fishing industry. Its fleets bring home fish of every kind, ranging from sole to herring. It is also rich in natural resources including coal, petroleum, natural gas, tin, limestone, iron ore, salt, clay, chalk, gypsum, lead, and silica.\nScience and technology.\nProminent English figures from the field of science and mathematics include Sir Isaac Newton, Michael Faraday, Charles Darwin, Robert Hooke, James Prescott Joule, John Dalton, Lord Rayleigh, J. J. Thomson, James Chadwick, Charles Babbage, George Boole, Alan Turing, Tim Berners-Lee, Paul Dirac, Stephen Hawking, Peter Higgs, Roger Penrose, John Horton Conway, Thomas Bayes, Arthur Cayley, G. H. Hardy, Oliver Heaviside, Andrew Wiles, Edward Jenner, Francis Crick, Joseph Lister, Joseph Priestley, Thomas Young, Christopher Wren and Richard Dawkins. Some experts claim that the earliest concept of a metric system was invented by John Wilkins, the first secretary of the Royal Society, in 1668.\nEngland was a leading centre of the Scientific Revolution from the 17th century. As the birthplace of the Industrial Revolution, England was home to many significant inventors during the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Famous English engineers include Isambard Kingdom Brunel, best known for the creation of the Great Western Railway, a series of famous steamships, and numerous important bridges, hence revolutionising public transport and modern-day engineering. Thomas Newcomen's steam engine helped spawn the Industrial Revolution. \nThe Father of Railways, George Stephenson, built the first public inter-city railway line in the world, the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, which opened in 1830. With his role in the marketing and manufacturing of the steam engine, and invention of modern coinage, Matthew Boulton (business partner of James Watt) is regarded as one of the most influential entrepreneurs in history. The physician Edward Jenner's smallpox vaccine is said to have \"saved more lives\u00a0... than were lost in all the wars of mankind since the beginning of recorded history.\"\nInventions and discoveries of the English include: the jet engine, the first industrial spinning machine, the first computer and the first modern computer, the World Wide Web along with HTML, the first successful human blood transfusion, the motorised vacuum cleaner, the lawn mower, the seat belt, the hovercraft, the electric motor, steam engines, and theories such as the Darwinian theory of evolution and atomic theory. Newton developed the ideas of universal gravitation, Newtonian mechanics, and calculus, and Robert Hooke his eponymously named law of elasticity. Other inventions include the iron plate railway, the thermosiphon, tarmac, the rubber band, the mousetrap, \"cat's eye\" road marker, joint development of the light bulb, steam locomotives, the modern seed drill and many modern techniques and technologies used in precision engineering.\nThe Royal Society, formally The Royal Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge, is a learned society and the United Kingdom's national academy of sciences. Founded on 28 November 1660, it was granted a royal charter by King Charles II as \"The Royal Society\". It is the oldest national scientific institution in the world. The society fulfils a number of roles: promoting science and its benefits, recognising excellence in science, supporting outstanding science, providing scientific advice for policy, fostering international and global co-operation, education and public engagement.\nThe Royal Society started from groups of physicians and natural philosophers, meeting at a variety of locations, including Gresham College in London. They were influenced by the \"new science\", as promoted by Francis Bacon in his \"New Atlantis\", from approximately 1645 onwards. A group known as \"The Philosophical Society of Oxford\" was run under a set of rules still retained by the Bodleian Library. After the English Restoration, there were regular meetings at Gresham College. It is widely held that these groups were the inspiration for the foundation of the Royal Society. \nScientific research and development remains important in the universities of England, with many establishing science parks to facilitate production and co-operation with industry. Between 2004 and 2008 the United Kingdom produced 7 per cent of the world's scientific research papers and had an 8 per cent share of scientific citations, the third and second-highest in the world (after the United States and China, respectively). Scientific journals produced in the United Kingdom include \"Nature\", the \"British Medical Journal\" and \"The Lancet\".\nTransport.\nThe Department for Transport is the government body responsible for overseeing transport in England. The department is run by the Secretary of State for Transport. England has a dense and modern transportation infrastructure. There are many motorways in England, and many other trunk roads, such as the A1 Great North Road, which runs through eastern England from London to Newcastle (much of this section is motorway) and onward to the Scottish border. The longest motorway in England is the M6, from Rugby through the North West up to the Anglo-Scottish border, a distance of . Other major routes include: the M1 from London to Leeds, the M25 which encircles London, the M60 which encircles Manchester, the M4 from London to South Wales, the M62 from Liverpool via Manchester to East Yorkshire, and the M5 from Birmingham to Bristol and the South West.\nBus transport across the country is widespread; major companies include Arriva, FirstGroup, Go-Ahead Group, National Express, Rotala and Stagecoach Group. The red double-decker buses in London have become a symbol of England.\nNational Cycle Route offers cycling routes nationally. There is a rapid transit network in two English cities: the London Underground; and the Tyne and Wear Metro in Newcastle upon Tyne, Gateshead and Sunderland. There are several tram networks, such as the Blackpool tramway, Manchester Metrolink, Sheffield Supertram and West Midlands Metro, and the Tramlink system centred on Croydon in South London.\nRail transport in England is the oldest in the world: passenger railways originated in England in 1825. Much of Britain's of rail network lies in England, covering the country fairly extensively, although a high proportion of railway lines were closed in the second half of the 20th century. There are plans to reopen lines such as the Varsity Line between Oxford and Cambridge. These lines are mostly standard gauge (single, double or quadruple track) though there are also a few narrow gauge lines. There is rail transport access to France and Belgium through an undersea rail link, the Channel Tunnel, which was completed in 1994. Crossrail, under construction in London, is Europe's largest construction project with a \u00a315 billion projected cost. High Speed 2, a new high-speed north\u2013south railway line, projected in 2015 to cost \u00a356 billion, but estimated in 2020 to be almost double that figure, is to start being built in 2020.\nEngland has extensive domestic and international aviation links. The largest airport is Heathrow, which is the world's busiest airport measured by number of international passengers. Other large airports include Gatwick, Manchester, Stansted, Luton and Birmingham.\nBy sea there is ferry transport, both local and international, including from Liverpool to Ireland and the Isle of Man, and Hull to the Netherlands and Belgium. There are around of navigable waterways in England, half of which is owned by the Canal &amp; River Trust, however, water transport is very limited. The River Thames is the major waterway in England, with imports and exports focused at the Port of Tilbury in the Thames Estuary, one of the United Kingdom's three major ports.\nEnergy.\nEnergy use in the United Kingdom stood at 2,249 TWh (193.4 million tonnes of oil equivalent) in 2014. This equates to energy consumption \"per capita\" of 34.82 MWh (3.00 tonnes of oil equivalent) compared to a 2010 world average of 21.54 MWh (1.85 tonnes of oil equivalent). Demand for electricity in 2014 was 34.42GW on average (301.7TWh over the year) coming from a total electricity generation of 335.0TWh. \nSuccessive UK governments have outlined numerous commitments to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. Notably, the UK is one of the best sites in Europe for wind energy, and wind power production is its fastest growing supply. Wind power contributed 15% of UK electricity generation in 2017. \nThe Climate Change Act 2008 was passed in Parliament with an overwhelming majority across political parties. It sets out emission reduction targets that the UK must comply with legally. It represents the first global legally binding climate change mitigation target set by a country. UK government energy policy aims to play a key role in limiting greenhouse gas emissions, whilst meeting energy demand. Shifting availabilities of resources and development of technologies also change the country's energy mix through changes in costs.\nThe current energy policy is the responsibility of the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy and Secretary of State for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy. The Minister of State for Business, Energy and Clean Growth is responsible for green finance, climate science and innovation, and low carbon generation. United Kingdom is ranked 4 out of 180 countries in the Environmental Performance Index. A law has been passed that UK greenhouse gas emissions will be net zero by 2050.\nTourism.\nEnglish Heritage is a governmental body with a broad remit of managing the historic sites, artefacts and environments of England. It is currently sponsored by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. \nThe National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty is a charity which also maintains multiple sites. Of the 25 United Kingdom UNESCO World Heritage Sites, 17 are in England. \nSome of the best known of these include Stonehenge, Avebury and Associated Sites, Tower of London, Jurassic Coast, Palace of Westminster, Roman Baths, City of Bath, Saltaire, Ironbridge Gorge, Studley Royal Park and more recently the English Lake District. The northernmost point of the Roman Empire, Hadrian's Wall, is the largest Roman artefact anywhere: it runs for a total of 73 miles in northern England.\nThe Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport has overall responsibility for tourism, arts and culture, cultural property, heritage and historic environments, libraries, and museums and galleries. The Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Arts, Heritage and Tourism is the minister with responsibility over tourism in England. \nA blue plaque, the oldest historical marker scheme in the world, is a permanent sign installed in a public place in England to commemorate a link between that location and a famous person or event. The scheme was the brainchild of politician William Ewart in 1863 and was initiated in 1866. It was formally established by the Royal Society of Arts in 1867, and since 1986 has been run by English Heritage. In 2011 there were around 1,600 museums in England. Entry to most state-supported museums and galleries is free unlike in other countries. \nLondon is one of the world's most visited cities, regularly taking the top five most visited cities in Europe. It is largely considered a global centre of finance, arts and culture.\nHealthcare.\nNational Health England (NHS England) is the publicly funded healthcare system responsible for providing the majority of healthcare in the country. The NHS began on 5 July 1948, putting into effect the provisions of the National Health Service Act 1946. It was based on the findings of the Beveridge Report, prepared by economist and social reformer William Beveridge. The NHS is largely funded from general taxation including National Insurance payments, and it provides most of its services free at the point of use, although there are charges for some people for eye tests, dental care, prescriptions and aspects of personal care.\nThe government department responsible for the NHS is the Department of Health, headed by the Secretary of State for Health, who sits in the British Cabinet. Most of the expenditure of the Department of Health is spent on the NHS\u2014\u00a398.6\u00a0billion was spent in 2008\u20132009. In recent years the private sector has been increasingly used to provide more NHS services despite opposition by doctors and trade unions.\nWhen purchasing drugs, the NHS has significant market power that, based on its own assessment of the fair value of the drugs, influences the global price, typically keeping prices lower. Several other countries either copy the UK's model or directly rely on Britain's assessments for their own decisions on state-financed drug reimbursements. Regulatory bodies such as the General Medical Council and the Nursing and Midwifery Council are organised on a UK-wide basis, as are non-governmental bodies such as the Royal Colleges.\nThe average life expectancy of people in England is 77.5 years for males and 81.7 years for females, the highest of the four countries of the United Kingdom. The South of England has a higher life expectancy than the North, however, regional differences do seem to be slowly narrowing: between 1991\u20131993 and 2012\u20132014, life expectancy in the North East increased by 6.0 years and in the North West by 5.8 years, the fastest increase in any region outside London, and the gap between life expectancy in the North East and South East is now 2.5 years, down from 2.9 in 1993.\nDemography.\nPopulation.\nWith over 53\u00a0million inhabitants, England is by far the most populous country of the United Kingdom, accounting for 84% of the combined total. England taken as a unit and measured against international states has the fourth largest population in the European Union and would be the 25th largest country by population in the world. With a density of 424 people per square kilometre, in 2009 it would have been the second most densely populated country in the European Union after Malta.\nThe English people are British people. Some genetic evidence suggests that 75\u201395% descend in the paternal line from prehistoric settlers who originally came from the Iberian Peninsula, as well as a 5% contribution from Angles and Saxons, and a significant Scandinavian (Viking) element. However, other geneticists place the Germanic estimate up to half. Over time, various cultures have been influential: Prehistoric, Brythonic, Roman, Anglo-Saxon, Viking (North Germanic), Gaelic cultures, as well as a large influence from Normans. There is an English diaspora in former parts of the British Empire; especially the United States, Canada, Australia, South Africa and New Zealand. Since the late 1990s, many English people have migrated to Spain.\nIn 1086, when the \"Domesday Book\" was compiled, England had a population of two million. About 10% lived in urban areas. By 1801, the population was 8.3\u00a0million, and by 1901 30.5\u00a0million. Due in particular to the economic prosperity of South East England, it has received many economic migrants from the other parts of the United Kingdom. There has been significant Irish migration. The proportion of ethnically European residents totals at 87.50%, including Germans and Poles.\nOther people from much further afield in the former British colonies have arrived since the 1950s: in particular, 6% of people living in England have family origins in the Indian subcontinent, mostly India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. About 0.7% of people are Chinese. 2.90% of the population are black, from Africa and the Caribbean, especially former British colonies. In 2007, 22% of primary school children in England were from ethnic minority families, and in 2011 that figure was 26.5%. About half of the population increase between 1991 and 2001 was due to immigration. Debate over immigration is politically prominent; 80% of respondents in a 2009 Home Office poll wanted to cap it. The ONS has projected that the population will grow by nine million between 2014 and 2039.\nEngland contains one indigenous national minority, the Cornish people, recognised by the UK government under the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities in 2014.\nLanguage.\nAs its name suggests, the English language, today spoken by hundreds of millions of people around the world, originated as the language of England, where it remains the principal tongue spoken by 98% of the population. It is an Indo-European language in the Anglo-Frisian branch of the Germanic family. After the Norman conquest, the Old English language, brought to Britain by the Anglo-Saxon settlers, was confined to the lower social classes as Norman French and Latin were used by the aristocracy.\nBy the 15th century, English was back in fashion among all classes, though much changed; the Middle English form showed many signs of French influence, both in vocabulary and spelling. During the English Renaissance, many words were coined from Latin and Greek origins. Modern English has extended this custom of flexibility when it comes to incorporating words from different languages. Thanks in large part to the British Empire, the English language is the world's unofficial \"lingua franca\".\nEnglish language learning and teaching is an important economic activity, and includes language schooling, tourism spending, and publishing. There is no legislation mandating an official language for England, but English is the only language used for official business. Despite the country's relatively small size, there are many distinct regional accents, and individuals with particularly strong accents may not be easily understood everywhere in the country.\nAs well as English, England has two other indigenous languages, Cornish and Welsh. Cornish died out as a community language in the 18th century but is being revived, and is now protected under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. It is spoken by 0.1% of people in Cornwall, and is taught to some degree in several primary and secondary schools.\nWhen the modern border between Wales and England was established by the Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542, many Welsh-speaking communities found themselves on the English side of the border. Welsh was spoken in Archenfield in Herefordshire into the nineteenth century, and by natives of parts of western Shropshire until the middle of the twentieth century if not later.\nState schools teach students a second language or third language from the ages of seven, usually French, German, Spanish, Latin, Greek. Due to immigration, it was reported in 2007 that around 800,000 school students spoke a foreign language at home, the most common being Punjabi and Urdu. However, following the 2011 census data released by the Office for National Statistics, figures now show that Polish is the main language spoken in England after English.\nReligion.\nIn the 2011 census, 59.4% of the population of England specified their religion as Christian, 24.7% answered that they had no religion, 5% specified that they were Muslim, while 3.7% of the population belongs to other religions and 7.2% did not give an answer. Christianity is the most widely practised religion in England, as it has been since the Early Middle Ages, although it was first introduced much earlier in Gaelic and Roman times. This Celtic Church was gradually joined to the Catholic hierarchy following the 6th-century Gregorian mission to Kent led by St\u00a0Augustine. The established church of England is the Church of England, which left communion with Rome in the 1530s when Henry\u00a0VIII was unable to annul his marriage to the aunt of the king of Spain. The church regards itself as both Catholic and Protestant.\nThere are High Church and Low Church traditions and some Anglicans regard themselves as Anglo-Catholics, following the Tractarian movement. The monarch of the United Kingdom is the Supreme Governor of the Church of England, which has around 26\u00a0million baptised members (of whom the vast majority are not regular churchgoers). It forms part of the Anglican Communion with the Archbishop of Canterbury acting as its symbolic worldwide head. Many cathedrals and parish churches are historic buildings of significant architectural importance, such as Westminster Abbey, York Minster, Durham Cathedral, and Salisbury Cathedral.\nThe 2nd-largest Christian practice is the Latin Rite of the Catholic Church. Since its reintroduction after the Catholic Emancipation, the Church has organised ecclesiastically on an England and Wales basis where there are 4.5\u00a0million members (most of whom are English). There has been one Pope from England to date, Adrian IV; while saints Bede and Anselm are regarded as Doctors of the Church.\nA form of Protestantism known as Methodism is the third largest Christian practice and grew out of Anglicanism through John Wesley. It gained popularity in the mill towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire, and amongst tin miners in Cornwall. There are other non-conformist minorities, such as Baptists, Quakers, Congregationalists, Unitarians and The Salvation Army.\nThe patron saint of England is Saint George; his symbolic cross is included in the flag of England, as well as in the Union Flag as part of a combination. There are many other English and associated saints; some of the best-known are: Cuthbert, Edmund, Alban, Wilfrid, Aidan, Edward the Confessor, John Fisher, Thomas More, Petroc, Piran, Margaret Clitherow and Thomas Becket. There are non-Christian religions practised. Jews have a history of a small minority on the island since 1070. They were expelled from England in 1290 following the Edict of Expulsion, only to be allowed back in 1656.\nEspecially since the 1950s, religions from the former British colonies have grown in numbers, due to immigration. Islam is the most common of these, now accounting for around 5% of the population in England. Hinduism, Sikhism and Buddhism are next in number, adding up to 2.8% combined, introduced from India and South East Asia.\nA small minority of the population practise ancient Pagan religions. Neopaganism in the United Kingdom is primarily represented by Wicca and Witchcraft religions, Druidry, and Heathenry. According to the 2011 UK Census, there are roughly 53,172 people who identify as Pagan in England, and 3,448 in Wales, including 11,026 Wiccans in England and 740 in Wales.\n24.7% of people in England declared no religion in 2011, compared with 14.6% in 2001. These figures are slightly lower than the combined figures for England and Wales as Wales has a higher level of irreligion than England. Norwich had the highest such proportion at 42.5%, followed closely by Brighton and Hove at 42.4%.\nEducation.\nThe Department for Education is the government department responsible for issues affecting people in England up to the age of 19, including education. State-run and state-funded schools are attended by approximately 93% of English schoolchildren. Education is the responsibility of the Secretary of State for Education.\nChildren who are between the ages of 3 and 5 attend nursery or an Early Years Foundation Stage reception unit within a primary school. Children between the ages of 5 and 11 attend primary school, and secondary school is attended by those aged between 11 and 16. State-funded schools are obliged by law to teach the National Curriculum; basic areas of learning include English literature, English language, mathematics, science, art &amp; design, citizenship, history, geography, religious education, design &amp; technology, computing, ancient &amp; modern languages, music, and physical education.\nMore than 90% of English schools require students to wear uniforms. School uniforms are defined by individual schools, within the constraint that uniform regulations must not discriminate on the grounds of sex, race, disability, sexual orientation, gender reassignment, religion or belief. Schools may choose to permit trousers for girls or religious dress.\nThe Programme for International Student Assessment coordinated by the OECD currently ranks the overall knowledge and skills of British 15-year-olds as 13th in the world in reading literacy, mathematics, and science with the average British student scoring 503.7, compared with the OECD average of 493, ahead of the United States and most of Europe.\nAlthough most English secondary schools are comprehensive, there are selective intake grammar schools to which entrance is subject to passing the eleven-plus exam. Around 7.2 per cent of English schoolchildren attend private schools, which are funded by private sources. Standards in state schools are monitored by the Office for Standards in Education, and in private schools by the Independent Schools Inspectorate.\nAfter finishing compulsory education, students take GCSE examinations. Students may then opt to continue into further education for two years. Further education colleges (particularly sixth form colleges) often form part of a secondary school site. A-level examinations are sat by a large number of further education students, and often form the basis of an application to university. Further education (FE) covers a wide curriculum of study and apprenticeships, including T-levels, BTEC, NVQ and others. Tertiary colleges provide both academic and vocational courses.\nHigher education students normally attend university from age 18 onwards, where they study for an academic degree. There are over 90\u00a0universities in England, all but one of which are public institutions. The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills is the government department responsible for higher education in England. Students are generally entitled to student loans to cover the cost of tuition fees and living costs. The first degree offered to undergraduates is the Bachelor's degree, which usually takes three years to complete. Students are then able to work towards a postgraduate degree, which usually takes one year, or towards a doctorate, which takes three or more years.\nEngland's universities include some of the highest-ranked universities in the world; University of Cambridge, University of Oxford, Imperial College London, University College London and King's College London are all ranked in the global top 30 in the 2018 \"QS World University Rankings\". The London School of Economics has been described as the world's leading social science institution for both teaching and research. The London Business School is considered one of the world's leading business schools and in 2010 its MBA programme was ranked best in the world by the \"Financial Times\". Academic degrees in England are usually split into classes: first class (1st), upper second class (2:1), lower second class (2:2), third (3rd), and unclassified.\nThe King's School, Canterbury and King's School, Rochester are the oldest schools in the English-speaking world. Many of England's most well-known schools, such as Winchester College, Eton, St Paul's School, Harrow School and Rugby School are fee-paying institutions.\nCulture.\nArchitecture.\nMany ancient standing stone monuments were erected during the prehistoric period; amongst the best known are Stonehenge, Devil's Arrows, Rudston Monolith and Castlerigg. With the introduction of Ancient Roman architecture there was a development of basilicas, baths, amphitheaters, triumphal arches, villas, Roman temples, Roman roads, Roman forts, stockades and aqueducts. It was the Romans who founded the first cities and towns such as London, Bath, York, Chester and St Albans. Perhaps the best-known example is Hadrian's Wall stretching right across northern England. Another well-preserved example is the Roman Baths at Bath, Somerset.\nEarly Medieval architecture's secular buildings were simple constructions mainly using timber with thatch for roofing. Ecclesiastical architecture ranged from a synthesis of Hiberno\u2013Saxon monasticism, to Early Christian basilica and architecture characterised by pilaster-strips, blank arcading, baluster shafts and triangular headed openings. After the Norman conquest in 1066 various Castles in England were created so law lords could uphold their authority and in the north to protect from invasion. Some of the best-known medieval castles are the Tower of London, Warwick Castle, Durham Castle and Windsor Castle.\nThroughout the Plantagenet era, an English Gothic architecture flourished, with prime examples including the medieval cathedrals such as Canterbury Cathedral, Westminster Abbey and York Minster. Expanding on the Norman base there was also castles, palaces, great houses, universities and parish churches. Medieval architecture was completed with the 16th-century Tudor style; the four-centred arch, now known as the Tudor arch, was a defining feature as were wattle and daub houses domestically. In the aftermath of the Renaissance a form of architecture echoing classical antiquity synthesised with Christianity appeared, the English Baroque style of architect Christopher Wren being particularly championed.\nGeorgian architecture followed in a more refined style, evoking a simple Palladian form; the Royal Crescent at Bath is one of the best examples of this. With the emergence of romanticism during Victorian period, a Gothic Revival was launched. In addition to this, around the same time the Industrial Revolution paved the way for buildings such as The Crystal Palace. Since the 1930s various modernist forms have appeared whose reception is often controversial, though traditionalist resistance movements continue with support in influential places.\nGardens.\nLandscape gardening, as developed by Capability Brown, set an international trend for the English garden. Gardening, and visiting gardens, are regarded as typically English pursuits. The English garden presented an idealized view of nature. At large country houses, the English garden usually included lakes, sweeps of gently rolling lawns set against groves of trees, and recreations of classical temples, Gothic ruins, bridges, and other picturesque architecture, designed to recreate an idyllic pastoral landscape.\nBy the end of the 18th century, the English garden was being imitated by the French landscape garden, and as far away as St. Petersburg, Russia, in Pavlovsk, the gardens of the future Emperor Paul. It also had a major influence on the form of the public parks and gardens which appeared around the world in the 19th century. The English landscape garden was centred on the English country house and manor houses. \nEnglish Heritage and the National Trust preserve great gardens and landscape parks throughout the country. The RHS Chelsea Flower Show is held every year by the Royal Horticultural Society and is said to be the largest gardening show in the world.\nFolklore.\nEnglish folklore developed over many centuries. Some of the characters and stories are present across England, but most belong to specific regions. Common folkloric beings include pixies, giants, elves, bogeymen, trolls, goblins and dwarves. While many legends and folk-customs are thought to be ancient, such as the tales featuring Offa of Angel and Wayland the Smith, others date from after the Norman invasion. The legends featuring Robin Hood and his Merry Men of Sherwood, and their battles with the Sheriff of Nottingham, are among the best-known of these.\nDuring the High Middle Ages tales originating from Brythonic traditions entered English folklore and developed into the Arthurian myth. These were derived from Anglo-Norman, Welsh and French sources, featuring King Arthur, Camelot, Excalibur, Merlin and the Knights of the Round Table such as Lancelot. These stories are most centrally brought together within Geoffrey of Monmouth's \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" (\"History of the Kings of Britain\"). Another early figure from British tradition, King Cole, may have been based on a real figure from Sub-Roman Britain. Many of the tales and pseudo-histories make up part of the wider Matter of Britain, a collection of shared British folklore.\nSome folk figures are based on semi or actual historical people whose story has been passed down centuries; Lady Godiva for instance was said to have ridden naked on horseback through Coventry, Hereward the Wake was a heroic English figure resisting the Norman invasion, Herne the Hunter is an equestrian ghost associated with Windsor Forest and Great Park and Mother Shipton is the archetypal witch. On 5 November people make bonfires, set off fireworks and eat toffee apples in commemoration of the foiling of the Gunpowder Plot centred on Guy Fawkes. The chivalrous bandit, such as Dick Turpin, is a recurring character, while Blackbeard is the archetypal pirate. There are various national and regional folk activities, participated in to this day, such as Morris dancing, Maypole dancing, Rapper sword in the North East, Long Sword dance in Yorkshire, Mummers Plays, bottle-kicking in Leicestershire, and cheese-rolling at Cooper's Hill. There is no official national costume, but a few are well established such as the Pearly Kings and Queens associated with cockneys, the Royal Guard, the Morris costume and Beefeaters.\nCuisine.\nSince the early modern period the food of England has historically been characterised by its simplicity of approach and a reliance on the high quality of natural produce. During the Middle Ages and through the Renaissance period, English cuisine enjoyed an excellent reputation, though a decline began during the Industrial Revolution with the move away from the land and increasing urbanisation of the populace. The cuisine of England has, however, recently undergone a revival, which has been recognised by food critics with some good ratings in \"Restaurant\"s best restaurant in the world charts. An early book of English recipes is the \"Forme of Cury\" from the royal court of Richard II.\nTraditional examples of English food include the Sunday roast, featuring a roasted joint (usually beef, lamb, chicken or pork) served with assorted vegetables, Yorkshire pudding and gravy. Other prominent meals include fish and chips and the full English breakfast (generally consisting of bacon, sausages, grilled tomatoes, fried bread, black pudding, baked beans, mushrooms and eggs). Various meat pies are consumed, such as steak and kidney pie, steak and ale pie, cottage pie, pork pie (usually eaten cold) and the Cornish pasty.\nSausages are commonly eaten, either as bangers and mash or toad in the hole. Lancashire hotpot is a well-known stew originating in the northwest. Some of the more popular cheeses are Cheddar, Red Leicester, Wensleydale, Double Gloucester and Blue Stilton. Many Anglo-Indian hybrid dishes, curries, have been created, such as chicken tikka masala and balti. Traditional English dessert dishes include apple pie or other fruit pies; spotted dick \u2013 all generally served with custard; and, more recently, sticky toffee pudding. Sweet pastries include scones (either plain or containing dried fruit) served with jam or cream, dried fruit loaves, Eccles cakes and mince pies as well as a wide range of sweet or spiced biscuits.\nCommon non-alcoholic drinks include tea, the popularity of which was increased by Catherine of Braganza, and coffee; frequently consumed alcoholic drinks include wine, ciders and English beers, such as bitter, mild, stout and brown ale.\nVisual arts.\nThe earliest known examples are the prehistoric rock and cave art pieces, most prominent in North Yorkshire, Northumberland and Cumbria, but also feature further south, for example at Creswell Crags. With the arrival of Roman culture in the 1st century, various forms of art such as statues, busts, glasswork and mosaics were the norm. There are numerous surviving artefacts, such as those at Lullingstone and Aldborough. During the Early Middle Ages the style favoured sculpted crosses and ivories, manuscript painting, gold and enamel jewellery, demonstrating a love of intricate, interwoven designs such as in the Staffordshire Hoard discovered in 2009. Some of these blended Gaelic and Anglian styles, such as the Lindisfarne Gospels and Vespasian Psalter. Later Gothic art was popular at Winchester and Canterbury, examples survive such as Benedictional of St. \u00c6thelwold and Luttrell Psalter.\nThe Tudor era saw prominent artists as part of their court, portrait painting which would remain an enduring part of English art, was boosted by German Hans Holbein, natives such as Nicholas Hilliard built on this. Under the Stuarts, Continental artists were influential especially the Flemish, examples from the period include Anthony van Dyck, Peter Lely, Godfrey Kneller and William Dobson. The 18th century was a time of significance with the founding of the Royal Academy, a classicism based on the High Renaissance prevailed, with Thomas Gainsborough and Joshua Reynolds becoming two of England's most treasured artists.\nIn the 19th century, Constable and Turner were major landscape artists. The Norwich School continued the landscape tradition, while the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, led by artists such as Holman Hunt, Dante Gabriel Rossetti and John Everett Millais, revived the Early Renaissance style with their vivid and detailed style. Prominent amongst 20th-century artists was Henry Moore, regarded as the voice of British sculpture, and of British modernism in general. More recent painters include Lucian Freud, whose work \"Benefits Supervisor Sleeping\" in 2008 set a world record for sale value of a painting by a then-living artist. The Royal Society of Arts is an organisation committed to the arts and culture.\nLiterature, poetry, and philosophy.\nEarly authors such as Bede and Alcuin wrote in Latin. The period of Old English literature provided the epic poem \"Beowulf\" and the secular prose of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\", along with Christian writings such as \"Judith\", C\u00e6dmon's \"Hymn\" and hagiographies. Following the Norman conquest Latin continued amongst the educated classes, as well as an Anglo-Norman literature.\nMiddle English literature emerged with Geoffrey Chaucer, author of \"The Canterbury Tales\", along with Gower, the Pearl Poet and Langland. William of Ockham and Roger Bacon, who were Franciscans, were major philosophers of the Middle Ages. Julian of Norwich, who wrote \"Revelations of Divine Love\", was a prominent Christian mystic. With the English Renaissance literature in the Early Modern English style appeared. William Shakespeare, whose works include \"Hamlet\", \"Romeo and Juliet\", \"Macbeth\", and \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", remains one of the most championed authors in English literature.\nChristopher Marlowe, Edmund Spenser, Philip Sydney, Thomas Kyd, John Donne, and Ben Jonson are other established authors of the Elizabethan age. Francis Bacon and Thomas Hobbes wrote on empiricism and materialism, including scientific method and social contract. Filmer wrote on the Divine Right of Kings. Marvell was the best-known poet of the Commonwealth, while John Milton authored \"Paradise Lost\" during the Restoration.\nSome of the most prominent philosophers of the Enlightenment were John Locke, Thomas Paine, Samuel Johnson and Jeremy Bentham. More radical elements were later countered by Edmund Burke who is regarded as the founder of conservatism. The poet Alexander Pope with his satirical verse became well regarded. The English played a significant role in romanticism: Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Lord Byron, John Keats, Mary Shelley, Percy Bysshe Shelley, William Blake and William Wordsworth were major figures.\nIn response to the Industrial Revolution, agrarian writers sought a way between liberty and tradition; William Cobbett, G. K. Chesterton and Hilaire Belloc were main exponents, while the founder of guild socialism, Arthur Penty, and cooperative movement advocate G. D. H. Cole are somewhat related. Empiricism continued through John Stuart Mill and Bertrand Russell, while Bernard Williams was involved in analytics. Authors from around the Victorian era include Charles Dickens, the Bront\u00eb sisters, Jane Austen, George Eliot, Rudyard Kipling, Thomas Hardy, H. G. Wells and Lewis Carroll. Since then England has continued to produce novelists such as George Orwell, D. H. Lawrence, Virginia Woolf, C. S. Lewis, Enid Blyton, Aldous Huxley, Agatha Christie, Terry Pratchett, J. R. R. Tolkien, and J. K. Rowling.\nPerforming arts.\nThe traditional folk music of England is centuries old and has contributed to several genres prominently; mostly sea shanties, jigs, hornpipes and dance music. It has its own distinct variations and regional peculiarities. Ballads featuring Robin Hood, printed by Wynkyn de Worde in the 16th century, are an important artefact, as are John Playford's \"The Dancing Master\" and Robert Harley's \"Roxburghe Ballads\" collections. Some of the best-known songs are \"Greensleeves\", \"Pastime with Good Company\", \"Maggie May\" and \"Spanish Ladies\" amongst others. Many nursery rhymes are of English origin such as \"Mary, Mary, Quite Contrary\", \"Roses are red\", \"Jack and Jill\", \"London Bridge Is Falling Down, The Grand Old Duke of York, Hey Diddle Diddle\" and \"Humpty Dumpty\". Traditional English Christmas carols include \"We Wish You a Merry Christmas\", \"The First Noel\", \u201cI Saw Three Ships\u201d and \"God Rest You Merry, Gentlemen\".\nEarly English composers in classical music include Renaissance artists Thomas Tallis and William Byrd, followed up by Henry Purcell from the Baroque period. German-born George Frideric Handel spent most of his composing life in London and became a national icon in Britain, creating some of the most well-known works of classical music, especially his English oratorios, \"The Messiah\", \"Solomon\", \"Water Music\", and \"Music for the Royal Fireworks\". One of his four Coronation Anthems, \"Zadok the Priest\", composed for the coronation of George II, has been performed at every subsequent British coronation, traditionally during the sovereign's anointing. \nClassical music attracted much attention from 1784 with the formation of the Birmingham Triennial Music Festival, which was the longest running classical music festival of its kind until the final concerts in 1912. The English Musical Renaissance was a hypothetical development in the late 19th and early 20th century, when English composers, often those lecturing or trained at the Royal College of Music, were said to have freed themselves from foreign musical influences. There was a revival in the profile of composers from England in the 20th century led by Edward Elgar, Benjamin Britten, Frederick Delius, Gustav Holst, Ralph Vaughan Williams and others. Present-day composers from England include Michael Nyman, best known for \"The Piano\", and Andrew Lloyd Webber, whose musicals have achieved enormous success in the West End and worldwide.\nIn popular music, many English bands and solo artists have been cited as the most influential and best-selling musicians of all time. Acts such as The Beatles, Led Zeppelin, Pink Floyd, Elton John, Queen, Rod Stewart, David Bowie, The Rolling Stones and Def Leppard are among the highest-selling recording artists in the world. Many musical genres have origins in (or strong associations with) England, such as British invasion, progressive rock, hard rock, Mod, glam rock, heavy metal, Britpop, indie rock, gothic rock, shoegazing, acid house, garage, trip hop, drum and bass and dubstep.\nLarge outdoor music festivals in the summer and autumn are popular, such as Glastonbury, V Festival, and the Reading and Leeds Festivals. England was at the forefront of the illegal, free rave movement from the late 1980s, which led to pan-European culture of teknivals mirrored on the UK free festival movement and associated travelling lifestyle. The Boishakhi Mela is a Bengali New Year festival celebrated by the British Bangladeshi community. It is the largest open-air Asian festival in Europe. After the Notting Hill Carnival, it is the second-largest street festival in the United Kingdom attracting over 80,000 visitors from across the country. \nThe most prominent opera house in England is the Royal Opera House at Covent Garden. The Proms \u2013 a season of orchestral classical concerts held primarily at the Royal Albert Hall in London \u2013 is a major cultural event in the English calendar, and takes place yearly. The Royal Ballet is one of the world's foremost classical ballet companies, its reputation built on two prominent figures of 20th-century dance, \"prima ballerina\" Margot Fonteyn and choreographer Frederick Ashton. The Royal Academy of Music is the oldest conservatoire in England, founded in 1822. It received its royal charter in 1830 from King George IV. England is home to numerous major orchestras such as the BBC Symphony Orchestra, the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, the Philharmonia Orchestra, and the London Symphony Orchestra.\nThe circus is a traditional form of entertainment in England. Chipperfield's Circus dates back more than 300 years, making it one of the oldest family circus dynasties. Philip Astley is regarded as the father of the modern circus. Following his invention of the circus ring in 1768, Astley's Amphitheatre opened in London in 1773. As an equestrian master Astley had a skill for trick horse-riding, and when he added tumblers, tightrope-walkers, jugglers, performing dogs, and a clown to fill time between his own demonstrations \u2013 the modern circus was born.\nPantomime is a British musical comedy stage production, designed for family entertainment. It is performed in theatres throughout the England during the Christmas and New Year season. The art originated in the 18th century with John Weaver, a dance master and choreographer. In 19th century England it acquired its present form, which includes songs, slapstick comedy and dancing, employing gender-crossing actors, combining topical humour with a story loosely based on a well-known fairy tale. \nCinema.\nEngland (and the UK as a whole) has had a considerable influence on the history of the cinema, producing some of the greatest actors, directors and motion pictures of all time, including Alfred Hitchcock, Charlie Chaplin, David Lean, Laurence Olivier, Vivien Leigh, John Gielgud, Peter Sellers, Julie Andrews, Michael Caine, Gary Oldman, Helen Mirren, Kate Winslet and Daniel Day-Lewis. Hitchcock and Lean are among the most critically acclaimed filmmakers. Hitchcock's first thriller, \"\" (1926), helped shape the thriller genre in film, while his 1929 film, \"Blackmail\", is often regarded as the first British feature film.\nMajor film studios in England include Pinewood, Elstree and Shepperton. Some of the most commercially successful films of all time have been produced in England, including two of the highest-grossing film franchises (\"Harry Potter\" and \"James Bond\"). Ealing Studios in London has a claim to being the oldest continuously working film studio in the world. Famous for recording many motion picture film scores, the London Symphony Orchestra first performed film music in 1935. The Hammer Horror films starring Christopher Lee saw the production of the first gory horror films showing blood and guts in colour.\nThe BFI Top 100 British films includes \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\" (1979), a film regularly voted the funniest of all time by the UK public. English producers are also active in international co-productions and English actors, directors and crew feature regularly in American films. The UK film council ranked David Yates, Christopher Nolan, Mike Newell, Ridley Scott and Paul Greengrass the five most commercially successful English directors since 2001. Other contemporary English directors include Sam Mendes, Guy Ritchie and Richard Curtis. Current actors include Tom Hardy, Daniel Craig, Benedict Cumberbatch, Lena Headey, Felicity Jones, Emilia Clarke, Lashana Lynch, and Emma Watson. Acclaimed for his motion capture work, Andy Serkis opened The Imaginarium Studios in London in 2011. The visual effects company Framestore in London has produced some of the most critically acclaimed special effects in modern film. Many successful Hollywood films have been based on English people, stories or events. The 'English Cycle' of Disney animated films include \"Alice in Wonderland\", \"The Jungle Book\" and \"Winnie the Pooh\".\nMuseums, libraries, and galleries.\nEnglish Heritage is a governmental body with a broad remit of managing the historic sites, artefacts and environments of England. It is currently sponsored by the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport. The charity National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty holds a contrasting role. 17 of the 25 United Kingdom UNESCO World Heritage Sites fall within England. Some of the best-known of these are: Hadrian's Wall, Stonehenge, Avebury and Associated Sites, Tower of London, Jurassic Coast, Saltaire, Ironbridge Gorge, Studley Royal Park and various others.\nThere are many museums in England, but perhaps the most notable is London's British Museum. Its collection of more than seven million objects is one of the largest and most comprehensive in the world, sourced from every continent, illustrating and documenting the story of human culture from its beginning to the present. The British Library in London is the national library and is one of the world's largest research libraries, holding over 150\u00a0million items in almost all known languages and formats; including around 25\u00a0million books. The most senior art gallery is the National Gallery in Trafalgar Square, which houses a collection of over 2,300 paintings dating from the mid-13th century to 1900. The Tate galleries house the national collections of British and international modern art; they also host the famously controversial Turner Prize.\nMedia.\nThe BBC, founded in 1922, is the UK's publicly funded radio, television and Internet broadcasting corporation, and is the oldest and largest broadcaster in the world. It operates numerous television and radio stations in the UK and abroad and its domestic services are funded by the television licence. The BBC World Service is an international broadcaster owned and operated by the BBC. It is the world's largest of any kind. It broadcasts radio news, speech and discussions in more than 40 languages. \nLondon dominates the media sector in England: national newspapers and television and radio are largely based there, although Manchester is also a significant national media centre. The UK publishing sector, including books, directories and databases, journals, magazines and business media, newspapers and news agencies, has a combined turnover of around \u00a320 billion and employs around 167,000 people. National newspapers produced in England include \"The Times\", \"The Guardian\" and the \"Financial Times\". \nMagazines and journals published in England that have achieved worldwide circulation include \"Nature\", \"New Scientist\", \"The Spectator\", \"Prospect\", \"NME\" and \"The Economist\". The Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport has overall responsibility over media and broadcasting in England. \nSport.\nEngland has a strong sporting heritage, and during the 19th century codified many sports that are now played around the world. Sports originating in England include association football, cricket, rugby union, rugby league, tennis, boxing, badminton, squash, rounders, hockey, snooker, billiards, darts, table tennis, bowls, netball, thoroughbred horseracing, greyhound racing and fox hunting. It has helped the development of golf, sailing and Formula One.\nFootball is the most popular of these sports. The England national football team, whose home venue is Wembley Stadium, played Scotland in the first ever international football match in 1872. Referred to as the \"home of football\" by FIFA, England hosted the 1966 FIFA World Cup, and won the tournament by defeating West Germany 4\u20132 in the final, with Geoff Hurst scoring a hat-trick. With a British television audience peak of 32.30\u00a0million viewers, the final is the most watched television event ever in the UK.\nAt club level, England is recognised by FIFA as the birthplace of club football, due to Sheffield F.C. founded in 1857 being the world's oldest club. The Football Association is the oldest governing body in the sport, with the rules of football first drafted in 1863 by Ebenezer Cobb Morley. The FA Cup and The Football League were the first cup and league competitions respectively. In the modern day, the Premier League is the world's most-watched football league, most lucrative, and amongst the elite.\nAs is the case throughout the UK, football in England is notable for the rivalries between clubs and the passion of the supporters, which includes a tradition of football chants. The most successful English football team in the European Cup/UEFA Champions League is Liverpool F.C. who have won the competition on six occasions. Other English success has come from Manchester United F.C., winning the competition on 3 occasions; Nottingham Forest F.C. on 2 occasions, Aston Villa F.C. and Chelsea F.C. have both won the trophy once.\nCricket is generally thought to have been developed in the early medieval period among the farming and metalworking communities of the Weald. The England cricket team is a composite England and Wales, team. One of the game's top rivalries is The Ashes series between England and Australia, contested since 1882. The climax of the 2005 Ashes was viewed by 7.4\u00a0million as it was available on terrestrial television. England has hosted five Cricket World Cups (1975, 1979, 1983, 1999 and 2019), winning the 2019 edition in a final regarded as one of the greatest one day internationals ever played. They hosted the ICC World Twenty20 in 2009, winning this format in 2010 beating rivals Australia in the final. In the domestic competition, the County Championship, Yorkshire are by far the most successful club having won the competition 32\u00a0times outright and sharing it on 1 other occasion. Lord's Cricket Ground situated in London is sometimes referred to as the \"Mecca of Cricket\".\nWilliam Penny Brookes was prominent in organising the format for the modern Olympic Games. In 1994, then President of the IOC, Juan Antonio Samaranch, laid a wreath on Brooke's grave, and said, \"I came to pay homage and tribute to Dr Brookes, who really was the founder of the modern Olympic Games\". London has hosted the Summer Olympic Games three times, in 1908, 1948, and 2012. England competes in the Commonwealth Games, held every four years. Sport England is the governing body responsible for distributing funds and providing strategic guidance for sporting activity in England. The Minister for Sport and Civil Society has responsibility for sport in England.\nRugby union originated in Rugby School, Warwickshire in the early 19th century. The England rugby union team won the 2003 Rugby World Cup, with Jonny Wilkinson scoring the winning drop goal in the last minute of extra time against Australia. England was one of the host nations of the competition in the 1991 Rugby World Cup and also hosted the 2015 Rugby World Cup. The top level of club participation is the English Premiership. Leicester Tigers, London Wasps, Bath Rugby and Northampton Saints have had success in the Europe-wide Heineken Cup.\nRugby league was born in Huddersfield in 1895. Since 2008, the England national rugby league team has been a full test nation in lieu of the Great Britain national rugby league team, which won three World Cups but is now retired. Club sides play in Super League, the present-day embodiment of the Rugby Football League Championship. Rugby League is most popular among towns in the northern English counties of Lancashire, Yorkshire and Cumbria. The vast majority of English clubs in Super League are based in the north of England. Some of the most successful clubs include Wigan Warriors, Hull F.C. St. Helens, Leeds Rhinos and Huddersfield Giants; the former three have all won the World Club Challenge previously.\nGolf has been prominent in England; due in part to its cultural and geographical ties to Scotland, the home of Golf. There are both professional tours for men and women, in two main tours: the PGA and the European Tour. England has produced grand slam winners: Cyril Walker, Tony Jacklin, Nick Faldo, and Justin Rose in the men's and Laura Davies, Alison Nicholas, and Karen Stupples in the women's. The world's oldest golf tournament, and golf's first major is The Open Championship, played both in England and Scotland. The biennial golf competition, the Ryder Cup, is named after English businessman Samuel Ryder who sponsored the event and donated the trophy. Nick Faldo is the most successful Ryder Cup player ever, having won the most points (25) of any player on either the European or US teams.\nTennis was created in Birmingham in the late 19th century, and the Wimbledon Championships is the oldest tennis tournament in the world, and widely considered the most prestigious. Wimbledon is a tournament that has a major place in the British cultural calendar. Fred Perry was the last Englishman to win Wimbledon in 1936. He was the first player to win all four Grand Slam singles titles and helped lead the Great Britain team to four Davis Cup wins. English women who have won Wimbledon include: Ann Haydon Jones in 1969 and Virginia Wade in 1977.\nIn boxing, under the Marquess of Queensberry Rules, England has produced many world champions across the weight divisions internationally recognised by the governing bodies. World champions include Bob Fitzsimmons, Ted \"Kid\" Lewis, Randolph Turpin, Nigel Benn, Chris Eubank, Frank Bruno, Lennox Lewis, Ricky Hatton, Naseem Hamed, Amir Khan, Carl Froch, and David Haye. In women's boxing, Nicola Adams became the world's first woman to win an Olympic boxing gold medal at the 2012 Summer Olympics.\nOriginating in 17th and 18th-century England, the thoroughbred is a horse breed best known for its use in horse racing. The National Hunt horse race the Grand National, is held annually at Aintree Racecourse in early April. It is the most watched horse race in the UK, attracting casual observers, and three-time winner Red Rum is the most successful racehorse in the event's history. Red Rum is also the best-known racehorse in the country.\nThe 1950 British Grand Prix at Silverstone was the first race in the newly created Formula One World Championship. Since then, England has produced some of the greatest drivers in the sport, including; John Surtees, Stirling Moss, Graham Hill (only driver to have won the Triple Crown), Nigel Mansell (only man to hold F1 and IndyCar titles at the same time), Damon Hill, Lewis Hamilton and Jenson Button. It has manufactured some of the most technically advanced racing cars, and many of today's racing companies choose England as their base of operations for its engineering knowledge and organisation. McLaren Automotive, Williams F1, Team Lotus, Honda, Brawn GP, Benetton, Renault, and Red Bull Racing are all, or have been, located in the south of England. England also has a rich heritage in Grand Prix motorcycle racing, the premier championship of motorcycle road racing, and produced several World Champions across all the various class of motorcycle: Mike Hailwood, John Surtees, Phil Read, Geoff Duke, and Barry Sheene.\nDarts is a widely popular sport in England; a professional competitive sport, darts is a traditional pub game. The sport is governed by the World Darts Federation, one of its member organisations is the British Darts Organisation (BDO), which annually stages the BDO World Darts Championship, the other being the Professional Darts Corporation (PDC), which runs its own world championship at Alexandra Palace in London. Phil Taylor is widely regarded as the best darts player of all time, having won 187 professional tournaments, and a record 16 World Championships. Trina Gulliver is the ten-time Women's World Professional Darts Champion of the British Darts Organisation. Another popular sport commonly associated with pub games is Snooker, and England has produced several world champions, including Steve Davis and Ronnie O'Sullivan.\nThe English are keen sailors and enjoy competitive sailing; founding and winning some of the world's most famous and respected international competitive tournaments across the various race formats, including the match race, a regatta, and the America's Cup. England has produced some of the world's greatest sailors, including Francis Chichester, Herbert Hasler, John Ridgway, Robin Knox-Johnston, Ellen MacArthur, Mike Golding, Paul Goodison, and the most successful Olympic sailor ever Ben Ainslie.\nNational symbols.\nThe St George's Cross has been the national flag of England since the 13th century. Originally the flag was used by the maritime Republic of Genoa. The English monarch paid a tribute to the Doge of Genoa from 1190 onwards so that English ships could fly the flag as a means of protection when entering the Mediterranean.\nA red cross was a symbol for many Crusaders in the 12th and 13th centuries. It became associated with Saint George, along with countries and cities, which claimed him as their patron saint and used his cross as a banner. Since 1606 the St George's Cross has formed part of the design of the Union Flag, a Pan-British flag designed by King James I. During the English Civil War and Interregnum, the New Model Army's standards and the Commonwealth's Great Seal both incorporated the flag of Saint George.\nThere are numerous other symbols and symbolic artefacts, both official and unofficial, including the Tudor rose, the nation's floral emblem, and the Three Lions featured on the Royal Arms of England. The Tudor rose was adopted as a national emblem of England around the time of the Wars of the Roses as a symbol of peace. It is a syncretic symbol in that it merged the white rose of the Yorkists and the red rose of the Lancastrians\u2014cadet branches of the Plantagenets who went to war over control of the nation. It is also known as the \"Rose of England\". The oak tree is a symbol of England, representing strength and endurance. The Royal Oak symbol and Oak Apple Day commemorate the escape of King Charles II from the grasp of the parliamentarians after his father's execution: he hid in an oak tree to avoid detection before safely reaching exile.\nThe Royal Arms of England, a national coat of arms featuring three lions, originated with its adoption by Richard the Lionheart in 1198. It is blazoned as \"gules, three lions passant guardant or\" and it provides one of the most prominent symbols of England; it is similar to the traditional arms of Normandy. England does not have an official designated national anthem, as the United Kingdom as a whole has \"God Save the Queen\". However, the following are often considered unofficial English national anthems:\n\"Jerusalem\", \"Land of Hope and Glory\" (used for England during the 2002 Commonwealth Games), and \"I Vow to Thee, My Country\". England's National Day is 23 April which is Saint George's Day: Saint George is the patron saint of England."}
{"id": "9317", "revid": "27853216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9317", "title": "European Union", "text": "The European Union (EU) is a political and economic union of member states that are located primarily in Europe. Its members have a combined area of and an estimated total population of about 447million. The EU has developed an internal single market through a standardised system of laws that apply in all member states in those matters, and only those matters, where members have agreed to act as one. EU policies aim to ensure the free movement of people, goods, services and capital within the internal market; enact legislation in justice and home affairs; and maintain common policies on trade, agriculture, fisheries and regional development. Passport controls have been abolished for travel within the Schengen Area. A monetary union was established in 1999, coming into full force in 2002, and is composed of 19 EU member states which use the euro currency. The EU has often been described as a \"sui generis\" political entity (without precedent or comparison).\nThe EU and European citizenship were established when the Maastricht Treaty came into force in 1993. The EU traces its origins to the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) and the European Economic Community (EEC), established, respectively, by the 1951 Treaty of Paris and 1957 Treaty of Rome. The original members of what came to be known as the European Communities were the Inner Six: Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and West Germany. The Communities and their successors have grown in size by the accession of new member states and in power by the addition of policy areas to their remit. The United Kingdom became the first member state to leave the EU on 31 January 2020. Before this, three territories of member states had left the EU or its forerunners. The latest major amendment to the constitutional basis of the EU, the Treaty of Lisbon, came into force in 2009.\nContaining some 5.8% of the world population in 2020, the EU had generated a nominal gross domestic product (GDP) of around trillion in 2021, constituting approximately 18% of global nominal GDP. Additionally, all EU countries have a very high Human Development Index according to the United Nations Development Programme. In 2012, the EU was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. Through the Common Foreign and Security Policy, the union has developed a role in external relations and defence. It maintains permanent diplomatic missions throughout the world and represents itself at the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, the G7 and the G20. Due to its global influence, the European Union has been described by some scholars as an emerging superpower.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nDuring the centuries that followed the fall of Rome in 476, several European states viewed themselves as \"translatio imperii\" (\"transfer of rule\") of the defunct Roman Empire: the Frankish Empire (481\u2013843) and the Holy Roman Empire (962\u20131806) were thereby attempts to resurrect Rome in the West. This political philosophy of a supra-national rule over the continent, similar to the example of the ancient Roman Empire, resulted in the early Middle Ages in the concept of a \"renovatio imperii\" (\"restoration of the empire\"), either in the forms of the \"Reichsidee\" (\"imperial idea\") or the religiously inspired \"Imperium Christianum\" (\"christian empire\"). Medieval Christendom and the political power of the Papacy have been cited as conducive to European integration and unity.\nIn the oriental parts of the continent, the Russian Tsardom, and ultimately the Empire (1547\u20131917), declared Moscow to be Third Rome and inheritor of the Eastern tradition after the fall of Constantinople in 1453. The gap between Greek East and Latin West had already been widened by the political scission\u00a0of the Roman Empire in the 4th century and the Great Schism of 1054, and would be eventually widened again by the Iron Curtain (1945\u20131991) before the enlargement of the European Union towards Eastern Europe since 2004 onward.\nPan-European political thought truly emerged during the 19th century, inspired by the liberal ideas of the French and American Revolutions after the demise of Napol\u00e9on's Empire (1804\u20131815). In the decades following the outcomes of the Congress of Vienna, ideals of European unity flourished across the continent, especially in the writings of Wojciech Jastrz\u0119bowski (1799\u20131882) or Giuseppe Mazzini (1805\u20131872). The term \"United States of Europe\" () was used at that time by Victor Hugo (1802\u20131885) during a speech at the International Peace Congress held in Paris in 1849:\nDuring the interwar period, the consciousness that national markets in Europe were interdependent though confrontational, along with the observation of a larger and growing US market on the other side of the ocean, nourished the urge for the economic integration of the continent. In 1920, advocating the creation of a European economic union, British economist John Maynard Keynes wrote that \"a Free Trade Union should be established ... to impose no protectionist tariffs whatever against the produce of other members of the Union.\" During the same decade, Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi, one of the first to imagine of a modern political union of Europe, founded the Pan-Europa Movement. His ideas influenced his contemporaries, among which then Prime Minister of France Aristide Briand. In 1929, the latter gave a speech in favour of a European Union before the assembly of the League of Nations, precursor of the United Nations. In a radio address in March 1943, with war still raging, Britain's leader Sir Winston Churchill spoke warmly of \"restoring the true greatness of Europe\" once victory had been achieved, and mused on the post-war creation of a \"Council of Europe\" which would bring the European nations together to build peace.\nPreliminary (19451957).\nAfter World War II, European integration was seen as an antidote to the extreme nationalism which had devastated parts of the continent. In a speech delivered on 19 September 1946 at the University of Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland, Winston Churchill went further and advocated the emergence of a United States of Europe. The 1948 Hague Congress was a pivotal moment in European federal history, as it led to the creation of the European Movement International and of the College of Europe, where Europe's future leaders would live and study together.\nIt also led directly to the founding of the Council of Europe in 1949, the first great effort to bring the nations of Europe together, initially ten of them. The Council focused primarily on values\u2014human rights and democracy\u2014rather than on economic or trade issues, and was always envisaged as a forum where sovereign governments could choose to work together, with no supra-national authority. It raised great hopes of further European integration, and there were fevered debates in the two years that followed as to how this could be achieved.\nBut in 1952, disappointed at what they saw as the lack of progress within the Council of Europe, six nations decided to go further and created the European Coal and Steel Community, which was declared to be \"a first step in the federation of Europe\". This community helped to economically integrate and coordinate the large number of Marshall Plan funds from the United States. European leaders Alcide De Gasperi from Italy, Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman from France, and Paul-Henri Spaak from Belgium understood that coal and steel were the two industries essential for waging war, and believed that by tying their national industries together, future war between their nations became much less likely. These men and others are officially credited as the founding fathers of the European Union.\nTreaty of Rome (19571992).\nIn 1957, Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and West Germany signed the Treaty of Rome, which created the European Economic Community (EEC) and established a customs union. They also signed another pact creating the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) for co-operation in developing nuclear energy. Both treaties came into force in 1958.\nThe EEC and Euratom were created separately from the ECSC and they shared the same courts and the Common Assembly. The EEC was headed by Walter Hallstein (Hallstein Commission) and Euratom was headed by Louis Armand (Armand Commission) and then \u00c9tienne Hirsch. Euratom was to integrate sectors in nuclear energy while the EEC would develop a customs union among members.\nDuring the 1960s, tensions began to show, with France seeking to limit supranational power. Nevertheless, in 1965 an agreement was reached and on 1 July 1967 the Merger Treaty created a single set of institutions for the three communities, which were collectively referred to as the \"European Communities\". Jean Rey presided over the first merged Commission (Rey Commission).\nIn 1973, the Communities were enlarged to include Denmark (including Greenland, which later left the Communities in 1985, following a dispute over fishing rights), Ireland, and the United Kingdom. Norway had negotiated to join at the same time, but Norwegian voters rejected membership in a referendum. In 1979, the first direct elections to the European Parliament were held.\nGreece joined in 1981, Portugal and Spain following in 1986. In 1985, the Schengen Agreement paved the way for the creation of open borders without passport controls between most member states and some non-member states. In 1986, the European flag began to be used by the EEC and the Single European Act was signed.\nIn 1990, after the fall of the Eastern Bloc, the former East Germany became part of the Communities as part of a reunified Germany.\nMaastricht Treaty (19922007).\nThe European Union was formally established when the Maastricht Treaty\u2014whose main architects were Helmut Kohl and Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand\u2014came into force on 1 November 1993. The treaty also gave the name European Community to the EEC, even if it was referred as such before the treaty. With further enlargement planned to include the former communist states of Central and Eastern Europe, as well as Cyprus and Malta, the Copenhagen criteria for candidate members to join the EU were agreed upon in June 1993. The expansion of the EU introduced a new level of complexity and discord. In 1995, Austria, Finland, and Sweden joined the EU.\nIn 2002, euro banknotes and coins replaced national currencies in 12 of the member states. Since then, the eurozone has increased to encompass 19 countries. The euro currency became the second largest reserve currency in the world. In 2004, the EU saw its biggest enlargement to date when Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia joined the Union.\nLisbon Treaty (2007present).\nIn 2007, Bulgaria and Romania became EU members. Later that year, Slovenia adopted the euro, followed by Cyprus and Malta in 2008, Slovakia in 2009, Estonia in 2011, Latvia in 2014, and Lithuania in 2015.\nOn 1 December 2009, the Lisbon Treaty entered into force and reformed many aspects of the EU. In particular, it changed the legal structure of the European Union, merging the EU three pillars system into a single legal entity provisioned with a legal personality, created a permanent President of the European Council, the first of which was Herman Van Rompuy, and strengthened the position of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.\nIn 2012, the EU received the Nobel Peace Prize for having \"contributed to the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy, and human rights in Europe.\" In 2013, Croatia became the 28th EU member.\nFrom the beginning of the 2010s, the cohesion of the European Union has been tested by several issues, including a debt crisis in some of the Eurozone countries, increasing migration from Africa and Asia, and the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the EU. A referendum in the UK on its membership of the European Union was held in 2016, with 51.9% of participants voting to leave. The UK formally notified the European Council of its decision to leave on 29 March 2017, initiating the formal withdrawal procedure for leaving the EU; following extensions to the process, the UK left the European Union on 31 January 2020, though most areas of EU law continued to apply to the UK for a transition period which lasted until 23:00 GMT on 31 December 2020.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n, the population of the European Union was about 447\u00a0million people (5.8% of the world population). In 2015, 5.1million children were born in the EU-28 corresponding to a birth rate of 10 per 1,000, which is 8 births below the world average. For comparison, the EU-28 birth rate had stood at 10.6 in 2000, 12.8 in 1985 and 16.3 in 1970. Its population growth rate was positive at an estimated 0.23% in 2016.\nIn 2010, 47.3million people who lived in the EU were born outside their resident country. This corresponds to 9.4% of the total EU population. Of these, 31.4million (6.3%) were born outside the EU and 16.0million (3.2%) were born in another EU member state. The largest absolute numbers of people born outside the EU were in Germany (6.4million), France (5.1million), the United Kingdom (4.7million), Spain (4.1million), Italy (3.2million), and the Netherlands (1.4million). In 2017, approximately 825,000 people acquired citizenship of a member state of the European Union. The largest groups were nationals of Morocco, Albania, India, Turkey and Pakistan. 2.4million immigrants from non-EU countries entered the EU in 2017.\nUrbanisation.\nThe EU contains about 40 urban areas with populations of over 1million. With a population of over 13 million, Paris is the largest metropolitan area and the only megacity in the EU. Paris is followed by Madrid, Barcelona, Berlin, the Ruhr, Rome, and Milan, all with a metropolitan population of over 4million.\nThe EU also has numerous polycentric urbanised regions like Rhine-Ruhr (Cologne, Dortmund, D\u00fcsseldorf et al.), Randstad (Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague, Utrecht et al.), Frankfurt Rhine-Main (Frankfurt, Wiesbaden, Mainz et al.), the Flemish Diamond (Antwerp, Brussels, Leuven, Ghent et al.) and Upper Silesian area (Katowice, Ostrava et al.).\nLanguages.\nThe European Union has 24 official languages: Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Irish, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovene, Spanish, and Swedish. Important documents, such as legislation, are translated into every official language and the European Parliament provides translation for documents and plenary sessions.\nDue to the high number of official languages, most of the institutions use only a handful of working languages. The European Commission conducts its internal business in three \"procedural languages\": English, French, and German. Similarly, the Court of Justice of the European Union uses French as the working language, while the European Central Bank conducts its business primarily in English.\nEven though language policy is the responsibility of member states, EU institutions promote multilingualism among its citizens. In 2012, English was the most widely spoken language in the EU, being understood by 51% of the EU population when counting both native and non-native speakers. However, following the UK's exit from the block in early 2020 the percentage of the EU population who spoke English as their native language fell from 13% to 1%. German is the most widely spoken mother tongue (18% of the EU population), and the second most widely understood foreign language, followed by French (13% of the EU population). In addition, both are official languages of several EU member states. More than half (56%) of EU citizens are able to engage in a conversation in a language other than their mother tongue.\nA total of twenty official languages of the EU belong to the Indo-European language family, represented by the Balto-Slavic, the Italic, the Germanic, the Hellenic, and the Celtic branches. Only four languages, namely Hungarian, Finnish, Estonian (all three Uralic), and Maltese (Semitic), are not Indo-European languages. The three official alphabets of the European Union (Cyrillic, Latin, and modern Greek) all derive from the Archaic Greek scripts.\nLuxembourgish (in Luxembourg) and Turkish (in Cyprus) are the only two national languages that are not official languages of the EU. On 26 February 2016 it was made public that Cyprus has asked to make Turkish an official EU language, in a \"gesture\" that could help solve the division of the country. Already in 2004, it was planned that Turkish would become an official language when Cyprus reunites.\nBesides the 24 official languages, there are about 150 regional and minority languages, spoken by up to 50\u00a0million people. Catalan, Galician and Basque are not recognised official languages of the European Union but have official status in one member state (Spain): therefore, official translations of the treaties are made into them and citizens have the right to correspond with the institutions in these languages. The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages ratified by most EU states provides general guidelines that states can follow to protect their linguistic heritage. The European Day of Languages is held annually on 26 September and is aimed at encouraging language learning across Europe.\nReligion.\nThe EU has no formal connection to any religion. The Article 17 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union recognises the \"status under national law of churches and religious associations\" as well as that of \"philosophical and non-confessional organisations\".\nThe preamble to the Treaty on European Union mentions the \"cultural, religious and humanist inheritance of Europe\". Discussion over the draft texts of the European Constitution and later the Treaty of Lisbon included proposals to mention Christianity or a god, or both, in the preamble of the text, but the idea faced opposition and was dropped.\nChristians in the European Union are divided among members of Catholicism (both Roman and Eastern Rite), numerous Protestant denominations (Anglicans, Lutherans, and Reformed forming the bulk of this category), and the Eastern Orthodox Church. In 2009, the EU had an estimated Muslim population of 13\u00a0million, and an estimated Jewish population of over a million. The other world religions of Buddhism, Hinduism, and Sikhism are also represented in the EU population.\nAccording to new polls about religiosity in the European Union in 2015 by Eurobarometer, Christianity is the largest religion in the European Union, accounting for 71.6% of the EU population. Catholics are the largest Christian group, accounting for 45.3% of the EU population, while Protestants make up 11.1%, Eastern Orthodox make up 9.6%, and other Christians make up 5.6%.\nEurostat's Eurobarometer opinion polls showed in 2005 that 52% of EU citizens believed in a god, 27% in \"some sort of spirit or life force\", and 18% had no form of belief. Many countries have experienced falling church attendance and membership in recent years. The countries where the fewest people reported a religious belief were Estonia (16%) and the Czech Republic (19%). The most religious countries were Malta (95%, predominantly Catholic) as well as Cyprus and Romania (both predominantly Orthodox) each with about 90% of citizens professing a belief in their respective god. Across the EU, belief was higher among women, older people, those with religious upbringing, those who left school at 15 or 16, and those \"positioning themselves on the right of the political scale\".\nMember states.\nThrough successive enlargements, the European Union has grown from the six founding states (Belgium, France, West Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands) to members. Countries accede to the union by becoming party to the founding treaties, thereby subjecting themselves to the privileges and obligations of EU membership. This entails a partial delegation of sovereignty to the institutions in return for representation within those institutions, a practice often referred to as \"pooling of sovereignty\".\nTo become a member, a country must meet the Copenhagen criteria, defined at the 1993 meeting of the European Council in Copenhagen. These require a stable democracy that respects human rights and the rule of law; a functioning market economy; and the acceptance of the obligations of membership, including EU law. Evaluation of a country's fulfilment of the criteria is the responsibility of the European Council. Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty provides the basis for a member to leave the Union. Two territories have left the Union: Greenland (an autonomous province of Denmark) withdrew in 1985; the United Kingdom formally invoked Article 50 of the Consolidated Treaty on European Union in 2017, and became the only sovereign state to leave when it withdrew from the EU in 2020.\nThere are six countries that are recognised as candidates for membership: Albania, Iceland, North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and Turkey, though Iceland suspended negotiations in 2013. Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo are officially recognised as potential candidates, with Bosnia and Herzegovina having submitted a membership application.\nThe four countries forming the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) are not EU members, but have partly committed to the EU's economy and regulations: Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, which are a part of the single market through the European Economic Area, and Switzerland, which has similar ties through bilateral treaties. The relationships of the European microstates, Andorra, Monaco, San Marino, and Vatican City include the use of the euro and other areas of co-operation.\nGeography.\nThe EU's member states cover an area of . The EU's highest peak is Mont Blanc in the Graian Alps, above sea level. The lowest points in the EU are Lammefjorden, Denmark and Zuidplaspolder, Netherlands, at 7\u00a0m (23\u00a0ft) below sea level.\nThe landscape, climate, and economy of the EU are influenced by its coastline, which is long.\nIncluding the overseas territories of France which are located outside the continent of Europe, but which are members of the union, the EU experiences most types of climate from Arctic (north-east Europe) to tropical (French Guiana), rendering meteorological averages for the EU as a whole meaningless. The majority of the population lives in areas with a temperate maritime climate (North-Western Europe and Central Europe), a Mediterranean climate (Southern Europe), or a warm summer continental or hemiboreal climate (Northern Balkans and Central Europe).\nThe EU's population is highly urbanised, with some 75% of inhabitants living in urban areas as of 2006. Cities are largely spread out across the EU with a large grouping in and around the Benelux.\nSeveral overseas territories and dependencies of various member states are also formally part of the EU.\nPolitics.\nThe EU operates through a hybrid system of supranational and intergovernmental decision-making, and according to the principles of conferral (which says that it should act only within the limits of the competences conferred on it by the treaties) and of subsidiarity (which says that it should act only where an objective cannot be sufficiently achieved by the member states acting alone). Laws made by the EU institutions are passed in a variety of forms. Generally speaking, they can be classified into two groups: those which come into force without the necessity for national implementation measures (regulations) and those which specifically require national implementation measures (directives).\nConstitutionally, the EU bears some resemblance to both a confederation and a federation, but has not formally defined itself as either. (It does not have a formal constitution: its status is defined by the Treaty of European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union). It is more integrated than a traditional confederation of states because the general level of government widely employs qualified majority voting in some decision-making among the member states, rather than relying exclusively on unanimity. It is less integrated than a federal state because it is not a state in its own right: sovereignty continues to flow 'from the bottom up', from the several peoples of the separate member states, rather than from a single undifferentiated whole. This is reflected in the fact that the member states remain the 'masters of the Treaties', retaining control over the allocation of competences to the Union through constitutional change (thus retaining so-called \"Kompetenz-kompetenz\"); in that they retain control of the use of armed force; they retain control of taxation; and in that they retain a right of unilateral withdrawal from the Union under Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union. In addition, the principle of subsidiarity requires that only those matters that need to be determined collectively are so determined.\nThe European Union has seven principal decision-making bodies, its institutions: the European Parliament, the European Council, the Council of the European Union, the European Commission, the Court of Justice of the European Union, the European Central Bank and the European Court of Auditors. Competence in scrutinising and amending legislation is shared between the Council of the European Union and the European Parliament, while executive tasks are performed by the European Commission and in a limited capacity by the European Council (not to be confused with the aforementioned Council of the European Union). The monetary policy of the eurozone is determined by the European Central Bank. The interpretation and the application of EU law and the treaties are ensured by the Court of Justice of the European Union. The EU budget is scrutinised by the European Court of Auditors. There are also a number of ancillary bodies which advise the EU or operate in a specific area.\nEU policy is in general promulgated by EU directives, which are then implemented in the domestic legislation of its member states, and EU regulations, which are immediately enforceable in all member states. Lobbying at EU level by special interest groups is regulated to try to balance the aspirations of private initiatives with public interest decision-making process.\nInstitutions.\nEuropean Council.\nThe European Council gives political direction to the EU. It convenes at least four times a year and comprises the President of the European Council (Charles Michel), the President of the European Commission and one representative per member state (either its head of state or head of government). The High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy (Josep Borrell) also takes part in its meetings. It has been described by some as the Union's \"supreme political authority\". It is actively involved in the negotiation of treaty changes and defines the EU's policy agenda and strategies.\nThe European Council uses its leadership role to sort out disputes between member states and the institutions, and to resolve political crises and disagreements over controversial issues and policies. It acts externally as a \"collective head of state\" and ratifies important documents (for example, international agreements and treaties).\nTasks for the President of the European Council are ensuring the external representation of the EU, driving consensus and resolving divergences among member states, both during meetings of the European Council and over the periods between them.\nThe European Council should not be mistaken for the Council of Europe, an international organisation independent of the EU based in Strasbourg.\nEuropean Commission.\nThe European Commission acts both as the EU's executive arm, responsible for the day-to-day running of the EU, and also the legislative initiator, with the sole power to propose laws for debate. The commission is 'guardian of the Treaties' and is responsible for their efficient operation and policing. It operates \"de facto\" as a cabinet government, with 27 Commissioners for different areas of policy, one from each member state, though Commissioners are bound to represent the interests of the EU as a whole rather than their home state.\nOne of the 27 is the President of the European Commission (Ursula von der Leyen for 20192024), appointed by the European Council, subject to the Parliament's approval. After the President, the most prominent Commissioner is the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, who is \"ex-officio\" a Vice-President of the Commission and is also chosen by the European Council. The other 26 Commissioners are subsequently appointed by the Council of the European Union in agreement with the nominated President. The 27 Commissioners as a single body are subject to approval (or otherwise) by vote of the European Parliament.\nCouncil of the European Union.\nThe Council of the European Union (also called the Council and the \"Council of Ministers\", its former title) forms one half of the EU's legislature. It consists of a government minister from each member state and meets in different compositions depending on the policy area being addressed. Notwithstanding its different configurations, it is considered to be one single body. In addition to its legislative functions, the council also exercises executive functions in relations to the Common Foreign and Security Policy.\nIn some policies, there are several member states that ally with strategic partners within the Union. Examples of such alliances include the Visegrad Group, Benelux, the Baltic Assembly, the New Hanseatic League, the Weimar Triangle, the Lublin Triangle, EU Med Group, the Craiova Group and Bucharest Nine.\nEuropean Parliament.\nThe European Parliament is one of three legislative institutions of the EU, which together with the Council of the European Union is tasked with amending and approving the Commission's proposals.\nThe 705 Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) are directly elected by EU citizens every five years on the basis of proportional representation. MEPs are elected on a national basis and they sit according to political groups rather than their nationality. Each country has a set number of seats and is divided into sub-national constituencies where this does not affect the proportional nature of the voting system.\nIn the ordinary legislative procedure, the European Commission proposes legislation, which requires the joint approval of the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union to pass. This process applies to nearly all areas, including the EU budget. The Parliament is the final body to approve or reject the proposed membership of the commission, and can attempt motions of censure on the commission by appeal to the Court of Justice. The President of the European Parliament (David Sassoli) carries out the role of speaker in Parliament and represents it externally. The President and Vice-Presidents are elected by MEPs every two and a half years.\nBudget.\nThe EU had an agreed budget of \u00a0billion for the year 2007 and \u00a0billion for the period 2007\u20132013, representing 1.10% and 1.05% of the EU-27's GNI forecast for the respective periods. In 1960, the budget of the then European Economic Community was 0.03% of GDP.\nIn the 2010 budget of \u00a0billion, the largest single expenditure item is \"cohesion &amp; competitiveness\" with around 45% of the total budget. Next comes \"agriculture\" with approximately 31% of the total. \"Rural development, environment and fisheries\" takes up around 11%. \"Administration\" accounts for around 6%. The \"\"EU as a global partner\" and \"citizenship, freedom, security and justice\"\" bring up the rear with approximately 6% and 1% respectively.\nThe Court of Auditors is legally obliged to provide the Parliament and the council (specifically, the Economic and Financial Affairs Council) with \"a statement of assurance as to the reliability of the accounts and the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions\". The Court also gives opinions and proposals on financial legislation and anti-fraud actions. The Parliament uses this to decide whether to approve the commission's handling of the budget.\nThe European Court of Auditors has signed off the European Union accounts every year since 2007 and, while making it clear that the European Commission has more work to do, has highlighted that most of the errors take place at national level. In their report on 2009 the auditors found that five areas of Union expenditure, agriculture and the cohesion fund, were materially affected by error. The European Commission estimated in 2009 that the financial effect of irregularities was \u00a0million.\nIn November 2020, members of the Union, Hungary and Poland, blocked approval to the EU's budget at a meeting in the Committee of Permanent Representatives (Coreper), citing a proposal that linked funding with adherence to the rule of law. The budget included a covid recovery fund of billion. The budget may still be approved if Hungary and Poland withdraw their vetos after further negotiations in the Council and the European Council.\nCompetences.\nEU member states retain all powers not explicitly handed to the European Union. In some areas the EU enjoys exclusive competence. These are areas in which member states have renounced any capacity to enact legislation. In other areas the EU and its member states share the competence to legislate. While both can legislate, member states can only legislate to the extent to which the EU has not. In other policy areas the EU can only co-ordinate, support and supplement member state action but cannot enact legislation with the aim of harmonising national laws.\nThat a particular policy area falls into a certain category of competence is not necessarily indicative of what legislative procedure is used for enacting legislation within that policy area. Different legislative procedures are used within the same category of competence, and even with the same policy area.\nThe distribution of competences in various policy areas between Member States and the Union is divided in the following three categories:\nLegal system and justice.\nThe EU is based on a series of treaties. These first established the European Community and the EU, and then made amendments to those founding treaties. These are power-giving treaties which set broad policy goals and establish institutions with the necessary legal powers to implement those goals. These legal powers include the ability to enact legislation which can directly affect all member states and their inhabitants. The EU has legal personality, with the right to sign agreements and international treaties.\nUnder the principle of supremacy, national courts are required to enforce the treaties that their member states have ratified, and thus the laws enacted under them, even if doing so requires them to ignore conflicting national law, and (within limits) even constitutional provisions.\nThe direct effect and supremacy doctrines were not explicitly set out in the European Treaties but were developed by the Court of Justice itself over the 1960s, apparently under the influence of its then most influential judge, Frenchman Robert Lecourt\nCourt of Justice of the European Union.\nThe judicial branch of the EU\u2014formally called the Court of Justice of the European Union\u2014consists of two courts: the Court of Justice and the General Court.\nThe Court of Justice primarily deals with cases taken by member states, the institutions, and cases referred to it by the courts of member states. Because of the doctrines of direct effect and supremacy, many judgments of the Court of Justice are automatically applicable within the internal legal orders of the member states.\nThe General Court mainly deals with cases taken by individuals and companies directly before the EU's courts, and the European Union Civil Service Tribunal adjudicates in disputes between the European Union and its civil service. Decisions from the General Court can be appealed to the Court of Justice but only on a point of law.\nFundamental rights.\nThe treaties declare that the EU itself is \"founded on the values of respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities\u00a0... in a society in which pluralism, non-discrimination, tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men prevail.\"\nIn 2009, the Lisbon Treaty gave legal effect to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. The charter is a codified catalogue of fundamental rights against which the EU's legal acts can be judged. It consolidates many rights which were previously recognised by the Court of Justice and derived from the \"constitutional traditions common to the member states.\" The Court of Justice has long recognised fundamental rights and has, on occasion, invalidated EU legislation based on its failure to adhere to those fundamental rights.\nSigning the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) is a condition for EU membership. Previously, the EU itself could not accede to the convention as it is neither a state nor had the competence to accede. The Lisbon Treaty and Protocol 14 to the ECHR have changed this: the former binds the EU to accede to the convention while the latter formally permits it.\nThe EU is independent from the Council of Europe, although they share purpose and ideas, especially on the rule of law, human rights and democracy. Furthermore, the European Convention on Human Rights and European Social Charter, as well as the source of law for the Charter of Fundamental Rights are created by the Council of Europe. The EU has also promoted human rights issues in the wider world. The EU opposes the death penalty and has proposed its worldwide abolition. Abolition of the death penalty is a condition for EU membership.\nOn 19 October 2020, the European Union revealed new plans to create a legal structure to act against human rights violations worldwide. The new plan was expected to provide the European Union with greater flexibility to target and sanction those responsible for serious human rights violations and abuses around the world.\nActs.\nThe main legal acts of the EU come in three forms: regulations, directives, and decisions. Regulations become law in all member states the moment they come into force, without the requirement for any implementing measures, and automatically override conflicting domestic provisions. Directives require member states to achieve a certain result while leaving them discretion as to how to achieve the result. The details of how they are to be implemented are left to member states. When the time limit for implementing directives passes, they may, under certain conditions, have direct effect in national law against member states.\nDecisions offer an alternative to the two above modes of legislation. They are legal acts which only apply to specified individuals, companies or a particular member state. They are most often used in competition law, or on rulings on State Aid, but are also frequently used for procedural or administrative matters within the institutions. Regulations, directives, and decisions are of equal legal value and apply without any formal hierarchy.\nEuropean Ombudsman.\nThe European Ombudsman was established by the Maastricht Treaty. The ombudsman is elected by the European Parliament for the length of the Parliament's term, and the position is renewable. Any EU citizen or entity may appeal to the ombudsman to investigate an EU institution on the grounds of maladministration (administrative irregularities, unfairness, discrimination, abuse of power, failure to reply, refusal of information or unnecessary delay). Emily O'Reilly is the ombudsman since 2013.\nHome affairs and migration.\nSince the creation of the EU in 1993, it has developed its competencies in the area of justice and home affairs; initially at an intergovernmental level and later by supranationalism. Accordingly, the Union has legislated in areas such as extradition, family law, asylum law, and criminal justice. Prohibitions against sexual and nationality discrimination have a long standing in the treaties.&lt;ref group=\"lower-alpha\" name=\"art39/141 Rome\"&gt;See Articles 157 (ex Article 141) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, on eur-lex.europa.eu&lt;/ref&gt; In more recent years, these have been supplemented by powers to legislate against discrimination based on race, religion, disability, age, and sexual orientation. By virtue of these powers, the EU has enacted legislation on sexual discrimination in the work-place, age discrimination, and racial discrimination.\nThe Union has also established agencies to co-ordinate police, prosecutorial and immigrations controls across the member states: Europol for co-operation of police forces, Eurojust for co-operation between prosecutors, and Frontex for co-operation between border control authorities. The EU also operates the Schengen Information System which provides a common database for police and immigration authorities. This co-operation had to particularly be developed with the advent of open borders through the Schengen Agreement and the associated cross border crime.\nForeign relations.\nForeign policy co-operation between member states dates from the establishment of the Community in 1957, when member states negotiated as a bloc in international trade negotiations under the EU's common commercial policy. Steps for a more wide-ranging co-ordination in foreign relations began in 1970 with the establishment of European Political Cooperation which created an informal consultation process between member states with the aim of forming common foreign policies. In 1987 the European Political Cooperation was introduced on a formal basis by the Single European Act. EPC was renamed as the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) by the Maastricht Treaty.\nThe aims of the CFSP are to promote both the EU's own interests and those of the international community as a whole, including the furtherance of international co-operation, respect for human rights, democracy, and the rule of law. The CFSP requires unanimity among the member states on the appropriate policy to follow on any particular issue. The unanimity and difficult issues treated under the CFSP sometimes lead to disagreements, such as those which occurred over the war in Iraq.\nThe coordinator and representative of the CFSP within the EU is the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy who speaks on behalf of the EU in foreign policy and defence matters, and has the task of articulating the positions expressed by the member states on these fields of policy into a common alignment. The High Representative heads up the European External Action Service (EEAS), a unique EU department that has been officially implemented and operational since 1 December 2010 on the occasion of the first anniversary of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon. The EEAS will serve as a foreign ministry and diplomatic corps for the European Union.\nBesides the emerging international policy of the European Union, the international influence of the EU is also felt through enlargement. The perceived benefits of becoming a member of the EU act as an incentive for both political and economic reform in states wishing to fulfil the EU's accession criteria, and are considered an important factor contributing to the reform of European formerly Communist countries. This influence on the internal affairs of other countries is generally referred to as \"soft power\", as opposed to military \"hard power\".\nSwitzerland was called to vote on whether to end the agreement with European Union on the free movement of people, in September 2020. The demand of Swiss People's Party (SPP) was, however, turned down, as the voters rejected SPP's demand for taking back immigration control.\nSecurity and defence.\nThe predecessors of the European Union were not devised as a military alliance because NATO was largely seen as appropriate and sufficient for defence purposes. 21 EU members are members of NATO while the remaining member states follow policies of neutrality. The Western European Union, a military alliance with a mutual defence clause, was disbanded in 2010 as its role had been transferred to the EU.\nSince the withdrawal of the United Kingdom, France is the only member officially recognised as a nuclear weapon state and the sole holder of a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council. Possessing the EU's largest armed forces and the largest national defence budget of the bloc, France is also the only EU country that has power projection capabilities outside of Europe.\nMost EU member states opposed the Nuclear Weapon Ban Treaty.\nFollowing the Kosovo War in 1999, the European Council agreed that \"the Union must have the capacity for autonomous action, backed by credible military forces, the means to decide to use them, and the readiness to do so, in order to respond to international crises without prejudice to actions by NATO\". To that end, a number of efforts were made to increase the EU's military capability, notably the Helsinki Headline Goal process. After much discussion, the most concrete result was the EU Battlegroups initiative, each of which is planned to be able to deploy quickly about 1500\u00a0personnel.\nEU forces have been deployed on peacekeeping missions from middle and northern Africa to the western Balkans and western Asia. EU military operations are supported by a number of bodies, including the European Defence Agency, European Union Satellite Centre and the European Union Military Staff. Frontex is an agency of the EU established to manage the cooperation between national border guards securing its external borders. It aims to detect and stop illegal immigration, human trafficking and terrorist infiltration. In 2015 the European Commission presented its proposal for a new European Border and Coast Guard Agency having a stronger role and mandate along with national authorities for border management. In an EU consisting of 27 members, substantial security and defence co-operation is increasingly relying on collaboration among all member states.\nHumanitarian aid.\nThe European Commission's Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection department, or \"ECHO\", provides humanitarian aid from the EU to developing countries. In 2012, its budget amounted to million, 51% of the budget went to Africa and 20% to Asia, Latin America, the Caribbean and Pacific, and 20% to the Middle East and Mediterranean.\nHumanitarian aid is financed directly by the budget (70%) as part of the financial instruments for external action and also by the European Development Fund (30%). The EU's external action financing is divided into 'geographic' instruments and 'thematic' instruments. The 'geographic' instruments provide aid through the Development Cooperation Instrument (DCI, billion, 2007\u20132013), which must spend 95% of its budget on official development assistance (ODA), and from the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI), which contains some relevant programmes. The European Development Fund (EDF, billion for the period 2008\u20132013 and billion for the period 2014\u20132020) is made up of voluntary contributions by member states, but there is pressure to merge the EDF into the budget-financed instruments to encourage increased contributions to match the 0.7% target and allow the European Parliament greater oversight.\nIn 2016, the average among EU countries was 0.4% and five had met or exceeded the 0.7% target: Denmark, Germany, Luxembourg, Sweden and the United Kingdom. If considered collectively, EU member states are the largest contributor of foreign aid in the world.\nInternational cooperation and development partnerships.\nThe EU uses foreign relations instruments like the European Neighbourhood Policy which seeks to tie those countries to the east and south of the European territory of the EU to the Union. These countries, primarily developing countries, include some who seek to one day become either a member state of the European Union, or more closely integrated with the European Union. The EU offers financial assistance to countries within the European Neighbourhood, so long as they meet the strict conditions of government reform, economic reform and other issues surrounding positive transformation. This process is normally underpinned by an Action Plan, as agreed by both Brussels and the target country.\nInternational recognition of sustainable development as a key element is growing steadily. Its role was recognized in three major UN summits on sustainable development: the 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg, South Africa; and the 2012 UN Conference on Sustainable Development (UNCSD) in Rio de Janeiro. Other key global agreements are the Paris Agreement and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (United Nations, 2015). The SDGs recognize that all countries must stimulate action in the following key areas \u2013 people, planet, prosperity, peace and partnership \u2013 in order to tackle the global challenges that are crucial for the survival of humanity.\nEU development action is based on the European Consensus on Development, which was endorsed on 20 December 2005 by EU Member States, the council, the European Parliament and the commission. It is applied from the principles of Capability approach and Rights-based approach to development.\nPartnership and cooperation agreements are bilateral agreements with non-member nations.\nTrade.\nThe European Union is the largest exporter in the world and as of 2008 the largest importer of goods and services. Internal trade between the member states is aided by the removal of barriers to trade such as tariffs and border controls. In the eurozone, trade is helped by not having any currency differences to deal with amongst most members.\nThe European Union Association Agreement does something similar for a much larger range of countries, partly as a so-called soft approach ('a carrot instead of a stick') to influence the politics in those countries.\nThe European Union represents all its members at the World Trade Organization (WTO), and acts on behalf of member states in any disputes. When the EU negotiates trade related agreement outside the WTO framework, the subsequent agreement must be approved by each individual EU member state government.\nThe European Union has concluded free trade agreements (FTAs) and other agreements with a trade component with many countries worldwide and is negotiating with many others.\nEconomy.\nAs a political entity the European Union is represented in the World Trade Organization (WTO). EU member states own the estimated second largest after the United States (trillion) net wealth in the world, equal to around 20% (~trillion) of the trillion (~trillion) global wealth.\n19 member states have joined a monetary union known as the eurozone, which uses the euro as a single currency. The currency union represents 342million EU citizens. The euro is the second largest reserve currency as well as the second most traded currency in the world after the United States dollar.\nOf the top 500 largest corporations in the world measured by revenue in 2010, 161 had their headquarters in the EU. In 2016, unemployment in the EU stood at 8.9% while inflation was at 2.2%, and the account balance at \u22120.9% of GDP. The average annual net earnings in the European Union was around () in 2015.\nThere is a significant variation in Nominal GDP per capita within individual EU states. The difference between the richest and poorest regions (281 NUTS-2 regions of the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics) ranged, in 2017, from 31% (Severozapaden, Bulgaria) of the EU28 average () to 253% (Luxembourg), or from to .\nInternal market.\nTwo of the original core objectives of the European Economic Community were the development of a common market, subsequently becoming a single market, and a customs union between its member states. The single market involves the free circulation of goods, capital, people, and services within the EU, and the customs union involves the application of a common external tariff on all goods entering the market. Once goods have been admitted into the market they cannot be subjected to customs duties, discriminatory taxes or import quotas, as they travel internally. The non-EU member states of Iceland, Norway, Liechtenstein and Switzerland participate in the single market but not in the customs union. Half the trade in the EU is covered by legislation harmonised by the EU.\nFree movement of capital is intended to permit movement of investments such as property purchases and buying of shares between countries. Until the drive towards economic and monetary union the development of the capital provisions had been slow. Post-Maastricht there has been a rapidly developing corpus of ECJ judgements regarding this initially neglected freedom. The free movement of capital is unique insofar as it is granted equally to non-member states.\nThe free movement of persons means that EU citizens can move freely between member states to live, work, study or retire in another country. This required the lowering of administrative formalities and recognition of professional qualifications of other states.\nThe free movement of services and of establishment allows self-employed persons to move between member states to provide services on a temporary or permanent basis. While services account for 60\u201370% of GDP, legislation in the area is not as developed as in other areas. This lacuna has been addressed by the recently passed Directive on services in the internal market which aims to liberalise the cross border provision of services. According to the Treaty the provision of services is a residual freedom that only applies if no other freedom is being exercised.\nMonetary union and financial services.\nThe creation of a European single currency became an official objective of the European Economic Community in 1969. In 1992, having negotiated the structure and procedures of a currency union, the member states signed the Maastricht Treaty and were legally bound to fulfil the agreed-on rules including the convergence criteria if they wanted to join the monetary union. The states wanting to participate had first to join the European Exchange Rate Mechanism.\nIn 1999, the currency union started, first as an accounting currency with eleven member states joining. In 2002, the currency was fully put into place, when euro notes and coins were issued and national currencies began to phase out in the eurozone, which by then consisted of 12 member states. The eurozone (constituted by the EU member states which have adopted the euro) has since grown to 19 countries.\nThe euro, and the monetary policies of those who have adopted it in agreement with the EU, are under the control of the European Central Bank (ECB). The ECB is the central bank for the eurozone, and thus controls monetary policy in that area with an agenda to maintain price stability. It is at the centre of the European System of Central Banks, which comprehends all EU national central banks and is controlled by its General Council, consisting of the President of the ECB, who is appointed by the European Council, the Vice-President of the ECB, and the governors of the national central banks of all 27 EU member states.\nThe European System of Financial Supervision is an institutional architecture of the EU's framework of financial supervision composed by three authorities: the European Banking Authority, the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority and the European Securities and Markets Authority. To complement this framework, there is also a European Systemic Risk Board under the responsibility of the ECB. The aim of this financial control system is to ensure the economic stability of the EU.\nTo prevent the joining states from getting into financial trouble or crisis after entering the monetary union, they were obliged in the Maastricht treaty to fulfil important financial obligations and procedures, especially to show budgetary discipline and a high degree of sustainable economic convergence, as well as to avoid excessive government deficits and limit the government debt to a sustainable level.\nIndustry and digital economy.\nThe European Commission working sectors are: Aeronautics, automotive, biotechnology, chemicals, construction, cosmetics, defense, electronics, firearms, food and drink, gambling, healthcare, maritime, mechanics, medical, postal, raw materials, space, textile, tourism, toys and Social economy (Societas cooperativa Europaea).\nEnergy.\nIn 2006, the EU-27 had a gross inland energy consumption of 1,825\u00a0million tonnes of oil equivalent (toe). Around 46% of the energy consumed was produced within the member states while 54% was imported. In these statistics, nuclear energy is treated as primary energy produced in the EU, regardless of the source of the uranium, of which less than 3% is produced in the EU.\nThe EU has had legislative power in the area of energy policy for most of its existence; this has its roots in the original European Coal and Steel Community. The introduction of a mandatory and comprehensive European energy policy was approved at the meeting of the European Council in October 2005, and the first draft policy was published in January 2007.\nThe EU has five key points in its energy policy: increase competition in the internal market, encourage investment and boost interconnections between electricity grids; diversify energy resources with better systems to respond to a crisis; establish a new treaty framework for energy co-operation with Russia while improving relations with energy-rich states in Central Asia and North Africa; use existing energy supplies more efficiently while increasing renewable energy commercialisation; and finally increase funding for new energy technologies.\nIn 2007, EU countries as a whole imported 82% of their oil, 57% of their natural gas and 97.48% of their uranium demands. The three largest suppliers of natural gas to the European Union are Russia, Norway and Algeria, that amounted for about three quarters of the imports in 2019. There is a strong dependence on Russian energy that the EU has been attempting to reduce.\nInfrastructure.\nThe EU is working to improve cross-border infrastructure within the EU, for example through the Trans-European Networks (TEN). Projects under TEN include the Channel Tunnel, LGV Est, the Fr\u00e9jus Rail Tunnel, the \u00d6resund Bridge, the Brenner Base Tunnel and the Strait of Messina Bridge. In 2010 the estimated network covers: of roads; of railways; 330 airports; 270 maritime harbours; and 210 internal harbours.\nRail transport in Europe is being synchronised with the European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS), an initiative to greatly enhance safety, increase efficiency of trains and enhance cross-border interoperability of rail transport in Europe by replacing signalling equipment with digitised mostly wireless versions and by creating a single Europe-wide standard for train control and command systems.\nThe developing European transport policies will increase the pressure on the environment in many regions by the increased transport network. In the pre-2004 EU members, the major problem in transport deals with congestion and pollution. After the recent enlargement, the new states that joined since 2004 added the problem of solving accessibility to the transport agenda. The Polish road network was upgraded such as the A4 autostrada.\nTelecommunications and space.\nThe Galileo positioning system is another EU infrastructure project. Galileo is a proposed Satellite navigation system, to be built by the EU and launched by the European Space Agency (ESA). The Galileo project was launched partly to reduce the EU's dependency on the US-operated Global Positioning System, but also to give more complete global coverage and allow for greater accuracy, given the aged nature of the GPS system.\nAgriculture and fisheries.\nThe Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is one of the long lasting policies of the European Community. The policy has the objectives of increasing agricultural production, providing certainty in food supplies, ensuring a high quality of life for farmers, stabilising markets, and ensuring reasonable prices for consumers. It was, until recently, operated by a system of subsidies and market intervention. Until the 1990s, the policy accounted for over 60% of the then European Community's annual budget, and accounts for around 34%.\nThe policy's price controls and market interventions led to considerable overproduction. These were intervention stores of products bought up by the Community to maintain minimum price levels. To dispose of surplus stores, they were often sold on the world market at prices considerably below Community guaranteed prices, or farmers were offered subsidies (amounting to the difference between the Community and world prices) to export their products outside the Community. This system has been criticised for under-cutting farmers outside Europe, especially those in the developing world. Supporters of CAP argue that the economic support which it gives to farmers provides them with a reasonable standard of living.\nSince the beginning of the 1990s, the CAP has been subject to a series of reforms. Initially, these reforms included the introduction of set-aside in 1988, where a proportion of farm land was deliberately withdrawn from production, milk quotas and, more recently, the 'de-coupling' (or disassociation) of the money farmers receive from the EU and the amount they produce (by the Fischler reforms in 2004). Agriculture expenditure will move away from subsidy payments linked to specific produce, toward direct payments based on farm size. This is intended to allow the market to dictate production levels. One of these reforms entailed the modification of the EU's sugar regime, which previously divided the sugar market between member states and certain African-Caribbean nations with a privileged relationship with the EU.\nCompetition.\nThe EU operates a competition policy intended to ensure undistorted competition within the single market.\nThe Competition Commissioner, Margrethe Vestager, is one of the most powerful positions in the commission, notable for the ability to affect the commercial interests of trans-national corporations. For example, in 2001 the commission for the first time prevented a merger between two companies based in the United States (GE and Honeywell) which had already been approved by their national authority. Another high-profile case against Microsoft, resulted in the Commission fining Microsoft over \u00a0million following nine years of legal action.\nLabour market.\nThe EU seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 6.7% in September 2018. The euro area unemployment rate was 8.1%. Among the member states, the lowest unemployment rates were recorded in the Czech Republic (2.3%), Germany and Poland (both 3.4%), and the highest in Spain (14.9%) and Greece (19.0 in July 2018).\nSocial policy and equality.\nThe EU has long sought to mitigate the effects of free markets by protecting workers rights and preventing social and environmental dumping. To this end it has adopted laws establishing minimum employment and environmental standards. These included the Working Time Directive and the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive.\nThe EU has also sought to coordinate the social security and health systems of member states to facilitate individuals exercising free movement rights and to ensure they maintain their ability to access social security and health services in other member states. Social security main legislation is found in the Equal Treatment in Occupational Social Security Directive 86/378, the Equal Treatment in Social Security Directive 79/7/EEC, the Social Security Regulation 1408/71/EC and 883/2004/EC and the Directive 2005/36/EC\nThe European Social Charter is the main body that recognizes the social rights of European citizens.\nA European unemployment insurance has been proposed among others by the commissioner of Jobs Nicolas Schmit. A European Directive about Minimum Wage has also been discussed\nSince 2019 there is a European Commissioner for Equality; a European Institute for Gender Equality has existed since 2007.\nIn 2020, the first ever European Union Strategy on LGBTIQ equality was approved under Helena Dalli mandate.\nHousing, youth, childhood, Functional diversity or elderly care are supportive competencies of the European Union and can be financed by the European Social Fund.\nRegional and local policy.\nStructural Funds and Cohesion Funds are supporting the development of underdeveloped regions of the EU. Such regions are primarily located in the states of central and southern Europe. Several funds provide emergency aid, support for candidate members to transform their country to conform to the EU's standard (Phare, ISPA, and SAPARD), and support to the Commonwealth of Independent States (TACIS). TACIS has now become part of the worldwide EuropeAid programme.\nDemographic transition to a society of aging population, low fertility-rates and depopulation of non-metropolitan regions is tackled within this policies.\nEnvironment and climate.\nIn 1957, when the EEC was founded, it had no environmental policy. Over the past 50 years, an increasingly dense network of legislation has been created, extending to all areas of environmental protection, including air pollution, water quality, waste management, nature conservation, and the control of chemicals, industrial hazards, and biotechnology. According to the Institute for European Environmental Policy, environmental law comprises over 500 Directives, Regulations and Decisions, making environmental policy a core area of European politics.\nEuropean policy-makers originally increased the EU's capacity to act on environmental issues by defining it as a trade problem.\nTrade barriers and competitive distortions in the Common Market could emerge due to the different environmental standards in each member state. In subsequent years, the environment became a formal policy area, with its own policy actors, principles and procedures. The legal basis for EU environmental policy was established with the introduction of the Single European Act in 1987.\nInitially, EU environmental policy focused on Europe. More recently, the EU has demonstrated leadership in global environmental governance, e.g. the role of the EU in securing the ratification and coming into force of the Kyoto Protocol despite opposition from the United States. This international dimension is reflected in the EU's Sixth Environmental Action Programme, which recognises that its objectives can only be achieved if key international agreements are actively supported and properly implemented both at EU level and worldwide. The Lisbon Treaty further strengthened the leadership ambitions. EU law has played a significant role in improving habitat and species protection in Europe, as well as contributing to improvements in air and water quality and waste management.\nMitigating climate change is one of the top priorities of EU environmental policy. In 2007, member states agreed that, in the future, 20% of the energy used across the EU must be renewable, and carbon dioxide emissions have to be lower in 2020 by at least 20% compared to 1990 levels. The EU has adopted an emissions trading system to incorporate carbon emissions into the economy. The European Green Capital is an annual award given to cities that focuses on the environment, energy efficiency, and quality of life in urban areas to create smart city.\nIn the Elections to the European Parliament in 2019, the green parties increased their power, possibly because of the rise of post materialist values.\nProposals to reach a zero carbon economy in the European Union by 2050 were suggested in 2018 \u2013 2019. Almost all member states supported that goal at an EU summit in June 2019. The Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, and Poland disagreed.\nIn 2017, the EU emitted 9.1% of global greenhouse-gas emissions. The EU has a target of zero GHG emission by 2050.\nEducation and research.\nBasic education is an area where the EU's role is limited to supporting national governments. In higher education, the policy was developed in the 1980s in programmes supporting exchanges and mobility. The most visible of these has been the Erasmus Programme, a university exchange programme which began in 1987. In its first 20\u00a0years, it supported international exchange opportunities for well over 1.5\u00a0million university and college students and became a symbol of European student life.\nThere are similar programmes for school pupils and teachers, for trainees in vocational education and training, and for adult learners in the Lifelong Learning Programme 2007\u20132013. These programmes are designed to encourage a wider knowledge of other countries and to spread good practices in the education and training fields across the EU. Through its support of the Bologna Process, the EU is supporting comparable standards and compatible degrees across Europe.\nScientific development is facilitated through the EU's Framework Programmes, the first of which started in 1984. The aims of EU policy in this area are to co-ordinate and stimulate research. The independent European Research Council allocates EU funds to European or national research projects. EU research and technological framework programmes deal in a number of areas, for example energy where the aim is to develop a diverse mix of renewable energy to help the environment and to reduce dependence on imported fuels.\nHealth care and food safety.\nThe EU has no major competences in the field of health care and Article 35 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union affirms that \"A high level of human health protection shall be ensured in the definition and implementation of all Union policies and activities\". The European Commission's Directorate-General for Health and Consumers seeks to align national laws on the protection of people's health, on the consumers' rights, on the safety of food and other products.\nAll EU and many other European countries offer their citizens a free European Health Insurance Card which, on a reciprocal basis, provides insurance for emergency medical treatment insurance when visiting other participating European countries. A directive on cross-border healthcare aims at promoting co-operation on health care between member states and facilitating access to safe and high-quality cross-border healthcare for European patients.\nThe EU has some of the highest levels of life expectancy in the world, with Spain, Italy, Sweden, France, Malta, Ireland, Netherlands, Luxembourg, and Greece all among the world's top 20 countries with the highest life expectancy. In general, life expectancy is lower in Eastern Europe than in Western Europe. In 2018, the EU region with the highest life expectancy was Madrid, Spain at 85.2 years, followed by the Spanish regions of La Rioja and Castilla y Le\u00f3n both at 84.3 years, Trentino in Italy at 84.3 years and \u00cele-de-France in France at 84.2 years. The overall life expectancy in the EU in 2018 was 81.0 years, higher than the World average of 72.6 years.\nCulture.\nCultural co-operation between member states has been an interest of the EU since its inclusion as a community competency in the Maastricht Treaty. Actions taken in the cultural area by the EU include the Culture 2000 seven-year programme, the European Cultural Month event, and orchestras such as the European Union Youth Orchestra. The European Capital of Culture programme selects one or more cities in every year to assist the cultural development of that city.\nSport.\nAssociation football is by far the most popular sport in the European Union by the number of registered players. The other sports with the most participants in clubs are tennis, basketball, swimming, athletics, golf, gymnastics, equestrian sports, handball, volleyball and sailing.\nSport is mainly the responsibility of the member states or other international organisations, rather than of the EU. There are some EU policies that have affected sport, such as the free movement of workers, which was at the core of the Bosman ruling that prohibited national football leagues from imposing quotas on foreign players with European citizenship.\nThe Treaty of Lisbon requires any application of economic rules to take into account the specific nature of sport and its structures based on voluntary activity. This followed lobbying by governing organisations such as the International Olympic Committee and FIFA, due to objections over the application of free market principles to sport, which led to an increasing gap between rich and poor clubs. The EU does fund a programme for Israeli, Jordanian, Irish, and British football coaches, as part of the Football 4 Peace project.\nSymbols.\nThe flag used is the Flag of Europe, which consists of a circle of 12 golden stars on a blue background. Originally designed in 1955 for the Council of Europe, the flag was adopted by the European Communities, the predecessors of the present Union, in 1986. The Council of Europe gave the flag a symbolic description in the following terms, though the official symbolic description adopted by the EU omits the reference to the \"Western world\":\n\"United in Diversity\" was adopted as the motto of the Union in the year 2000, having been selected from proposals submitted by school pupils. Since 1985, the flag day of the Union has been Europe Day, on 9 May (the date of the 1950 Schuman declaration). The anthem of the Union is an instrumental version of the prelude to the \"Ode to Joy\", the 4th movement of Ludwig van Beethoven's ninth symphony. The anthem was adopted by European Community leaders in 1985 and has since been played on official occasions.\nBesides naming the continent, the Greek mythological figure of Europa has frequently been employed as a personification of Europe. Known from the myth in which Zeus seduces her in the guise of a white bull, Europa has also been referred to in relation to the present Union. Statues of Europa and the bull decorate several of the Union's institutions and a portrait of her is seen on the 2013 series of Euro banknotes. The bull is, for its part, depicted on all residence permit cards.\nCharles the Great, also known as Charlemagne () and later recognised as \"Pater Europae\" (\"Father of Europe\"), has a symbolic relevance to Europe. The commission has named one of its central buildings in Brussels after Charlemagne and the city of Aachen has since 1949 awarded the Charlemagne Prize to champions of European unification. Since 2008, the organisers of this prize, in conjunction with the European Parliament, have awarded the Charlemagne Youth Prize in recognition of similar efforts led by young people.\nMedia.\nMedia freedom is a fundamental right that applies to all member states of the European Union and its citizens, as defined in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights as well as the European Convention on Human Rights. Within the EU enlargement process, guaranteeing media freedom is named a \"key indicator of a country's readiness to become part of the EU\".\nThe majority of media in the European Union are national-oriented, although some EU-wide media focusing on European affairs have emerged since the early 1990s, such as Euronews, Eurosport, EUobserver, EURACTIV or Politico Europe. ARTE is a public Franco-German TV network that promotes programming in the areas of culture and the arts. 80% of its programming are provided in equal proportion by the two member companies, while the remainder is being provided by the European Economic Interest Grouping \"ARTE GEIE\" and the channel's European partners.\nThe MEDIA Programme of the European Union has supported the European popular film and audiovisual industries since 1991. It provides support for the development, promotion and distribution of European works within Europe and beyond.\nImpact.\nThe European Union has had a significant positive economic impact on most member states. According to a 2019 study of the member states who joined from 1973 to 2004, \"without European integration, per capita incomes would have been, on average, approximately 10% lower in the first ten years after joining the EU.\" Greece was the exception reported by the study, which analysed up to 2008, \"to avoid confounding effects from the global financial crisis\".\nThe European Union has contributed to peace in Europe, in particular by pacifying border disputes, and to the spread of democracy, especially by encouraging democratic reforms in aspiring Eastern European member states after the collapse of the USSR. Scholar Thomas Risse wrote in 2009, \"there is a consensus in the literature on Eastern Europe that the EU membership perspective had a huge anchoring effects for the new democracies.\" However, R. Daniel Kelemen argues that the EU has proved beneficial to leaders who are overseeing democratic backsliding, as the EU is reluctant to intervene in domestic politics, gives authoritarian governments funds which they can use to strengthen their regimes, and because freedom of movement within the EU allows dissenting citizens to leave their backsliding countries. At the same time, the union provides an external constraint that prevents soft authoritarian regimes from progressing into hard dictatorships."}
{"id": "9319", "revid": "11677590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9319", "title": "Eriocaulales", "text": ""}
{"id": "9320", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9320", "title": "Ericales", "text": "The Ericales are a large and diverse order of dicotyledons. Species in this order have considerable commercial importance including for tea, persimmon, blueberry, kiwifruit, Brazil nuts, and azalea. The order includes trees, bushes, lianas, and herbaceous plants. Together with ordinary autophytic plants, the Ericales include chlorophyll-deficient mycoheterotrophic plants (e.g., \"Sarcodes sanguinea\") and carnivorous plants (e.g., genus \"Sarracenia\").\nMany species have five petals, often grown together. Fusion of the petals as a trait was traditionally used to place the order in the subclass Sympetalae.\nMycorrhizal associations are quite common among the order representatives, and three kinds of mycorrhiza are found exclusively among Ericales (namely, ericoid, arbutoid and monotropoid mycorrhiza). In addition, some families among the order are notable for their exceptional ability to accumulate aluminum.\nEricales are a cosmopolitan order. Areas of distribution of families vary largely - while some are restricted to tropics, others exist mainly in Arctic or temperate regions. The entire order contains over 8,000 species, of which the Ericaceae account for 2,000-4,000 species (by various estimates).\nEconomic importance.\nThe most commercially used plant in the order is tea (\"Camellia sinensis\") from the family Theaceae. The order also includes some edible fruits, including kiwifruit (esp. \"Actinidia deliciosa\"), persimmon (genus \"Diospyros\"), blueberry, huckleberry, cranberry, Brazil nut, and Mamey sapote. The order also includes shea (\"Vitellaria paradoxa\"), which is the major dietary lipid source for millions of sub-Saharan Africans. Many Ericales species are cultivated for their showy flowers: well-known examples are azalea, rhododendron, camellia, heather, polyanthus, cyclamen, phlox, and busy Lizzie.\nClassification.\nThese families are recognized in the APG III system as members of the Ericales:\nPreviously included families.\nThese families are not recognized in the APG III system but have been in common use in the recent past:\nThese make up an early diverging group of asterids. Under the Cronquist system, the Ericales included a smaller group of plants, which were placed among the Dilleniidae:"}
{"id": "9321", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9321", "title": "Edward Sapir", "text": "Edward Sapir (; January 26, 1884 \u2013 February 4, 1939) was an American anthropologist-linguist, who is widely considered to be one of the most important figures in the development of the discipline of linguistics in the United States.\nSapir was born in German Pomerania, in what is now northern Poland. His family emigrated to the United States of America when he was a child. He studied Germanic linguistics at Columbia, where he came under the influence of Franz Boas, who inspired him to work on Native American languages. While finishing his Ph.D. he went to California to work with Alfred Kroeber documenting the indigenous languages there. He was employed by the Geological Survey of Canada for fifteen years, where he came into his own as one of the most significant linguists in North America, the other being Leonard Bloomfield. He was offered a professorship at the University of Chicago, and stayed for several years continuing to work for the professionalization of the discipline of linguistics. By the end of his life he was professor of anthropology at Yale, where he never really fit in. Among his many students were the linguists Mary Haas and Morris Swadesh, and anthropologists such as Fred Eggan and Hortense Powdermaker.\nWith his linguistic background, Sapir became the one student of Boas to develop most completely the relationship between linguistics and anthropology. Sapir studied the ways in which language and culture influence each other, and he was interested in the relation between linguistic differences, and differences in cultural world views. This part of his thinking was developed by his student Benjamin Lee Whorf into the principle of linguistic relativity or the \"Sapir\u2013Whorf\" hypothesis. In anthropology Sapir is known as an early proponent of the importance of psychology to anthropology, maintaining that studying the nature of relationships between different individual personalities is important for the ways in which culture and society develop.\nAmong his major contributions to linguistics is his classification of Indigenous languages of the Americas, upon which he elaborated for most of his professional life. He played an important role in developing the modern concept of the phoneme, greatly advancing the understanding of phonology.\nBefore Sapir it was generally considered impossible to apply the methods of historical linguistics to languages of indigenous peoples because they were believed to be more primitive than the Indo-European languages. Sapir was the first to prove that the methods of comparative linguistics were equally valid when applied to indigenous languages. In the 1929 edition of Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica he published what was then the most authoritative classification of Native American languages, and the first based on evidence from modern comparative linguistics. He was the first to produce evidence for the classification of the Algic, Uto-Aztecan, and Na-Dene languages. He proposed some language families that are not considered to have been adequately demonstrated, but which continue to generate investigation such as Hokan and Penutian.\nHe specialized in the study of Athabascan languages, Chinookan languages, and Uto-Aztecan languages, producing important grammatical descriptions of Takelma, Wishram, Southern Paiute. Later in his career he also worked with Yiddish, Hebrew, and Chinese, as well as Germanic languages, and he also was invested in the development of an International Auxiliary Language.\nLife.\nChildhood and youth.\nSapir was born into a family of Lithuanian Jews in Lauenburg (now L\u0119bork) in the Province of Pomerania where his father, Jacob David Sapir, worked as a cantor. The family was not Orthodox, and his father maintained his ties to Judaism through its music. The Sapir family did not stay long in Pomerania and never accepted German as a nationality. Edward Sapir's first language was Yiddish, and later English. In 1888, when he was four years old, the family moved to Liverpool, England, and in 1890 to the United States, to Richmond, Virginia. Here Edward Sapir lost his younger brother Max to typhoid fever. His father had difficulty keeping a job in a synagogue and finally settled in New York on the Lower East Side, where the family lived in poverty. As Jacob Sapir could not provide for his family, Sapir's mother, Eva Seagal Sapir, opened a shop to supply the basic necessities. They formally divorced in 1910. After settling in New York, Edward Sapir was raised mostly by his mother, who stressed the importance of education for upward social mobility, and turned the family increasingly away from Judaism. Even though Eva Sapir was an important influence, Sapir received his lust for knowledge and interest in scholarship, aesthetics, and music from his father. At age 14 Sapir won a Pulitzer scholarship to the prestigious Horace Mann high school, but he chose not to attend the school which he found too posh, going instead to DeWitt Clinton High School, and saving the scholarship money for his college education. Through the scholarship Sapir supplemented his mother's meager earnings.\nEducation at Columbia.\nSapir entered Columbia in 1901, still paying with the Pulitzer scholarship. Columbia at this time was one of the few elite private universities that did not limit admission of Jewish applicants with implicit quotas around 12%. Approximately 40% of incoming students at Columbia were Jewish. Sapir earned both a B.A. (1904) and an M.A. (1905) in Germanic philology from Columbia, before embarking on his Ph.D. in Anthropology which he completed in 1909.\nCollege.\nSapir emphasized language study in his college years at Columbia, studying Latin, Greek, and French for eight semesters. From his sophomore year he additionally began to focus on Germanic languages, completing coursework in Gothic, Old High German, Old Saxon, Icelandic, Dutch, Swedish, and Danish. Through Germanics professor William Carpenter, Sapir was exposed to methods of comparative linguistics that were being developed into a more scientific framework than the traditional philological approach. He also took courses in Sanskrit, and complemented his language studies by studying music in the department of the famous composer Edward MacDowell (though it is uncertain whether Sapir ever studied with MacDowell himself). In his last year in college Sapir enrolled in the course \"Introduction to Anthropology\", with Professor Livingston Farrand, who taught the Boas \"four field\" approach to anthropology. He also enrolled in an advanced anthropology seminar taught by Franz Boas, a course that would completely change the direction of his career.\nInfluence of Boas.\nAlthough still in college, Sapir was allowed to participate in the Boas graduate seminar on American Languages, which included translations of Native American and Inuit myths collected by Boas. In this way Sapir was introduced to Indigenous American languages while he kept working on his M.A. in Germanic linguistics. Robert Lowie later said that Sapir's fascination with indigenous languages stemmed from the seminar with Boas in which Boas used examples from Native American languages to disprove all of Sapir's common-sense assumptions about the basic nature of language. Sapir's 1905 Master's thesis was an analysis of Johann Gottfried Herder's \"Treatise on the Origin of Language\", and included examples from Inuit and Native American languages, not at all familiar to a Germanicist. The thesis criticized Herder for retaining a Biblical chronology, too shallow to allow for the observable diversification of languages, but he also argued with Herder that all of the world's languages have equal aesthetic potentials and grammatical complexity. He ended the paper by calling for a \"very extended study of all the various existing stocks of languages, in order to determine the most fundamental properties of language\" \u2013 almost a program statement for the modern study of linguistic typology, and a very Boasian approach.\nIn 1906 he finished his coursework, having focused the last year on courses in anthropology and taking seminars such as Primitive Culture with Farrand, Ethnology with Boas, Archaeology and courses in Chinese language and culture with Berthold Laufer. He also maintained his Indo-European studies with courses in Celtic, Old Saxon, Swedish, and Sanskrit. Having finished his coursework, Sapir moved on to his doctoral fieldwork, spending several years in short term appointments while working on his dissertation.\nEarly fieldwork.\nSapir's first fieldwork was on the Wishram Chinook language in the summer of 1905, funded by the Bureau of American Ethnology. This first experience with Native American languages in the field was closely overseen by Boas, who was particularly interested in having Sapir gather ethnological information for the Bureau. Sapir gathered a volume of Wishram texts, published 1909, and he managed to achieve a much more sophisticated understanding of the Chinook sound system than Boas. In the summer of 1906 he worked on Takelma and Chasta Costa. Sapir's work on Takelma became his doctoral dissertation, which he defended in 1908. The dissertation foreshadowed several important trends in Sapir's work, particularly the careful attention to the intuition of native speakers regarding sound patterns that later would become the basis for Sapir's formulation of the phoneme.\nIn 1907\u20131908 Sapir was offered a position at the University of California at Berkeley, where Boas' first student Alfred Kroeber was the head of a project under the California state survey to document the Indigenous languages of California. Kroeber suggested that Sapir study the nearly extinct Yana language, and Sapir set to work. Sapir worked first with Betty Brown, one of the language's few remaining speakers. Later he began work with Sam Batwi, who spoke another dialect of Yana, but whose knowledge of Yana mythology was an important fount of knowledge. Sapir described the way in which the Yana language distinguishes grammatically and lexically between the speech of men and women.\nThe collaboration between Kroeber and Sapir was made difficult by the fact that Sapir largely followed his own interest in detailed linguistic description, ignoring the administrative pressures to which Kroeber was subject, among them the need for a speedy completion and a focus on the broader classification issues. In the end Sapir didn't finish the work during the allotted year, and Kroeber was unable to offer him a longer appointment.\nDisappointed at not being able to stay at Berkeley, Sapir devoted his best efforts to other work, and did not get around to preparing any of the Yana material for publication until 1910, to Kroeber's deep disappointment.\nSapir ended up leaving California early to take up a fellowship at the University of Pennsylvania, where he taught Ethnology and American Linguistics. At Pennsylvania he worked closely with another student of Boas, Frank Speck, and the two undertook work on Catawba in the summer of 1909. Also in the summer of 1909, Sapir went to Utah with his student J. Alden Mason. Intending originally to work on Hopi, he studied the Southern Paiute language; he decided to work with Tony Tillohash, who proved to be the perfect informant. Tillohash's strong intuition about the sound patterns of his language led Sapir to propose that the phoneme is not just an abstraction existing at the structural level of language, but in fact has psychological reality for speakers.\nTillohash became a good friend of Sapir, and visited him at his home in New York and Philadelphia. Sapir worked with his father to transcribe a number of Southern Paiute songs that Tillohash knew. This fruitful collaboration laid the ground work for the classical description of the Southern Paiute language published in 1930, and enabled Sapir to produce conclusive evidence linking the Shoshonean languages to the Nahuan languages \u2013 establishing the Uto-Aztecan language family. Sapir's description of Southern Paiute is known by linguistics as \"a model of analytical excellence\".\nAt Pennsylvania, Sapir was urged to work at a quicker pace than he felt comfortable. His \"Grammar of Southern Paiute\" was supposed to be published in Boas' \"Handbook of American Indian Languages\", and Boas urged him to complete a preliminary version while funding for the publication remained available, but Sapir did not want to compromise on quality, and in the end the \"Handbook\" had to go to press without Sapir's piece. Boas kept working to secure a stable appointment for his student, and by his recommendation Sapir ended up being hired by the Canadian Geological Survey, who wanted him to lead the institutionalization of anthropology in Canada. Sapir, who by then had given up the hope of working at one of the few American research universities, accepted the appointment and moved to Ottawa.\nIn Ottawa.\nIn the years 1910\u201325 Sapir established and directed the Anthropological Division in the Geological Survey of Canada in Ottawa. When he was hired, he was one of the first full-time anthropologists in Canada. He brought his parents with him to Ottawa, and also quickly established his own family, marrying Florence Delson, who also had Lithuanian Jewish roots. Neither the Sapirs nor the Delsons were in favor of the match. The Delsons, who hailed from the prestigious Jewish center of Vilna, considered the Sapirs to be rural upstarts and were less than impressed with Sapir's career in an unpronounceable academic field. Edward and Florence had three children together: Herbert Michael, Helen Ruth, and Philip.\nCanada's Geological Survey.\nAs director of the Anthropological division of the Geological Survey of Canada, Sapir embarked on a project to document the Indigenous cultures and languages of Canada. His first fieldwork took him to Vancouver Island to work on the Nootka language. Apart from Sapir the division had two other staff members, Marius Barbeau and Harlan I. Smith. Sapir insisted that the discipline of linguistics was of integral importance for ethnographic description, arguing that just as nobody would dream of discussing the history of the Catholic Church without knowing Latin or study German folksongs without knowing German, so it made little sense to approach the study of Indigenous folklore without knowledge of the indigenous languages. At this point the only Canadian first nation languages that were well known were Kwakiutl, described by Boas, Tshimshian and Haida. Sapir explicitly used the standard of documentation of European languages, to argue that the amassing knowledge of indigenous languages was of paramount importance. By introducing the high standards of Boasian anthropology, Sapir incited antagonism from those amateur ethnologists who felt that they had contributed important work. Unsatisfied with efforts by amateur and governmental anthropologists, Sapir worked to introduce an academic program of anthropology at one of the major universities, in order to professionalize the discipline.\nSapir enlisted the assistance of fellow Boasians: Frank Speck, Paul Radin and Alexander Goldenweiser, who with Barbeau worked on the peoples of the Eastern Woodlands: the Ojibwa, the Iroquois, the Huron and the Wyandot. Sapir initiated work on the Athabascan languages of the Mackenzie valley and the Yukon, but it proved too difficult to find adequate assistance, and he concentrated mainly on Nootka and the languages of the North West Coast.\nDuring his time in Canada, together with Speck, Sapir also acted as an advocate for Indigenous rights, arguing publicly for introduction of better medical care for Indigenous communities, and assisting the Six Nation Iroquois in trying to recover eleven wampum belts that had been stolen from the reservation and were on display in the museum of the University of Pennsylvania. (The belts were finally returned to the Iroquois in 1988.) He also argued for the reversal of a Canadian law prohibiting the Potlatch ceremony of the West Coast tribes.\nWork with Ishi.\nIn 1915 Sapir returned to California, where his expertise on the Yana language made him urgently needed. Kroeber had come into contact with Ishi, the last native speaker of the Yahi language, closely related to Yana, and needed someone to document the language urgently. Ishi, who had grown up without contact to whites, was monolingual in Yahi and was the last surviving member of his people. He had been adopted by the Kroebers, but had fallen ill with tuberculosis, and was not expected to live long. Sam Batwi, the speaker of Yana who had worked with Sapir, was unable to understand the Yahi variety, and Krober was convinced that only Sapir would be able to communicate with Ishi. Sapir traveled to San Francisco and worked with Ishi over the summer of 1915, having to invent new methods for working with a monolingual speaker. The information from Ishi was invaluable for understanding the relation between the different dialects of Yana. Ishi died of his illness in early 1916, and Kroeber partly blamed the exacting nature of working with Sapir for his failure to recover. Sapir described the work: \"I think I may safely say that my work with Ishi is by far the most time-consuming and nerve-racking that I have ever undertaken. Ishi's imperturbable good humor alone made the work possible, though it also at times added to my exasperation\".\nMoving on.\nThe First World War took its toll on the Canadian Geological Survey, cutting funding for anthropology and making the academic climate less agreeable. Sapir continued work on Athabascan, working with two speakers of the Alaskan languages Kutchin and Ingalik. Sapir was now more preoccupied with testing hypotheses about historical relationships between the Na-Dene languages than with documenting endangered languages, in effect becoming a theoretician. He was also growing to feel isolated from his American colleagues. From 1912 Florence's health deteriorated due to a lung abscess, and a resulting depression. The Sapir household was largely run by Eva Sapir, who did not get along well with Florence, and this added to the strain on both Florence and Edward. Sapir's parents had by now divorced and his father seemed to suffer from a psychosis, which made it necessary for him to leave Canada for Philadelphia, where Edward continued to support him financially. Florence was hospitalized for long periods both for her depressions and for the lung abscess, and she died in 1924 due to an infection following surgery, providing the final incentive for Sapir to leave Canada. When the University of Chicago offered him a position, he happily accepted.\nDuring his period in Canada, Sapir came into his own as the leading figure in linguistics in North America. Among his substantial publications from this period were his book on \"Time Perspective in the Aboriginal American Culture\" (1916), in which he laid out an approach to using historical linguistics to study the prehistory of Native American cultures. Particularly important for establishing him in the field was his seminal book \"Language\" (1921), which was a layman's introduction to the discipline of linguistics as Sapir envisioned it. He also participated in the formulation of a report to the American Anthropological Association regarding the standardization of orthographic principles for writing Indigenous languages.\nWhile in Ottawa, he also collected and published French Canadian Folk Songs, and wrote a volume of his own poetry. His interest in poetry led him to form a close friendship with another Boasian anthropologist and poet, Ruth Benedict. Sapir initially wrote to Benedict to commend her for her dissertation on \"The Guardian Spirit\", but soon realized that Benedict had published poetry pseudonymously. In their correspondence the two critiqued each other's work, both submitting to the same publishers, and both being rejected. They also were both interested in psychology and the relation between individual personalities and cultural patterns, and in their correspondences they frequently psychoanalyzed each other. However, Sapir often showed little understanding for Benedict's private thoughts and feelings, and particularly his conservative gender ideology jarred with Benedict's struggles as a female professional academic. Though they were very close friends for a while, it was ultimately the differences in worldview and personality that led their friendship to fray.\nBefore departing Canada, Sapir had a short affair with Margaret Mead, Benedict's prot\u00e9g\u00e9 at Columbia. But Sapir's conservative ideas about marriage and the woman's role were anathema to Mead, as they had been to Benedict, and as Mead left to do field work in Samoa, the two separated permanently. Mead received news of Sapir's remarriage while still in Samoa, and burned their correspondence there on the beach.\nChicago years.\nSettling in Chicago reinvigorated Sapir intellectually and personally. He socialized with intellectuals, gave lectures, participated in poetry and music clubs. His first graduate student at Chicago was Li Fang-Kuei. The Sapir household continued to be managed largely by Grandmother Eva, until Sapir remarried in 1926. Sapir's second wife, Jean Victoria McClenaghan, was sixteen years younger than he. She had first met Sapir when a student in Ottawa, but had since also come to work at the University of Chicago's department of Juvenile Research. Their son Paul Edward Sapir was born in 1928. Their other son J. David Sapir became a linguist and anthropologist specializing in West African Languages, especially Jola languages. Sapir also exerted influence through his membership in the Chicago School of Sociology, and his friendship with psychologist Harry Stack Sullivan.\nAt Yale.\nFrom 1931 until his death in 1939, Sapir taught at Yale University, where he became the head of the Department of Anthropology. He was invited to Yale to found an interdisciplinary program combining anthropology, linguistics and psychology, aimed at studying \"the impact of culture on personality\". While Sapir was explicitly given the task of founding a distinct anthropology department, this was not well received by the department of sociology who worked by William Graham Sumner's \"Evolutionary sociology\", which was anathema to Sapir's Boasian approach, nor by the two anthropologists of the Institute for Human Relations Clark Wissler and G. P. Murdock. Sapir never thrived at Yale, where as one of only four Jewish faculty members out of 569 he was denied membership to the faculty club where the senior faculty discussed academic business.\nAt Yale, Sapir's graduate students included Morris Swadesh, Benjamin Lee Whorf, Mary Haas, Charles Hockett, and Harry Hoijer, several of whom he brought with him from Chicago. Sapir came to regard a young Semiticist named Zellig Harris as his intellectual heir, although Harris was never a formal student of Sapir. (For a time he dated Sapir's daughter.) In 1936 Sapir clashed with the Institute for Human Relations over the research proposal by anthropologist Hortense Powdermaker, who proposed a study of the black community of Indianola, Mississippi. Sapir argued that her research should be funded instead of the more sociological work of John Dollard. Sapir eventually lost the discussion and Powdermaker had to leave Yale.\nIn the summer of 1937 while teaching at the Linguistic Institute of the Linguistic Society of America in Ann Arbor, Sapir began having problems with a heart condition that had initially been diagnosed a couple of years earlier. In 1938, he had to take a leave from Yale, during which Benjamin Lee Whorf taught his courses and G. P. Murdock advised some of his students. After Sapir's death in 1939, G. P. Murdock became the chair of the anthropology department. Murdock, who despised the Boasian paradigm of cultural anthropology, dismantled most of Sapir's efforts to integrate anthropology, psychology, and linguistics.\nAnthropological thought.\nSapir's anthropological thought has been described as isolated within the field of anthropology in his own days. Instead of searching for the ways in which culture influences human behavior, Sapir was interested in understanding how cultural patterns themselves were shaped by the composition of individual personalities that make up a society. This made Sapir cultivate an interest in individual psychology and his view of culture was more psychological than many of his contemporaries. It has been suggested that there is a close relation between Sapir's literary interests and his anthropological thought. His literary theory saw individual aesthetic sensibilities and creativity to interact with learned cultural traditions to produce unique and new poetic forms, echoing the way that he also saw individuals and cultural patterns to dialectically influence each other.\nBreadth of languages studied.\nSapir's special focus among American languages was in the Athabaskan languages, a family which especially fascinated him. In a private letter, he wrote: \"Dene is probably the son-of-a-bitchiest language in America to actually \"know\"...most fascinating of all languages ever invented.\" Sapir also studied the languages and cultures of Wishram Chinook, Navajo, Nootka, Colorado River Numic, Takelma, and Yana. His research on Southern Paiute, in collaboration with consultant Tony Tillohash, led to a 1933 article which would become influential in the characterization of the phoneme.\nAlthough noted for his work on American linguistics, Sapir wrote prolifically in linguistics in general. His book \"Language\" provides everything from a grammar-typological classification of languages (with examples ranging from Chinese to Nootka) to speculation on the phenomenon of language drift, and the arbitrariness of associations between language, race, and culture. Sapir was also a pioneer in Yiddish studies (his first language) in the United States (cf. \"Notes on Judeo-German phonology\", 1915).\nSapir was active in the international auxiliary language movement. In his paper \"The Function of an International Auxiliary Language\", he argued for the benefits of a regular grammar and advocated a critical focus on the fundamentals of language, unbiased by the idiosyncrasies of national languages, in the choice of an international auxiliary language.\nHe was the first Research Director of the International Auxiliary Language Association (IALA), which presented the Interlingua conference in 1951. He directed the Association from 1930 to 1931, and was a member of its Consultative Counsel for Linguistic Research from 1927 to 1938. Sapir consulted with Alice Vanderbilt Morris to develop the research program of IALA."}
{"id": "9322", "revid": "2043601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9322", "title": "English", "text": "English usually refers to:\nEnglish may also refer to:"}
{"id": "9323", "revid": "23115738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9323", "title": "Easter Sunday", "text": ""}
{"id": "9324", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9324", "title": "Easter egg", "text": "Easter eggs, also called Paschal eggs, and Egg of Easter are eggs that are sometimes decorated. They are usually used as gifts on the occasion of Easter. As such, Easter eggs are common during the season of Eastertide (Easter season). The oldest tradition is to use dyed and painted chicken eggs, but a modern custom is to substitute chocolate eggs wrapped in coloured foil, hand-carved wooden eggs, or plastic eggs filled with confectionery such as chocolate. However, real eggs continue to be used in Central and Eastern European tradition.\nAlthough eggs, in general, were a traditional symbol of fertility and rebirth, in Christianity, for the celebration of Eastertide, Easter eggs symbolize the empty tomb of Jesus, from which Jesus was resurrected. In addition, one ancient tradition was the staining of Easter eggs with the colour red \"in memory of the blood of Christ, shed as at that time of his crucifixion.\"\nThis custom of the Easter egg, according to many sources, can be traced to early Christians of Mesopotamia, and from there it spread into Eastern Europe and Siberia through the Orthodox Churches, and later into Europe through the Catholic and Protestant Churches. Other sources maintain that the custom arose in western Europe during the Middle Ages as a result of the fact that Western Christians were prohibited from eating eggs during Lent, but were allowed to eat them when Easter arrived.\nHistory.\nThe practice of decorating eggshells is quite ancient, with decorated, engraved ostrich eggs found in Africa which are 60,000 years old. In the pre-dynastic period of Egypt and the early cultures of Mesopotamia and Crete, eggs were associated with death and rebirth, as well as with kingship, with decorated ostrich eggs, and representations of ostrich eggs in gold and silver, were commonly placed in graves of the ancient Sumerians and Egyptians as early as 5,000 years ago. These cultural relationships may have influenced early Christian and Islamic cultures in those areas, as well as through mercantile, religious, and political links from those areas around the Mediterranean.\nAccording to many sources, the Christian custom of Easter eggs was adopted from Persian tradition into the early Christians of Mesopotamia, who stained them with red colouring \"in memory of the blood of Christ, shed at His crucifixion\". The Christian Church officially adopted the custom, regarding the eggs as a symbol of the resurrection of Jesus, with the Roman Ritual, the first edition of which was published in 1610 but which has texts of much older date, containing among the Easter Blessings of Food, one for eggs, along with those for lamb, bread, and new produce. \nSociology professor Kenneth Thompson discusses the spread of the Easter egg throughout Christendom, writing that \"use of eggs at Easter seems to have come from Persia into the Greek Christian Churches of Mesopotamia, thence to Russia and Siberia through the medium of Orthodox Christianity. From the Greek Church the custom was adopted by either the Roman Catholics or the Protestants and then spread through Europe.\" Both Thompson, as well as British orientalist Thomas Hyde state that in addition to dyeing the eggs red, the early Christians of Mesopotamia also stained Easter eggs green and yellow.\nPeter Gainsford maintains that the association between eggs and Easter most likely arose in western Europe during the Middle Ages as a result of the fact that Catholic Christians were prohibited from eating eggs during Lent, but were allowed to eat them when Easter arrived.\nInfluential 19th century folklorist and philologist Jacob Grimm speculates, in the second volume of his \"Deutsche Mythologie\", that the folk custom of Easter eggs among the continental Germanic peoples may have stemmed from springtime festivities of a Germanic goddess known in Old English as \u0112ostre (namesake of modern English \"Easter\") and possibly known in Old High German as *\"Ostara\" (and thus namesake of Modern German \"Ostern\" 'Easter'). However, despite Grimm's speculation, there is no evidence to connect eggs with Ostara. The use of eggs as favors or treats at Easter originated when they were prohibited during Lent. A common practice in England in the medieval period was for children to go door-to-door begging for eggs on the Saturday before Lent began. People handed out eggs as special treats for children prior to their fast.\nAlthough one of the Christian traditions are to use dyed or painted chicken eggs, a modern custom is to substitute chocolate eggs, or plastic eggs filled with candy such as jelly beans; as many people give up sweets as their Lenten sacrifice, individuals enjoy them at Easter after having abstained from them during the preceding forty days of Lent. These eggs can be hidden for children to find on Easter morning, which may be left by the Easter Bunny. They may also be put in a basket filled with real or artificial straw to resemble a bird's nest.\nTraditions and customs.\nLenten tradition.\nThe Easter egg tradition may also have merged into the celebration of the end of the privations of Lent in the West.\nHistorically, it was traditional to use up all of the household's eggs before Lent began.\nEggs were originally forbidden during Lent as well as on other traditional fast days in Western Christianity (this tradition still continues among the Eastern Christian Churches). Likewise, in Eastern Christianity, meat, eggs, and dairy are all prohibited during the Lenten fast.\nThis established the tradition of Pancake Day being celebrated on Shrove Tuesday. This day, the Tuesday before Ash Wednesday when Lent begins, is also known as Mardi Gras, a French phrase which translates as \"Fat Tuesday\" to mark the last consumption of eggs and dairy before Lent begins.\nIn the Orthodox Church, Great Lent begins on Clean Monday, rather than Wednesday, so the household's dairy products would be used up in the preceding week, called Cheesefare Week.\nDuring Lent, since chickens would not stop producing eggs during this time, a larger than usual store might be available at the end of the fast. This surplus, if any, had to be eaten quickly to prevent spoiling. Then, with the coming of Easter, the eating of eggs resumes. Some families cook a special meatloaf with eggs in it to be eaten with the Easter dinner.\nOne would have been forced to hard boil the eggs that the chickens produced so as not to waste food, and for this reason the Spanish dish hornazo (traditionally eaten on and around Easter) contains hard-boiled eggs as a primary ingredient.\nIn Hungary, eggs are used sliced in potato casseroles around the Easter period.\nSymbolism and related customs.\nSome Christians symbolically link the cracking open of Easter eggs with the empty tomb of Jesus.\nIn the Orthodox churches, Easter eggs are blessed by the priest at the end of the Paschal Vigil (which is equivalent to Holy Saturday), and distributed to the faithful. The egg is seen by followers of Christianity as a symbol of resurrection: while being dormant it contains a new life sealed within it.\nSimilarly, in the Roman Catholic Church in Poland, the so-called \u015bwi\u0119conka, i.e. blessing of decorative baskets with a sampling of Easter eggs and other symbolic foods, is one of the most enduring and beloved Polish traditions on Holy Saturday.\nDuring Paschaltide, in some traditions the Pascal greeting with the Easter egg is even extended to the deceased. On either the second Monday or Tuesday of Pascha, after a memorial service people bring blessed eggs to the cemetery and bring the joyous paschal greeting, \"Christ has risen\", to their beloved departed (see Radonitza).\nIn Greece, women traditionally dye the eggs with onion skins and vinegar on Thursday (also the day of Communion). These ceremonial eggs are known as kokkina avga. They also bake tsoureki for the Easter Sunday feast. Red Easter eggs are sometimes served along the centerline of tsoureki (braided loaf of bread).\nIn Egypt, it is a tradition to decorate boiled eggs during Sham el-Nessim holiday, which falls every year after the Eastern Christian Easter.\nCoincidentally, every Passover, Jews place a hard-boiled egg on the Passover ceremonial plate, and the celebrants also eat hard-boiled eggs dipped in salt water as part of the ceremony.\nColouring.\nThe dyeing of Easter eggs in different colours is commonplace, with colour being achieved through boiling the egg in natural substances (such as, onion peel (brown colour), oak or alder bark or walnut nutshell (black), beet juice (pink) etc.), or using artificial colourings.\nA greater variety of colour was often provided by tying on the onion skin with different coloured woollen yarn. In the North of England these are called pace-eggs or paste-eggs, from a dialectal form of Middle English \"pasche\". King Edward I's household accounts in 1290 list an item of \u2018one shilling and sixpence for the decoration and distribution of 450 Pace-eggs!\u2019, which were to be coloured or gilded and given to members of the royal household. Traditionally in England, eggs were wrapped in onion skins and boiled to make their shells look like mottled gold, or wrapped in flowers and leaves first in order to leave a pattern, which parallels a custom practised in traditional Scandinavian culture. Eggs could also be drawn on with a wax candle before staining, often with a person\u2019s name and date on the egg. Pace Eggs were generally eaten for breakfast on Easter Sunday breakfast. Alternatively, they could be kept as decorations, used in egg-jarping (egg tapping) games, or given to Pace Eggers. In more recent centuries in England, eggs have been stained with coffee grains or simply boiled and painted in their shells.\nIn the Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches, Easter eggs are dyed red to represent the blood of Christ, with further symbolism being found in the hard shell of the egg symbolizing the sealed Tomb of Christ \u2014 the cracking of which symbolized his resurrection from the dead. The tradition of red easter eggs was used by the Russian Orthodox Church. The tradition to dying the easter eggs in an Onion tone exists in the cultures of Armenia, Georgia, Belarus, Russia, Czechia, Romania, and Israel. The colour is made by boiling onion peel in water.\nPatterning.\nWhen boiling them with onion skins leaves can be attached prior to dying to create leaf patterns. The leaves are attached to the eggs before they are dyed with a transparent cloth to wrap the eggs with like inexpensive muslin or nylon stockings, leaving patterns once the leaves are removed after the dyeing process. These eggs are part of Easter custom in many areas and often accompany other traditional Easter foods. Passover haminados are prepared with similar methods.\nPysanky are Ukrainian Easter eggs, decorated using a wax-resist (batik) method. The word comes from the verb \"pysaty\", \"to write\", as the designs are not painted on, but written with beeswax.\nDecorating eggs for Easter using wax resistant batik is a popular method in some other eastern European countries.\nUse of Easter eggs in decorations.\nIn some Mediterranean countries, especially in Lebanon, chicken eggs are boiled and decorated by dye and/or painting and used as decoration around the house. Then, on Easter Day, young kids would duel with them saying 'Christ is resurrected, Indeed, He is', breaking and eating them. This also happens in Georgia, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Greece, Macedonia, Romania, Russia, Serbia and Ukraine. In Easter Sunday friends and family hit each other's egg with their own. The one whose egg does not break is believed to be in for good luck in the future.\nIn Germany, eggs decorate trees and bushes as Easter egg trees, and in several areas public wells as Osterbrunnen.\nThere used to be a custom in Ukraine, during Easter celebrations to have \"krashanky\" on a table in a bowl with wheatgrass. The number of the \"krashanky\" equalled the number of departed family members.\nEaster egg games.\nEgg hunts.\nAn egg hunt is a game in which decorated eggs, which may be hard-boiled chicken eggs, chocolate eggs, or artificial eggs containing candies, are hidden for children to find. The eggs often vary in size, and may be hidden both indoors and outdoors. When the hunt is over, prizes may be given for the largest number of eggs collected, or for the largest or the smallest egg.\nThe central European Slavic nations (Czechs and Slovaks etc.) have a tradition of gathering eggs by gaining them from the females in return of whipping them with a pony-tail shaped whip made out of fresh willow branches and splashing them with water, by the Ruthenians called \"polivanja\", which is supposed to give them health and beauty.\nCascarones, a Latin American tradition now shared by many US States with high Hispanic demographics, are emptied and dried chicken eggs stuffed with confetti and sealed with a piece of tissue paper. The eggs are hidden in a similar tradition to the American Easter egg hunt and when found the children (and adults) break them over each other's heads.\nIn order to enable children to take part in egg hunts despite visual impairment, eggs have been created that emit various clicks, beeps, noises, or music so that visually impaired children can easily hunt for Easter eggs.\nEgg rolling.\nEgg rolling is also a traditional Easter egg game played with eggs at Easter. In the United Kingdom, Germany, and other countries children traditionally rolled eggs down hillsides at Easter. This tradition was taken to the New World by European settlers, and continues to this day each Easter with an Easter egg roll on the White House lawn. Different nations have different versions of the game.\nEgg tapping.\nIn the North of England, during Eastertide, a traditional game is played where hard boiled \"pace eggs\" are distributed and each player hits the other player's egg with their own. This is known as \"egg tapping\", \"egg dumping\", or \"egg jarping\". The winner is the holder of the last intact egg. The annual egg jarping world championship is held every year over Easter in Peterlee, Durham.\nIt is also practiced in Italy (where it is called \"scuccetta\"), Bulgaria, Hungary, Croatia, Latvia, Lithuania, Lebanon, Macedonia, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia (where it is called \"tur\u010danje\" or \"trkanje\"), Ukraine, Russia, and other countries. In parts of Austria, Bavaria and German-speaking Switzerland it is called \"Ostereiertitschen\" or \"Eierpecken\". In parts of Europe it is also called \"epper\", presumably from the German name \"Opfer\", meaning \"offering\" and in Greece it is known as \"tsougrisma\". In South Louisiana, this practice is called pocking eggs and is slightly different. The Louisiana Creoles hold that the winner eats the eggs of the losers in each round.\nIn the Greek Orthodox tradition, red eggs are also cracked together when people exchange Easter greetings.\nEgg dance.\nEgg dance is a traditional Easter game in which eggs are laid on the ground or floor and the goal is to dance among them without damaging any eggs which originated in Germany.\nPace egg plays.\nThe Pace Egg plays are traditional village plays, with a rebirth theme. The drama takes the form of a combat between the hero and villain, in which the hero is killed and brought back to life. The plays take place in England during Easter.\nVariants.\nChocolate eggs.\nAccording to some accounts, chocolate eggs may have first appeared in Bayonne as an holiday treat produced by Spanish-Jewish immigrants for Christians during Lent. \nChocolate eggs were introduced to the court of Louis XIV in Versailles and in 1725 the widow Giambone in Turin started producing chocolate eggs by filling empty chicken egg shells with molten chocolate. In 1873 J.S. Fry &amp; Sons of England introduced the first chocolate Easter egg in Britain. Manufacturing their first Easter egg in 1875, Cadbury created the modern chocolate Easter egg after developing a pure cocoa butter that could be moulded into smooth shapes.\nIn Western cultures, the giving of chocolate eggs is now commonplace, with 80 million Easter eggs sold in the UK alone. Formerly, the containers Easter eggs were sold in contained large amounts of plastic, although in the United Kingdom this has gradually been replaced with recyclable paper and cardboard.\nMarzipan eggs.\nIn the Indian state of Goa, the Goan Catholic version of marzipan is used to make easter eggs. In the Philippines, mazap\u00e1n de pili (Spanish for \"pili marzipan\") is made from pili nuts.\nArtificial eggs.\nThe jewelled Easter eggs made by the Faberg\u00e9 firm for the two last Russian Tsars are regarded as masterpieces of decorative arts. Most of these creations themselves contained hidden surprises such as clock-work birds, or miniature ships.\nIn Bulgaria, Poland, Romania, Russia, Ukraine, and other Central European countries' folk traditions, Easter eggs are carved from wood and hand-painted, and making artificial eggs out of porcelain for ladies is common.\nEaster eggs are frequently depicted in sculpture, including a sculpture of a pysanka standing in Vegreville, Alberta.\nLegends.\nChristian traditions.\nWhile the origin of Easter eggs can be explained in the symbolic terms described above, among followers of Eastern Christianity the legend says that Mary Magdalene was bringing cooked eggs to share with the other women at the tomb of Jesus, and the eggs in her basket miraculously turned bright red when she saw the risen Christ.\nA different, but not necessarily conflicting legend concerns Mary Magdalene's efforts to spread the Gospel. According to this tradition, after the Ascension of Jesus, Mary went to the Emperor of Rome and greeted him with \"Christ has risen,\" whereupon he pointed to an egg on his table and stated, \"Christ has no more risen than that egg is red.\" After making this statement it is said the egg immediately turned blood red.\nRed Easter eggs, known as \"kokkina avga\" (\u03ba\u03cc\u03ba\u03ba\u03b9\u03bd\u03b1 \u03b1\u03c5\u03b3\u03ac) in Greece and \"krashanki\" in Ukraine, are an Easter tradition and a distinct type of Easter egg prepared by various Orthodox Christian peoples. The red eggs are part of Easter custom in many areas and often accompany other traditional Easter foods. Passover haminados are prepared with similar methods.\nDark red eggs are a tradition in Greece and represent the blood of Christ shed on the cross. The practice dates to the early Christian church in Mesopotamia.\nIn Greece, superstitions of the past included the custom of placing the first-dyed red egg at the home's iconostasis (place where icons are displayed) to ward off evil. The heads and backs of small lambs were also marked with the red dye to protect them.\nParallels in other faiths.\nThe egg is widely used as a symbol of the start of new life, just as new life emerges from an egg when the chick hatches out.\nPainted eggs are used at the Iranian spring holidays, the Nowruz that marks the first day of spring or Equinox, and the beginning of the year in the Persian calendar. It is celebrated on the day of the astronomical Northward equinox, which usually occurs on March 21 or the previous/following day depending on where it is observed. The painted eggs symbolize fertility and are displayed on the Nowruz table, called Haft-Seen together with various other symbolic objects. There are sometimes one egg for each member of the family. The ancient Zoroastrians painted eggs for Nowruz, their New Year celebration, which falls on the Spring equinox. The tradition continues among Persians of Islamic, Zoroastrian, and other faiths today. The Nowruz tradition has existed for at least 2,500 years. The sculptures on the walls of Persepolis show people carrying eggs for Nowruz to the king.\nThe Neopagan holiday of Ostara occurs at roughly the same time as Easter. While it is often claimed that the use of painted eggs is an ancient, pre-Christian component of the celebration of Ostara, there are no historical accounts that ancient celebrations included this practice, apart from the Old High German lullaby which is believed by most to be a modern fabrication. Rather, the use of painted eggs has been adopted under the assumption that it might be a pre-Christian survival. In fact, modern scholarship has been unable to trace any association between eggs and a supposed goddess named Ostara before the 19th century, when early folklorists began to speculate about the possibility.\nThere are good grounds for the association between hares (later termed Easter bunnies) and bird eggs, through folklore confusion between hares' forms (where they raise their young) and plovers' nests.\nIn Judaism, a hard-boiled egg is an element of the Passover Seder, representing festival sacrifice. The children's game of hunting for the afikomen (a half-piece of matzo) has similarities to the Easter egg hunt tradition, by which the child who finds the hidden bread will be awarded a prize. In other homes, the children hide the afikoman and a parent must look for it; when the parents give up, the children demand a prize for revealing its location."}
{"id": "9325", "revid": "11388421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9325", "title": "Easter", "text": "Easter, also called Pascha (Aramaic, Greek, Latin) or Resurrection Sunday, is a Christian festival and cultural holiday commemorating the resurrection of Jesus from the dead, described in the New Testament as having occurred on the third day after his burial following his crucifixion by the Romans at Calvary 30 AD. It is the culmination of the Passion of Jesus, preceded by Lent (or Great Lent), a 40-day period of fasting, prayer, and penance.\nMost Christians refer to the week before Easter as \"Holy Week\", which contains the days of the Easter Triduum, including Maundy Thursday, commemorating the Maundy and Last Supper, as well as Good Friday, commemorating the crucifixion and death of Jesus. In Western Christianity, Eastertide, or the Easter Season, begins on Easter Sunday and lasts seven weeks, ending with the coming of the 50th day, Pentecost Sunday. In Eastern Christianity, the Paschal season begins on Pascha and ends with the coming of the 40th day, the Feast of the Ascension.\nEaster and its related holidays are moveable feasts, not falling on a fixed date in the Gregorian or Julian calendars which follow only the cycle of the Sun; its date is computed based on a lunisolar calendar similar to the Hebrew calendar. The First Council of Nicaea (325) established two rules, independence from the Hebrew calendar and worldwide uniformity, which were the only rules for Easter explicitly laid down by the council. No details for the computation were specified; these were worked out in practice, a process that took centuries and generated a number of controversies. It has come to be the first Sunday after the ecclesiastical full moon that occurs on or soonest after 21 March. Even if calculated on the basis of the more accurate Gregorian calendar, the date of that full moon sometimes differs from that of the astronomical first full moon after the March equinox.\nEaster is linked to the Jewish Passover (Hebrew: \"pesach\", Aramaic: \"pascha\") by its origin (according to the synoptic Gospels, both the crucifixion and the resurrection took place during the Passover) and by much of its symbolism, as well as by its position in the calendar. In most European languages the feast is called by the words for passover in those languages; and in the older English versions of the Bible the term Easter was the term used to translate passover. Easter customs vary across the Christian world, and include sunrise services, exclaiming the Paschal greeting, clipping the church, and decorating Easter eggs (a symbol of the empty tomb). The Easter lily, a symbol of the resurrection, traditionally decorates the chancel area of churches on this day and for the rest of Eastertide. Additional customs that have become associated with Easter and are observed by both Christians and some non-Christians include Easter parades, the Easter Bunny and egg hunting. There are also various traditional Easter foods that vary regionally.\nEtymology.\nThe modern English term \"Easter\", cognate with modern Dutch \"ooster\" and German \"Ostern\", developed from an Old English word that usually appears in the form \"\u0112astrun\", \"-on\", or \"-an\"; but also as \"\u0112astru\", \"-o\"; and \"\u0112astre\" or \"\u0112ostre\". Bede provides the only documentary source for the etymology of the word, in his eighth-century \"The Reckoning of Time\". He wrote that \"\u0112osturm\u014dna\u00fe\" (Old English 'Month of \u0112ostre', translated in Bede's time as \"Paschal month\") was an English month, corresponding to April, which he says \"was once called after a goddess of theirs named \u0112ostre, in whose honour feasts were celebrated in that month\".\nIn Latin and Greek, the Christian celebration was, and still is, called \"Pascha\" (Greek: \u03a0\u03ac\u03c3\u03c7\u03b1), a word derived from Aramaic \u05e4\u05e1\u05d7\u05d0 (\"Paskha\"), cognate to Hebrew \u05e4\u05b6\u05bc\u05e1\u05b7\u05d7 (\"Pesach\"). The word originally denoted the Jewish festival known in English as Passover, commemorating the Jewish Exodus from slavery in Egypt. As early as the 50s of the 1st century, Paul the Apostle, writing from Ephesus to the Christians in Corinth, applied the term to Christ, and it is unlikely that the Ephesian and Corinthian Christians were the first to hear Exodus 12 interpreted as speaking about the death of Jesus, not just about the Jewish Passover ritual. In most languages, Germanic languages such as English being exceptions, the feast is known by names derived from Greek and Latin \"Pascha\". Pascha is also a name by which Jesus himself is remembered in the Orthodox Church, especially in connection with his resurrection and with the season of its celebration.\nOthers call the holiday day.\nTheological significance.\nThe supernatural resurrection from the dead of Jesus, which Easter celebrates, is one of the chief tenets of the Christian faith. The resurrection established Jesus as the Son of God and is cited as proof that God will righteously judge the world. For those who trust in Jesus's death and resurrection, \"death is swallowed up in victory.\" Any person who chooses to follow Jesus receives \"a new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead\". Through faith in the working of God those who follow Jesus are spiritually resurrected with him so that they may walk in a new way of life and receive eternal salvation, being physically resurrected to dwell in the Kingdom of Heaven.\nEaster is linked to Passover and the Exodus from Egypt recorded in the Old Testament through the Last Supper, sufferings, and crucifixion of Jesus that preceded the resurrection. According to the three Synoptic Gospels, Jesus gave the Passover meal a new meaning, as in the upper room during the Last Supper he prepared himself and his disciples for his death. He identified the bread and cup of wine as his body, soon to be sacrificed, and his blood, soon to be shed. Paul states, \"Get rid of the old yeast that you may be a new batch without yeast\u2014as you really are. For Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed\"; this refers to the Passover requirement to have no yeast in the house and to the allegory of Jesus as the Paschal lamb.\nEarly Christianity.\nThe first Christians, Jewish and Gentile, were certainly aware of the Hebrew calendar. Jewish Christians, the first to celebrate the resurrection of Jesus, timed the observance in relation to Passover.\nDirect evidence for a more fully formed Christian festival of Pascha (Easter) begins to appear in the mid-2nd century. Perhaps the earliest extant primary source referring to Easter is a mid-2nd-century Paschal homily attributed to Melito of Sardis, which characterizes the celebration as a well-established one. Evidence for another kind of annually recurring Christian festival, those commemorating the martyrs, began to appear at about the same time as the above homily.\nWhile martyrs' days (usually the individual dates of martyrdom) were celebrated on fixed dates in the local solar calendar, the date of Easter was fixed by means of the local Jewish lunisolar calendar. This is consistent with the celebration of Easter having entered Christianity during its earliest, Jewish, period, but does not leave the question free of doubt.\nThe ecclesiastical historian Socrates Scholasticus attributes the observance of Easter by the church to the perpetuation of its custom, \"just as many other customs have been established\", stating that neither Jesus nor his Apostles enjoined the keeping of this or any other festival. Although he describes the details of the Easter celebration as deriving from local custom, he insists the feast itself is universally observed.\nDate.\nEaster and the holidays that are related to it are \"moveable feasts\", in that they do not fall on a fixed date in the Gregorian or Julian calendars (both of which follow the cycle of the sun and the seasons). Instead, the date for Easter is determined on a lunisolar calendar similar to the Hebrew calendar. The First Council of Nicaea (325) established two rules, independence of the Jewish calendar and worldwide uniformity, which were the only rules for Easter explicitly laid down by the Council. No details for the computation were specified; these were worked out in practice, a process that took centuries and generated a number of controversies. (See also Computus and Reform of the date of Easter.) In particular, the Council did not decree that Easter must fall on Sunday. This was already the practice almost everywhere.\nIn Western Christianity, using the Gregorian calendar, Easter always falls on a Sunday between 22 March and 25 April, within about seven days after the astronomical full moon. The following day, Easter Monday, is a legal holiday in many countries with predominantly Christian traditions.\nEastern Christianity bases its calculations on the Julian Calendar. Because of the thirteen-day difference between the calendars between 1900 and 2099, 21 March corresponds, during the 21st century, to 3 April in the Gregorian Calendar. Easter therefore varies between 4 April and 8 May in the Gregorian calendar (the Julian calendar is no longer used as the civil calendar of the countries where Eastern Christian traditions predominate). Also, because the Julian \"full moon\" is always several days after the astronomical full moon, the eastern Easter is often later, relative to the visible Moon's phases, than western Easter.\nAmong the Oriental Orthodox some churches have changed from the Julian to the Gregorian calendar and the date for Easter as for other fixed and moveable feasts is the same as in the Western church.\nComputations.\nIn 725, Bede succinctly wrote, \"The Sunday following the full Moon which falls on or after the equinox will give the lawful Easter.\" However, this does not precisely reflect the ecclesiastical rules. The full moon referred to (called the Paschal full moon) is not an astronomical full moon, but the 14th day of a lunar month. Another difference is that the astronomical equinox is a natural astronomical phenomenon, which can fall on 19, 20 or 21 March, while the ecclesiastical date is fixed by convention on 21 March.\nIn applying the ecclesiastical rules, Christian churches use 21 March as the starting point in determining the date of Easter, from which they find the next full moon, etc. The Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox Churches continue to use the Julian calendar. Their starting point in determining the date of Orthodox Easter is also 21 March but according to the Julian reckoning, which in the current century corresponds to 3 April in the Gregorian calendar.\nIn addition, the lunar tables of the Julian calendar are five behind those of the Gregorian calendar. Therefore, the Julian computation of the Paschal full moon is a full five days later than the astronomical full moon. The result of this combination of solar and lunar discrepancies is divergence in the date of Easter in most years (see table).\nEaster is determined on the basis of lunisolar cycles. The lunar year consists of 30-day and 29-day lunar months, generally alternating, with an embolismic month added periodically to bring the lunar cycle into line with the solar cycle. In each solar year (1 January to 31 December inclusive), the lunar month beginning with an ecclesiastical new moon falling in the 29-day period from 8 March to 5 April inclusive is designated as the paschal lunar month for that year.\nEaster is the third Sunday in the paschal lunar month, or, in other words, the Sunday after the paschal lunar month's 14th day. The 14th of the paschal lunar month is designated by convention as the Paschal full moon, although the 14th of the lunar month may differ from the date of the astronomical full moon by up to two days. Since the ecclesiastical new moon falls on a date from 8 March to 5 April inclusive, the paschal full moon (the 14th of that lunar month) must fall on a date from 22 March to 18 April inclusive.\nThe Gregorian calculation of Easter was based on a method devised by the Calabrian doctor Aloysius Lilius (or Lilio) for adjusting the epacts of the Moon, and has been adopted by almost all Western Christians and by Western countries which celebrate national holidays at Easter. For the British Empire and colonies, a determination of the date of Easter Sunday using Golden Numbers and Sunday letters was defined by the Calendar (New Style) Act 1750 with its Annexe. This was designed to match exactly the Gregorian calculation.\nControversies over the date.\nThe precise date of Easter has at times been a matter of contention. By the later 2nd century, it was widely accepted that the celebration of the holiday was a practice of the disciples and an undisputed tradition. The Quartodeciman controversy, the first of several Easter controversies, arose concerning the date on which the holiday should be celebrated.\nThe term \"Quartodeciman\" refers to the practice of ending the Lenten fast on Nisan 14 of the Hebrew calendar, \"the 's passover\". According to the church historian Eusebius, the Quartodeciman Polycarp (bishop of Smyrna, by tradition a disciple of John the Apostle) debated the question with Anicetus (bishop of Rome). The Roman province of Asia was Quartodeciman, while the Roman and Alexandrian churches continued the fast until the Sunday following (the Sunday of Unleavened Bread), wishing to associate Easter with Sunday. Neither Polycarp nor Anicetus persuaded the other, but they did not consider the matter schismatic either, parting in peace and leaving the question unsettled.\nControversy arose when Victor, bishop of Rome a generation after Anicetus, attempted to excommunicate Polycrates of Ephesus and all other bishops of Asia for their Quartodecimanism. According to Eusebius, a number of synods were convened to deal with the controversy, which he regarded as all ruling in support of Easter on Sunday. Polycrates (\"circa\" 190), however, wrote to Victor defending the antiquity of Asian Quartodecimanism. Victor's attempted excommunication was apparently rescinded, and the two sides reconciled upon the intervention of bishop Irenaeus and others, who reminded Victor of the tolerant precedent of Anicetus.\nQuartodecimanism seems to have lingered into the 4th century, when Socrates of Constantinople recorded that some Quartodecimans were deprived of their churches by John Chrysostom and that some were harassed by Nestorius.\nIt is not known how long the Nisan 14 practice continued. But both those who followed the Nisan 14 custom, and those who set Easter to the following Sunday had in common the custom of consulting their Jewish neighbors to learn when the month of Nisan would fall, and setting their festival accordingly. By the later 3rd century, however, some Christians began to express dissatisfaction with the custom of relying on the Jewish community to determine the date of Easter. The chief complaint was that the Jewish communities sometimes erred in setting Passover to fall before the Northern Hemisphere spring equinox. The Sardica paschal table confirms these complaints, for it indicates that the Jews of some eastern Mediterranean city (possibly Antioch) fixed Nisan 14 on dates well before the spring equinox on multiple occasions.\nBecause of this dissatisfaction with reliance on the Jewish calendar, some Christians began to experiment with independent computations. Others, however, believed that the customary practice of consulting Jews should continue, even if the Jewish computations were in error.\nFirst Council of Nicaea (325 AD).\nThis controversy between those who advocated independent computations, and those who wished to continue the custom of relying on the Jewish calendar, was formally resolved by the First Council of Nicaea in 325, which endorsed changing to an independent computation by the Christian community in order to celebrate in common. This effectively required the abandonment of the old custom of consulting the Jewish community in those places where it was still used. Epiphanius of Salamis wrote in the mid-4th century:\nthe emperor\u00a0... convened a council of 318 bishops\u00a0... in the city of Nicea\u00a0... They passed certain ecclesiastical canons at the council besides, and at the same time decreed in regard to the Passover that there must be one unanimous concord on the celebration of God's holy and supremely excellent day. For it was variously observed by people\nThat the older custom (called \"protopaschite\" by historians) did not at once die out, but persisted for a time, is indicated by the existence of canons and sermons against it.\nDionysius Exiguus, and others following him, maintained that the 318 Bishops assembled at the Nicene Council had specified a particular method of determining the date of Easter; subsequent scholarship has refuted this tradition. In any case, in the years following the council, the computational system that was worked out by the church of Alexandria came to be normative. It took a while for the Alexandrian rules to be adopted throughout Christian Europe, however. The 8-year cycle originally employed was replaced by (or by the time of) Augustalis's treatise on the measurement of Easter, after which Rome used his 84-year lunisolar calendar cycle until 457. It then switched to an adaptation by Victorius of the Alexandrian rules.\nBecause this Victorian cycle differed from the Alexandrian cycle in the dates of some of the Paschal Full Moons, and because it tried to respect the Roman custom of fixing Easter to the Sunday in the week of the 16th to the 22nd of the lunar month (rather than the 15th to the 21st as at Alexandria), by providing alternative \"Latin\" and \"Greek\" dates in some years, occasional differences in the date of Easter as fixed by Alexandrian rules continued. The Alexandrian rules were adopted in the West following the tables of Dionysius Exiguus in 525.\nEarly Christians in Britain and Ireland also used an 84-year cycle. From the 5th century onward this cycle set its equinox to 25 March and fixed Easter to the Sunday falling in the 14th to the 20th of the lunar month inclusive. This 84-year cycle was replaced by the Alexandrian method in the course of the 7th and 8th centuries. Churches in western continental Europe used a late Roman method until the late 8th century during the reign of Charlemagne, when they finally adopted the Alexandrian method. Since 1582, when the Catholic Church adopted the Gregorian calendar while most of Europe used the Julian calendar, the date on which Easter is celebrated has again differed.\nThe Greek island of Syros, whose population is divided almost equally between Catholics and Orthodox, is one of the few places where the two Churches share a common date for Easter, with the Catholics accepting the Orthodox date\u2014a practice helping considerably in maintaining good relations between the two communities.\nReform of the date.\nIn the 20th century, some individuals and institutions have propounded changing the method of calculating the date for Easter, the most prominent proposal being the Sunday after the second Saturday in April. Despite having some support, proposals to reform the date have not been implemented. An Orthodox congress of Eastern Orthodox bishops, which included representatives mostly from the Patriarch of Constantinople and the Serbian Patriarch, met in Constantinople in 1923, where the bishops agreed to the Revised Julian calendar.\nThe original form of this calendar would have determined Easter using precise astronomical calculations based on the meridian of Jerusalem. However, all the Eastern Orthodox countries that subsequently adopted the Revised Julian calendar adopted only that part of the revised calendar that applied to festivals falling on fixed dates in the Julian calendar. The revised Easter computation that had been part of the original 1923 agreement was never permanently implemented in any Orthodox diocese.\nIn the United Kingdom, the Easter Act 1928 set out legislation to change the date of Easter to be the first Sunday after the second Saturday in April (or, in other words, the Sunday in the period from 9 to 15 April). However, the legislation has not been implemented, although it remains on the Statute book and could be implemented subject to approval by the various Christian churches.\nAt a summit in Aleppo, Syria, in 1997, the World Council of Churches (WCC) proposed a reform in the calculation of Easter which would have replaced the present divergent practices of calculating Easter with modern scientific knowledge taking into account actual astronomical instances of the spring equinox and full moon based on the meridian of Jerusalem, while also following the tradition of Easter being on the Sunday following the full moon. The recommended World Council of Churches changes would have sidestepped the calendar issues and eliminated the difference in date between the Eastern and Western churches. The reform was proposed for implementation starting in 2001, and despite repeated calls for reform, it was not ultimately adopted by any member body.\nIn January 2016, Christian churches again considered agreeing on a common, universal date for Easter, while also simplifying the calculation of that date, with either the second or third Sunday in April being popular choices.\nTable of the dates of Easter.\nThe WCC presented comparative data of the relationships:\nPosition in the church year.\nWestern Christianity.\nIn Western Christianity, Easter is preceded by Lent, a period of fasting and penitence in preparation for Easter, which begins on Ash Wednesday and lasts 40 days (not counting Sundays). The week before Easter, known as Holy Week, is very special in the Christian tradition. The Sunday before Easter is Palm Sunday, with the Wednesday before Easter being known as Spy Wednesday. The last three days before Easter are Maundy Thursday, Good Friday and Holy Saturday (sometimes referred to as Silent Saturday).\nPalm Sunday, Maundy Thursday and Good Friday respectively commemorate Jesus's entry in Jerusalem, the Last Supper and the Crucifixion. Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, and Holy Saturday are sometimes referred to as the Easter Triduum (Latin for \"Three Days\"). Many churches begin celebrating Easter late in the evening of Holy Saturday at a service called the Easter Vigil.\nThe week beginning with Easter Sunday is called Easter Week or the Octave of Easter, and each day is prefaced with \"Easter\", e.g. Easter Monday (a public holiday in many countries), Easter Tuesday (a much less widespread public holiday), etc. Easter Saturday is therefore the Saturday \"after\" Easter Sunday. The day before Easter is properly called Holy Saturday. Eastertide, or Paschaltide, the season of Easter, begins on Easter Sunday and lasts until the day of Pentecost, seven weeks later.\nEastern Christianity.\nIn Eastern Christianity, the spiritual preparation for Easter begins with Great Lent, which starts on Clean Monday and lasts for 40 continuous days (including Sundays). The last week of Great Lent (following the fifth Sunday of Great Lent) is called Palm Week, and ends with Lazarus Saturday. The Vespers which begins Lazarus Saturday officially brings Great Lent to a close, although the fast continues through the following week. After Lazarus Saturday comes Palm Sunday, Holy Week, and finally Easter itself, and the fast is broken immediately after the Paschal Divine Liturgy.\nThe Paschal Vigil begins with the Midnight Office, which is the last service of the Lenten Triodion and is timed so that it ends a little before midnight on Holy Saturday night. At the stroke of midnight the Paschal celebration itself begins, consisting of Paschal Matins, Paschal Hours, and Paschal Divine Liturgy. Placing the Paschal Divine Liturgy at midnight guarantees that no Divine Liturgy will come earlier in the morning, ensuring its place as the pre-eminent \"Feast of Feasts\" in the liturgical year.\nThe liturgical season from Easter to the Sunday of All Saints (the Sunday after Pentecost) is known as the Pentecostarion (the \"50 days\"). The week which begins on Easter Sunday is called Bright Week, during which there is no fasting, even on Wednesday and Friday. The Afterfeast of Easter lasts 39 days, with its Apodosis (leave-taking) on the day before the Feast of the Ascension. Pentecost Sunday is the 50th day from Easter (counted inclusively).\nLiturgical observance.\nWestern Christianity.\nThe Easter festival is kept in many different ways among Western Christians. The traditional, liturgical observation of Easter, as practised among Roman Catholics, Lutherans, and some Anglicans begins on the night of Holy Saturday with the Easter Vigil which follows an ancient liturgy involving symbols of light, candles and water and numerous readings form the Old and New Testament.\nServices continue on Easter Sunday and in a number of countries on Easter Monday. In parishes of the Moravian Church, as well as some other denominations such as the Methodist Churches, there is a tradition of Easter Sunrise Services often starting in cemeteries in remembrance of the biblical narrative in the Gospels, or other places in the open where the sunrise is visible.\nIn some traditions, Easter services typically begin with the Paschal greeting: \"Christ is risen!\" The response is: \"He is risen indeed. Alleluia!\" \nEastern Christianity.\nEastern Orthodox, Eastern Catholics and Byzantine Rite Lutherans have a similar emphasis on Easter in their calendars, and many of their liturgical customs are very similar.\nPreparation for Easter begins with the season of Great Lent, which begins on Clean Monday. While the end of Lent is Lazarus Saturday, fasting does not end until Easter Sunday. The Orthodox service begins late Saturday evening, observing the Jewish tradition that evening is the start of liturgical holy days.\nThe church is darkened, then the priest lights a candle at midnight, representing the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Altar servers light additional candles, with a procession which moves three times around the church to represent the three days in the tomb. The service continues early into Sunday morning, with a feast to end the fasting. An additional service is held later that day on Easter Sunday.\nNon-observing Christian groups.\nMany Puritans saw traditional feasts of the established Anglican Church, such as All Saints' Day and Easter, as an abomination. The Puritan rejection of Easter traditions was (and is) based partly upon their interpretation of 2 Corinthians 6:14\u201316 and partly upon a more general belief that, if a religious practice or celebration is not actually written in the Christian Bible, then that practice/celebration must be a later development and cannot be considered an authentic part of Christian practice or belief\u2014so at best simply unnecessary, at worst actually sinful.\nMembers of the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers), as part of their historic \"testimony against times and seasons\", do not celebrate or observe Easter or any traditional feast days of the established Church, believing instead that \"every day is the Lord's day\", and that elevation of one day above others suggests that it is acceptable to do un-Christian acts on other days. During the 17th and 18th centuries, Quakers were persecuted for this non-observance of Holy Days.\nGroups such as the Restored Church of God and the Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland reject the celebration of Easter, seeing it as originating in a pagan spring festival taken over by the \"Roman\" Catholic Church.\nJehovah's Witnesses maintain a similar view, observing a yearly commemorative service of the Last Supper and the subsequent execution of Christ on the evening of Nisan 14 (as they calculate the dates derived from the lunar Hebrew calendar). It is commonly referred to by many Witnesses as simply \"The Memorial\". Jehovah's Witnesses believe that such verses as Luke 22:19\u201320 and 1 Corinthians 11:26 constitute a commandment to remember the death of Christ though not the resurrection, and they do so on a yearly basis just as Passover is celebrated annually by the Jews.\nSome Christian groups feel that Easter is something to be regarded with great joy: not marking the day itself, but remembering and rejoicing in the event it commemorates\u2014the miracle of Christ's resurrection. In this spirit, these Christians teach that each day and all Sabbaths should be kept holy, in Christ's teachings. Hebrew-Christian, Sacred Name, and Armstrong movement churches (such as the Living Church of God) usually reject Easter in favor of Nisan 14 observance and celebration of the Christian Passover. This is especially true of Christian groups that celebrate the New Moons or annual High Sabbaths in addition to seventh-day Sabbath. They support this textually with reference to the letter to the Colossians: \"Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of a feast day or a new moon or a sabbath day: which are a shadow of the things to come; but the body is Christ's.\"\nEaster celebrations around the world.\nIn Christian countries where Christianity is a state religion, or where the country has large Christian population, Easter is often a public holiday. As Easter always falls on a Sunday, many countries in the world also have Easter Monday as a public holiday. Some retail stores, shopping malls, and restaurants are closed on Easter Sunday. Good Friday, which occurs two days before Easter Sunday, is also a public holiday in many countries, as well as in 12 U.S. states. Even in states where Good Friday is not a holiday, many financial institutions, stock markets, and public schools are closed. The few banks that are normally open on regular Sundays are closed on Easter.\nIn the Nordic countries Good Friday, Easter Sunday and Easter Monday are public holidays, and Good Friday and Easter Monday are bank holidays. In Denmark, Iceland and Norway Maundy Thursday is also a public holiday. It is a holiday for most workers, except those operating some shopping malls which keep open for a half-day. Many businesses give their employees almost a week off, called Easter break. Schools are closed between Palm Sunday and Easter Monday. According to a 2014 poll, 6 of 10 Norwegians travel during Easter, often to a countryside cottage; 3 of 10 said their typical Easter included skiing.\nIn the Netherlands both Easter Sunday and Easter Monday are national holidays. Like first and second Christmas Day, they are \"both\" considered Sundays, which results in a first and a second Easter Sunday, after which the week continues to a Tuesday.\nIn Commonwealth nations Easter Day is rarely a public holiday, as is the case for celebrations which fall on a Sunday. In the United Kingdom both Good Friday and Easter Monday are bank holidays, except for Scotland, where only Good Friday is a bank holiday. In Canada, Easter Monday is a statutory holiday for federal employees. In the Canadian province of Quebec, either Good Friday or Easter Monday are statutory holidays (although most companies give both).\nIn Australia, because of its location in the southern hemisphere, Easter takes place in autumn. Hence, Australian Easter is associated with harvest time, rather than with the coming of spring as in the northern hemisphere. The religious aspect of Easter remains the same. Good Friday and Easter Monday are public holidays across all states and territories. \"Easter Saturday\" (the Saturday before Easter Sunday) is a public holiday in every state except Tasmania and Western Australia, while Easter Sunday itself is a public holiday only in New South Wales. Easter Tuesday is additionally a conditional public holiday in Tasmania, varying between award, and was also a public holiday in Victoria until 1994.\nIn the United States, because Easter falls on a Sunday, which is already a non-working day for federal and state employees, it has not been designated as a federal or state holiday. Easter parades are held in many American cities, involving festive strolling processions.\nEaster eggs.\nTraditional customs.\nThe egg is an ancient symbol of new life and rebirth. In Christianity it became associated with Jesus's crucifixion and resurrection. The custom of the Easter egg originated in the early Christian community of Mesopotamia, who stained eggs red in memory of the blood of Christ, shed at his crucifixion. As such, for Christians, the Easter egg is a symbol of the empty tomb. The oldest tradition is to use dyed chicken eggs.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Church Easter eggs are blessed by a priest both in families' baskets together with other foods forbidden during Great Lent and alone for distribution or in church or elsewhere.\nEaster eggs are a widely popular symbol of new life among the Eastern Orthodox and also in Poland and other Slavic countries' folk traditions. A batik-like decorating process known as pisanka produces intricate, brilliantly-colored eggs. The celebrated House of Faberg\u00e9 workshops created exquisite jewelled Easter eggs for the Russian Imperial family from 1885 to 1916.\nModern customs.\nA modern custom in the Western world is to substitute decorated chocolate, or plastic eggs filled with candy such as jellybeans; as many people give up sweets as their Lenten sacrifice, individuals enjoy them at Easter after having abstained from them during the preceding forty days of Lent.\nManufacturing their first Easter egg in 1875, British chocolate company Cadbury sponsors the annual Easter egg hunt which takes place in over 250 National Trust locations in the United Kingdom. On Easter Monday, the President of the United States holds an annual Easter egg roll on the White House lawn for young children.\nEaster Bunny.\nIn some traditions the children put out their empty baskets for the Easter bunny to fill while they sleep.They wake to find their baskets filled with candy eggs and other treats.\nA custom originating in Germany, the Easter Bunny is a popular legendary anthropomorphic Easter gift-giving character analogous to Santa Claus in American culture. Many children around the world follow the tradition of coloring hard-boiled eggs and giving baskets of candy. Historically, foxes, cranes and storks were also sometimes named as the mystical creatures. Since the rabbit is a pest in Australia, the Easter Bilby is available as an alternative."}
{"id": "9328", "revid": "1007795188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9328", "title": "Euphoria (disambiguation)", "text": "Euphoria is an emotional and mental state defined as a sense of great happiness and well-being.\nEuphoria may also refer to:"}
{"id": "9330", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9330", "title": "EucliD", "text": ""}
