{"id": "5771", "revid": "14485769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5771", "title": "Christopher Marlowe", "text": "Christopher Marlowe, also known as Kit Marlowe (; baptised 26 February 156430 May 1593), was an English playwright, poet and translator of the Elizabethan era. Modern scholars count Marlowe among the most famous of the Elizabethan playwrights; based upon the \"many imitations\" of his play \"Tamburlaine,\" they consider him to have been the foremost dramatist in London in the years just before his mysterious early death. Some scholars also believe that he greatly influenced William Shakespeare, who was baptised in the same year as Marlowe and later succeeded him as the pre-eminent Elizabethan playwright. Marlowe was the first to achieve critical notoriety for his use of blank verse, which became the standard for the era. His plays are distinguished by their overreaching protagonists. Themes found within Marlowe's literary works have been noted as humanistic with realistic emotions, which some scholars find difficult to reconcile with Marlowe's \"anti-intellectualism\" and his catering to the taste of his Elizabethan audiences for generous displays of extreme physical violence, cruelty, and bloodshed.\nEvents in Marlowe's life were sometimes as extreme as those found in his dramas. Reports of Marlowe's death in 1593 were particularly infamous in his day and are contested by scholars today due to a lack of good documentation. Traditionally, the playwright's death has been blamed on a long list of conjectures, including a bar-room fight, blasphemous libel against the church, homosexual intrigue, betrayal by another playwright, and espionage from the highest level: Elizabeth I of England's Privy Council. An official coroner's account of Marlowe's death was only revealed in 1925, but it did little to persuade all scholars that it told the whole story nor did it eliminate the uncertainties present in his biography.\nEarly life.\nChristopher Marlowe was born to Canterbury shoemaker John Marlowe and his wife Katherine, daughter of William Arthur of Dover. He was baptised on 26 February 1564 at St. George's Church, Canterbury. Marlowe's birth was likely to have been a few days before, making him about two months older than William Shakespeare, who was baptised on 26 April 1564 in Stratford-upon-Avon.\nBy age 14, Marlowe attended The King's School, Canterbury on scholarship and two years later Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he also studied on scholarship and received his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1584. Marlowe mastered Latin during his schooling; reading and translating the works of Ovid. In 1587, the university hesitated to award his Master of Arts degree because of a rumour that he intended to go to the English seminary at Rheims in northern France, presumably to prepare for ordination as a Roman Catholic priest. If true, such an action on his part would have been a direct violation of royal edict issued by Queen Elizabeth I in 1585 criminalising any attempt by an English citizen to be ordained in the Roman Catholic Church.\nLarge-scale violence between Protestants and Catholics on the European continent has been cited by scholars as the impetus for the Protestant English Queen's defensive anti-Catholic laws issued from 1581 until her death in 1603. Despite the dire implications for Marlowe, his degree was awarded on schedule when the Privy Council intervened on his behalf, commending him for his \"faithful dealing\" and \"good service\" to the Queen. The nature of Marlowe's service was not specified by the Council, but its letter to the Cambridge authorities has provoked much speculation by modern scholars, notably the theory that Marlowe was operating as a secret agent for Privy Council member Sir Francis Walsingham. The only surviving evidence of the Privy Council's correspondence is found in their minutes, the letter being lost. There is no mention of espionage in the minutes, but its summation of the lost Privy Council letter is vague in meaning, stating that \"it was not Her Majesties pleasure\" that persons employed as Marlowe had been \"in matters touching the benefit of his country should be defamed by those who are ignorant in th'affaires he went about.\" Scholars agree the vague wording was typically used to protect government agents, but they continue to debate what the \"matters touching the benefit of his country\" actually were in Marlowe's case and how they affected the 23-year-old writer as he launched his literary career in 1587.\nLiterary career.\nPlays.\nSix dramas have been attributed to the authorship of Christopher Marlowe either alone or in collaboration with other writers, with varying degrees of evidence. The writing sequence or chronology of these plays is mostly unknown and is offered here with any dates and evidence known. Among the little available information we have, \"Dido\" is believed to be the first Marlowe play performed, while it was \"Tamburlaine\" that was first to be performed on a regular commercial stage in London in 1587. Believed by many scholars to be Marlowe's greatest success, \"Tamburlaine\" was the first English play written in blank verse and, with Thomas Kyd's \"The Spanish Tragedy\", is generally considered the beginning of the mature phase of the Elizabethan theatre.\nWorks\n(The dates of composition are approximate).:\nThe play \"Lust's Dominion\" was attributed to Marlowe upon its initial publication in 1657, though scholars and critics have almost unanimously rejected the attribution. He may also have written or co-written \"Arden of Faversham\".\nPoetry and translations.\nPublication and responses to the poetry and translations credited to Marlowe primarily occurred posthumously, including:\nCollaborations.\nModern scholars still look for evidence of collaborations between Marlowe and other writers. In 2016, one publisher was the first to endorse the scholarly claim of a collaboration between Marlowe and the playwright William Shakespeare:\nContemporary reception.\nMarlowe's plays were enormously successful, possibly due to the imposing stage presence of his lead actor, Edward Alleyn. Alleyn was unusually tall for the time and the haughty roles of Tamburlaine, Faustus and Barabas were probably written for him. Marlowe's plays were the foundation of the repertoire of Alleyn's company, the Admiral's Men, throughout the 1590s. One of Marlowe's poetry translations did not fare as well. In 1599, Marlowe's translation of Ovid was banned and copies were publicly burned as part of Archbishop Whitgift's crackdown on offensive material.\nModern compendiums.\nThere are at least two major modern scholarly editions of the collected works of Christopher Marlowe:\nThere are also notable scholarly collections of essays concerning the collected works of Christopher Marlowe, including:\nChronology of dramatic works.\nThis is a possible chronology of composition for the dramatic works of Christopher Marlowe based upon dates previously cited. The dates of composition are approximate. There are other chronologies for Marlowe, including one based upon dates of printing, as was used in the 2004 \"Cambridge Companion to Christopher Marlowe\", edited by Patrick Cheney.\nAdult life and legend.\nAs with other Elizabethans, little is known about Marlowe's adult life. All available evidence, other than what can be deduced from his literary works, is found in legal records and other official documents. This has not stopped writers of fiction and non-fiction from speculating about his professional activities, private life and character. Marlowe has often been described as a spy, a brawler and a heretic, as well as a \"magician\", \"duellist\", \"tobacco-user\", \"counterfeiter\" and \"rakehell\". While J. A. Downie and Constance Kuriyama have argued against the more lurid speculations, it is the usually circumspect J. B. Steane who remarked, \"it seems absurd to dismiss all of these Elizabethan rumours and accusations as 'the Marlowe myth. To understand his brief adult life, from 1587 to 1593, much has been written, including speculation of: his involvement in royally sanctioned espionage; his vocal declaration as an atheist; his private, and possibly same-sex, sexual interests; and the puzzling circumstances surrounding his death.\nSpying.\nMarlowe is alleged to have been a government spy. Park Honan and Charles Nicholl speculate that this was the case and suggest that Marlowe's recruitment took place when he was at Cambridge. In 1587, when the Privy Council ordered the University of Cambridge to award Marlowe his degree as Master of Arts, it denied rumours that he intended to go to the English Catholic college in Rheims, saying instead that he had been engaged in unspecified \"affaires\" on \"matters touching the benefit of his country\". Surviving college records from the period also indicate that, in the academic year 1584\u20131585, Marlowe had had a series of unusually lengthy absences from the university which violated university regulations. Surviving college buttery accounts, which record student purchases for personal provisions, show that Marlowe began spending lavishly on food and drink during the periods he was in attendance; the amount was more than he could have afforded on his known scholarship income.\nIt has been speculated that Marlowe was the \"Morley\" who was tutor to Arbella Stuart in 1589. This possibility was first raised in a \"Times Literary Supplement\" letter by E. St John Brooks in 1937; in a letter to \"Notes and Queries\", John Baker has added that only Marlowe could have been Arbella's tutor due to the absence of any other known \"Morley\" from the period with an MA and not otherwise occupied. If Marlowe was Arbella's tutor, it might indicate that he was there as a spy, since Arbella, niece of Mary, Queen of Scots, and cousin of James VI of Scotland, later James I of England, was at the time a strong candidate for the succession to Elizabeth's throne. Frederick S. Boas dismisses the possibility of this identification, based on surviving legal records which document Marlowe's \"residence in London between September and December 1589\". Marlowe had been party to a fatal quarrel involving his neighbours and the poet Thomas Watson in Norton Folgate and was held in Newgate Prison for a fortnight. In fact, the quarrel and his arrest occurred on 18 September, he was released on bail on 1 October and he had to attend court, where he was acquitted on 3 December, but there is no record of where he was for the intervening two months.\nIn 1592 Marlowe was arrested in the English garrison town of Flushing (Vlissingen) in the Netherlands, for alleged involvement in the counterfeiting of coins, presumably related to the activities of seditious Catholics. He was sent to the Lord Treasurer (Burghley), but no charge or imprisonment resulted. This arrest may have disrupted another of Marlowe's spying missions, perhaps by giving the resulting coinage to the Catholic cause. He was to infiltrate the followers of the active Catholic plotter William Stanley and report back to Burghley.\nPhilosophy.\nMarlowe was reputed to be an atheist, which held the dangerous implication of being an enemy of God and the state, by association. With the rise of public fears concerning The School of Night, or \"School of Atheism\" in the late 16th century, accusations of atheism were closely associated with disloyalty to the Protestant monarchy of England.\nSome modern historians consider that Marlowe's professed atheism, as with his supposed Catholicism, may have been no more than a sham to further his work as a government spy. Contemporary evidence comes from Marlowe's accuser in Flushing, an informer called Richard Baines. The governor of Flushing had reported that each of the men had \"of malice\" accused the other of instigating the counterfeiting and of intending to go over to the Catholic \"enemy\"; such an action was considered atheistic by the Church of England. Following Marlowe's arrest in 1593, Baines submitted to the authorities a \"note containing the opinion of one Christopher Marly concerning his damnable judgment of religion, and scorn of God's word\". Baines attributes to Marlowe a total of eighteen items which \"scoff at the pretensions of the Old and New Testament\" such as, \"Christ was a bastard and his mother dishonest [unchaste]\", \"the woman of Samaria and her sister were whores and that Christ knew them dishonestly\", \"St John the Evangelist was bedfellow to Christ and leaned always in his bosom\" (cf. John 13:23\u201325) and \"that he used him as the sinners of Sodom\". He also implied that Marlowe had Catholic sympathies. Other passages are merely sceptical in tone: \"he persuades men to atheism, willing them not to be afraid of bugbears and hobgoblins\". The final paragraph of Baines's document reads:\nSimilar examples of Marlowe's statements were given by Thomas Kyd after his imprisonment and possible torture (see above); Kyd and Baines connect Marlowe with the mathematician Thomas Harriot's and Sir Walter Raleigh's circle. Another document claimed about that time that \"one Marlowe is able to show more sound reasons for Atheism than any divine in England is able to give to prove divinity, and that ... he hath read the Atheist lecture to Sir Walter Raleigh and others\".\nSome critics believe that Marlowe sought to disseminate these views in his work and that he identified with his rebellious and iconoclastic protagonists. Plays had to be approved by the Master of the Revels before they could be performed and the censorship of publications was under the control of the Archbishop of Canterbury. Presumably these authorities did not consider any of Marlowe's works to be unacceptable other than the \"Amores\".\nSexuality.\nIt has been claimed that Marlowe was homosexual. Some scholars argue that the identification of an Elizabethan as gay or homosexual in a modern sense is \"anachronistic,\" claiming that for the Elizabethans the terms were more likely to have been applied to sexual acts rather than to what we understand to be exclusive sexual orientations and identities. Other scholars argue that the evidence is inconclusive and that the reports of Marlowe's homosexuality may be rumours produced after his death. Richard Baines reported Marlowe as saying: \"all they that love not Tobacco &amp; Boies were fools\". David Bevington and Eric C. Rasmussen describe Baines's evidence as \"unreliable testimony\" and \"These and other testimonials need to be discounted for their exaggeration and for their having been produced under legal circumstances we would regard as a witch-hunt\".\nJ. B. Steane remarked that he considered there to be \"no evidence for Marlowe's homosexuality at all\". Other scholars point to the frequency with which Marlowe explores homosexual themes in his writing: in \"Hero and Leander\", Marlowe writes of the male youth Leander: \"in his looks were all that men desire...\" \"Edward the Second\" contains the following passage enumerating homosexual relationships:\nMarlowe wrote the only play about the life of Edward II up to his time, taking the humanist literary discussion of male sexuality much further than his contemporaries. The play was extremely bold, dealing with a star-crossed love story between Edward II and Piers Gaveston. Though it was a common practice at the time to reveal characters as gay to give audiences reason to suspect them as culprits in a crime, Christopher Marlowe's Edward II is portrayed as a sympathetic character. The decision to start the play \"Dido, Queen of Carthage\" with a homoerotic scene between Zeus and Ganymede that bears no connection to the subsequent plot has long puzzled scholars.\nArrest and death.\nIn early May 1593, several bills were posted about London threatening Protestant refugees from France and the Netherlands who had settled in the city. One of these, the \"Dutch church libel\", written in rhymed iambic pentameter, contained allusions to several of Marlowe's plays and was signed, \"Tamburlaine\". On 11 May the Privy Council ordered the arrest of those responsible for the libels. The next day, Marlowe's colleague Thomas Kyd was arrested, his lodgings were searched and a three-page fragment of a heretical tract was found. In a letter to Sir John Puckering, Kyd asserted that it had belonged to Marlowe, with whom he had been writing \"in one chamber\" some two years earlier. In a second letter, Kyd described Marlowe as blasphemous, disorderly, holding treasonous opinions, being an irreligious reprobate and \"intemperate &amp; of a cruel hart\". They had both been working for an aristocratic patron, probably Ferdinando Stanley, Lord Strange. A warrant for Marlowe's arrest was issued on 18 May, when the Privy Council apparently knew that he might be found staying with Thomas Walsingham, whose father was a first cousin of the late Sir Francis Walsingham, Elizabeth's principal secretary in the 1580s and a man more deeply involved in state espionage than any other member of the Privy Council. Marlowe duly presented himself on 20 May but there apparently being no Privy Council meeting on that day, was instructed to \"give his daily attendance on their Lordships, until he shall be licensed to the contrary\". On Wednesday, 30 May, Marlowe was killed.\nVarious accounts of Marlowe's death were current over the next few years. In his \"Palladis Tamia\", published in 1598, Francis Meres says Marlowe was \"stabbed to death by a bawdy serving-man, a rival of his in his lewd love\" as punishment for his \"epicurism and atheism\". In 1917, in the \"Dictionary of National Biography\", Sir Sidney Lee wrote that Marlowe was killed in a drunken fight and this is still often stated as fact today. The official account came to light only in 1925, when the scholar Leslie Hotson discovered the coroner's report of the inquest on Marlowe's death, held two days later on Friday 1 June 1593, by the Coroner of the Queen's Household, William Danby. Marlowe had spent all day in a house in Deptford, owned by the widow Eleanor Bull and together with three men: Ingram Frizer, Nicholas Skeres and Robert Poley. All three had been employed by one or other of the Walsinghams. Skeres and Poley had helped snare the conspirators in the Babington plot and Frizer would later describe Thomas Walsingham as his \"master\" at that time, although his role was probably more that of a financial or business agent, as he was for Walsingham's wife Audrey a few years later. These witnesses testified that Frizer and Marlowe had argued over payment of the bill (now famously known as the 'Reckoning') exchanging \"divers malicious words\" while Frizer was sitting at a table between the other two and Marlowe was lying behind him on a couch. Marlowe snatched Frizer's dagger and wounded him on the head. In the ensuing struggle, according to the coroner's report, Marlowe was stabbed above the right eye, killing him instantly. The jury concluded that Frizer acted in self-defence and within a month he was pardoned. Marlowe was buried in an unmarked grave in the churchyard of St. Nicholas, Deptford immediately after the inquest, on 1 June 1593.\nThe complete text of the inquest report was published by Leslie Hotson in his book, \"The Death of Christopher Marlowe\", in the introduction to which Prof. George Kittredge said \"The mystery of Marlowe's death, heretofore involved in a cloud of contradictory gossip and irresponsible guess-work, is now cleared up for good and all on the authority of public records of complete authenticity and gratifying fullness\" but this confidence proved fairly short-lived. Hotson had considered the possibility that the witnesses had \"concocted a lying account of Marlowe's behaviour, to which they swore at the inquest, and with which they deceived the jury\" but came down against that scenario. Others began to suspect that this was indeed the case. Writing to the \"TLS\" shortly after the book's publication, Eug\u00e9nie de Kalb disputed that the struggle and outcome as described were even possible and Samuel A. Tannenbaum insisted the following year that such a wound could not have possibly resulted in instant death, as had been claimed. Even Marlowe's biographer John Bakeless acknowledged that \"some scholars have been inclined to question the truthfulness of the coroner's report. There is something queer about the whole episode\" and said that Hotson's discovery \"raises almost as many questions as it answers\". It has also been discovered more recently that the apparent absence of a local county coroner to accompany the Coroner of the Queen's Household would, if noticed, have made the inquest null and void.\nOne of the main reasons for doubting the truth of the inquest concerns the reliability of Marlowe's companions as witnesses. As an \"agent provocateur\" for the late Sir Francis Walsingham, Robert Poley was a consummate liar, the \"very genius of the Elizabethan underworld\" and is on record as saying \"I will swear and forswear myself, rather than I will accuse myself to do me any harm\". The other witness, Nicholas Skeres, had for many years acted as a confidence trickster, drawing young men into the clutches of people in the money-lending racket, including Marlowe's apparent killer, Ingram Frizer, with whom he was engaged in such a swindle. Despite their being referred to as \"generosi\" (gentlemen) in the inquest report, the witnesses were professional liars. Some biographers, such as Kuriyama and Downie, take the inquest to be a true account of what occurred but in trying to explain what really happened if the account was \"not\" true, others have come up with a variety of murder theories.\nSince there are only written documents on which to base any conclusions and since it is probable that the most crucial information about his death was never committed to paper, it is unlikely that the full circumstances of Marlowe's death will ever be known.\nReputation among contemporary writers.\nFor his contemporaries in the literary world, Marlowe was above all an admired and influential artist. Within weeks of his death, George Peele remembered him as \"Marley, the Muses' darling\"; Michael Drayton noted that he \"Had in him those brave translunary things / That the first poets had\" and Ben Jonson wrote of \"Marlowe's mighty line\". Thomas Nashe wrote warmly of his friend, \"poor deceased Kit Marlowe,\" as did the publisher Edward Blount in his dedication of \"Hero and Leander\" to Sir Thomas Walsingham. Among the few contemporary dramatists to say anything negative about Marlowe was the anonymous author of the Cambridge University play \"The Return from Parnassus\" (1598) who wrote, \"Pity it is that wit so ill should dwell, / Wit lent from heaven, but vices sent from hell\".\nThe most famous tribute to Marlowe was paid by Shakespeare in \"As You Like It\", where he not only quotes a line from \"Hero and Leander\" (\"Dead Shepherd, now I find thy saw of might, 'Who ever lov'd that lov'd not at first sight?) but also gives to the clown Touchstone the words \"When a man's verses cannot be understood, nor a man's good wit seconded with the forward child, understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room\". This appears to be a reference to Marlowe's murder which involved a fight over the \"reckoning\", the bill, as well as to a line in Marlowe's \"Jew of Malta\"; \"Infinite riches in a little room\".\nShakespeare was much influenced by Marlowe in his work, as can be seen in the use of Marlovian themes in \"Antony and Cleopatra\", \"The Merchant of Venice\", \"Richard II\" and \"Macbeth\" (\"Dido\", \"Jew of Malta\", \"Edward II\" and \"Doctor Faustus\", respectively). In \"Hamlet\", after meeting with the travelling actors, Hamlet requests the Player perform a speech about the Trojan War, which at 2.2.429\u201332 has an echo of Marlowe's \"Dido, Queen of Carthage\". In \"Love's Labour's Lost\" Shakespeare brings on a character \"Marcade\" (three syllables) in conscious acknowledgement of Marlowe's character \"Mercury\", also attending the King of Navarre, in \"Massacre at Paris\". The significance, to those of Shakespeare's audience who were familiar with \"Hero and Leander\", was Marlowe's identification of himself with the god Mercury.\nShakespeare authorship theory.\nAn argument has arisen about the notion that Marlowe may have faked his death and then continued to write under the assumed name of William Shakespeare. Academic consensus rejects alternative candidates for authorship of Shakespeare's plays and sonnets, including Marlowe.\nMemorials.\nA Marlowe Memorial in the form of a bronze sculpture of \"The Muse of Poetry\" by Edward Onslow Ford was erected by subscription in Buttermarket, Canterbury in 1891. In July 2002, a memorial window to Marlowe, a gift of the Marlowe Society, was unveiled in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey. Controversially, a question mark was added to the generally accepted date of death. On 25 October 2011 a letter from Paul Edmondson and Stanley Wells was published by \"The Times\" newspaper, in which they called on the Dean and Chapter to remove the question mark on the grounds that it \"flew in the face of a mass of unimpugnable evidence\". In 2012, they renewed this call in their e-book \"Shakespeare Bites Back\", adding that it \"denies history\" and again the following year in their book \"Shakespeare Beyond Doubt\".\nThe Marlowe Theatre in Canterbury, Kent, UK, was named after the town's \"most famous\" resident in 1949. Originally housed in a former 1920s cinema on St. Margaret's Street, the Marlowe Theatre later moved to a newly converted 1930's era Odeon Cinema in the city. After a 2011 reopening with a newly enhanced state-of-the-art theatre facility, the Marlowe now enjoys some of the country's finest touring companies including, Glyndebourne Opera, the Royal Shakespeare Company, the Royal National Theatre as well as many major West End musicals.\nMarlowe in fiction.\nMarlowe has been used as a character in books, theatre, film, television and radio.\nWorks of Marlowe in performance.\nModern productions of the plays of Christopher Marlowe have increased in frequency throughout the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, including the following notable productions:"}
{"id": "5772", "revid": "1019181695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5772", "title": "Cricket (disambiguation)", "text": "Cricket is a bat-and-ball sport contested by two teams.\nCricket also commonly refers to:\nCricket(s) or The Cricket(s) may also refer to:"}
{"id": "5773", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5773", "title": "Carroll OConnor", "text": ""}
{"id": "5776", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5776", "title": "Caving", "text": "Caving \u2013 also known as spelunking in the United States and Canada and potholing in the United Kingdom and Ireland \u2013 is the recreational pastime of exploring wild cave systems (as distinguished from show caves). In contrast, speleology is the scientific study of caves and the cave environment.\nThe challenges involved in caving vary according to the cave being visited; in addition to the total absence of light beyond the entrance, negotiating pitches, squeezes, and water hazards can be difficult. Cave diving is a distinct, and more hazardous, sub-speciality undertaken by a small minority of technically proficient cavers. In an area of overlap between recreational pursuit and scientific study, the most devoted and serious-minded cavers become accomplished at the surveying and mapping of caves and the formal publication of their efforts. These are usually published freely and publicly, especially in the UK and other European countries, although in the US, these are generally private. \nSometimes categorized as an \"extreme sport\", it is not commonly considered as such by longtime enthusiasts, who may dislike the term for its connotation of disregard for safety.\nMany caving skills overlap with those involved in canyoning and mine and urban exploration.\nMotivation.\nCaving is often undertaken for the enjoyment of the outdoor activity or for physical exercise, as well as original exploration, similar to mountaineering or diving. Physical or biological science is also an important goal for some cavers, while others are engaged in cave photography. Virgin cave systems comprise some of the last unexplored regions on Earth and much effort is put into trying to locate, enter and survey them. In well-explored regions (such as most developed nations), the most accessible caves have already been explored, and gaining access to new caves often requires cave digging or cave diving.\nCaving, in certain areas, has also been utilized as a form of eco and adventure tourism, for example in New Zealand. Tour companies have established an industry leading and guiding tours into and through caves. Depending on the type of cave and the type of tour, the experience could be adventure-based or ecological-based. There are tours led through lava tubes by a guiding service (e.g. Lava River Cave, the oceanic islands of Tenerife, Iceland and Hawaii).\nCaving has also been described as an \"individualist's team sport\" by some, as cavers can often make a trip without direct physical assistance from others but will generally go in a group for companionship or to provide emergency help if needed. Some however consider the assistance cavers give each other as a typical team sport activity.\nEtymology.\nThe base term \"caving\" comes from the Latin \"cavea\" or \"caverna\", meaning simply, a cave.\n\"Potholing\" refers to the act of exploring \"potholes\", a word originating in the north of England for predominantly vertical caves.\nClay Perry, an American caver of the 1940s, wrote about a group of men and boys who explored and studied caves throughout New England. This group referred to themselves as \"spelunkers\", a term derived from the Latin \"\" (\"cave, cavern, den\"), itself from the Greek \"sp\u0113lynks\" (\"cave\"). This is regarded as the first use of the word in the Americas. Throughout the 1950s, \"spelunking\" was the general term used for exploring caves in US English. It was used freely, without any positive or negative connotations, although only rarely outside the US.\nIn the 1960s, the terms \"spelunking\" and \"spelunker\" began to be considered d\u00e9class\u00e9 among experienced enthusiasts. In 1985, Steve Knutson\u00a0\u2013 editor of the National Speleological Society (NSS) publication \"American Caving Accidents\"\u00a0\u2013 made the following distinction:\nThis sentiment is exemplified by bumper stickers and T-shirts displayed by some cavers: \"Cavers rescue spelunkers\". Nevertheless, outside the caving community, \"spelunking\" and \"spelunkers\" predominately remain neutral terms referring to the practice and practitioners, without any respect to skill level.\nHistory.\nIn the mid-nineteenth century, John Birkbeck explored potholes in England, notably Gaping Gill in 1842 and Alum Pot in 1847\u20138, returning there in the 1870s. In the mid-1880s, Herbert E. Balch began exploring Wookey Hole Caves and in the 1890s, Balch was introduced to the caves of the Mendip Hills. One of the oldest established caving clubs, Yorkshire Ramblers' Club, was founded in 1892.\nCaving as a specialized pursuit was pioneered by \u00c9douard-Alfred Martel (1859\u20131938), who first achieved the descent and exploration of the Gouffre de Padirac, in France, as early as 1889 and the first complete descent of a 110-metre wet vertical shaft at Gaping Gill in 1895. He developed his own techniques based on ropes and metallic ladders. Martel visited Kentucky and notably Mammoth Cave National Park in October 1912. In the 1920s famous US caver Floyd Collins made important explorations in the area and in the 1930s, as caving became increasingly popular, small exploration teams both in the Alps and in the karstic high plateaus of southwest France (Causses and Pyrenees) transformed cave exploration into both a scientific and recreational activity. Robert de Joly, Guy de Lavaur and Norbert Casteret were prominent figures of that time, surveying mostly caves in Southwest France. During World War II, an alpine team composed of Pierre Chevalier, Fernand Petzl, Charles Petit-Didier and others explored the Dent de Crolles cave system near Grenoble, which became the deepest explored system in the world (-658m) at that time. The lack of available equipment during the war forced Pierre Chevalier and the rest of the team to develop their own equipment, leading to technical innovation. The scaling-pole (1940), nylon ropes (1942), use of explosives in caves (1947) and mechanical rope-ascenders (Henri Brenot's \"monkeys\", first used by Chevalier and Brenot in a cave in 1934) can be directly associated to the exploration of the Dent de Crolles cave system.\nIn 1941, American cavers organized themselves into the National Speleological Society (NSS) to advance the exploration, conservation, study and understanding of caves in the United States. American caver Bill Cuddington, known as \"Vertical Bill\", further developed the single-rope technique (SRT) in the late 1950s. In 1958, two Swiss alpinists, Juesi and Marti teamed together, creating the first rope ascender known as the Jumar. In 1968 Bruno Dressler asked Fernand Petzl, who worked as a metals machinist, to build a rope-ascending tool, today known as the Petzl Croll, that he had developed by adapting the Jumar to vertical caving. Pursuing these developments, Petzl started in the 1970s a caving equipment manufacturing company named Petzl. The development of the rappel rack and the evolution of mechanical ascension systems extended the practice and safety of vertical exploration to a wider range of cavers.\nPractice and equipment.\nHard hats are worn to protect the head from bumps and falling rocks. The caver's primary light source is usually mounted on the helmet in order to keep the hands free. Electric LED lights are most common. Many cavers carry two or more sources of light \u2013 one as primary and the others as backup in case the first fails. More often than not, a second light will be mounted to the helmet for quick transition if the primary fails. Carbide lamp systems are an older form of illumination, inspired by miner's equipment, and are still used by some cavers, particularly on remote expeditions where electric charging facilities are not available.\nThe type of clothes worn underground varies according to the environment of the cave being explored, and the local culture. In cold caves, the caver may wear a warm base layer that retains its insulating properties when wet, such as a fleece (\"furry\") suit or polypropylene underwear, and an oversuit of hard-wearing (e.g., cordura) or waterproof (e.g., PVC) material. Lighter clothing may be worn in warm caves, particularly if the cave is dry, and in tropical caves thin polypropylene clothing is used, to provide some abrasion protection while remaining as cool as possible. Wetsuits may be worn if the cave is particularly wet or involves stream passages. On the feet boots are worn\u00a0\u2013 hiking-style boots in drier caves, or rubber boots (such as wellies) often with neoprene socks (\"wetsocks\") in wetter caves. Knee-pads (and sometimes elbow-pads) are popular for protecting joints during crawls. Depending on the nature of the cave, gloves are sometimes worn to protect the hands against abrasion or cold. In pristine areas and for restoration, clean oversuits and powder-free, non-latex surgical gloves are used to protect the cave itself from contaminants.\nRopes are used for descending or ascending pitches (single rope technique or SRT) or for protection. Knots commonly used in caving are the figure-of-eight- (or figure-of-nine-) loop, bowline, alpine butterfly, and Italian hitch. Ropes are usually rigged using bolts, slings, and carabiners. In some cases cavers may choose to bring and use a flexible metal ladder.\nIn addition to the equipment already described, cavers frequently carry packs containing first-aid kits, emergency equipment, and food. Containers for securely transporting urine are also commonly carried. On longer trips, containers for securely transporting feces out of the cave are carried.\nDuring very long trips, it may be necessary to camp in the cave\u00a0\u2013 some cavers have stayed underground for many days, or in particularly extreme cases, for weeks at a time. This is particularly the case when exploring or mapping very extended cave systems, where it would be impractical to retrace the route back to the surface regularly. Such long trips necessitate the cavers carrying provisions, sleeping and cooking equipment.\nSafety.\nCaves can be dangerous places; hypothermia, falling, flooding, falling rocks and physical exhaustion are the main risks. Rescuing people from underground is difficult and time-consuming, and requires special skills, training, and equipment. Full-scale cave rescues often involve the efforts of dozens of rescue workers (often other long-time cavers who have participated in specialized courses, as normal rescue staff are not sufficiently experienced in cave environments), who may themselves be put in jeopardy in effecting the rescue. This said, caving is not necessarily a high-risk sport (especially if it does not involve difficult climbs or diving). As in all physical sports, knowing one's limitations is key.\nCaving in warmer climates carries the risk of contracting histoplasmosis, a fungal infection that is contracted from bird or bat droppings. It can cause pneumonia and can disseminate in the body to cause continued infections.\nIn many parts of the world, leptospirosis (\"a type of bacterial infection spread by animals\" including rats) is a distinct threat due to the presence of rat urine in rainwater or precipitation that enters the caves water system. Complications are uncommon, but can be serious.\nSafety risks while caving can be minimized by using a number of techniques:\nCave conservation.\nMany cave environments are very fragile. Many speleothems can be damaged by even the slightest touch and some by impacts as slight as a breath. Research suggests that increased carbon dioxide levels can lead to \"a higher equilibrium concentration of calcium within the drip waters feeding the speleothems, and hence causes dissolution of existing features.\" In 2008, researchers found evidence that respiration from cave visitors may generate elevated carbon dioxide concentrations in caves, leading to increased temperatures of up to 3\u00a0\u00b0C and a dissolution of existing features.\nPollution is also of concern. Since water that flows through a cave eventually comes out in streams and rivers, any pollution may ultimately end up in someone's drinking water, and can even seriously affect the surface environment, as well. Even minor pollution such as dropping organic material can have a dramatic effect on the cave biota.\nCave-dwelling species are also very fragile, and often, a particular species found in a cave may live within that cave alone, and be found nowhere else in the world, such as Alabama cave shrimp. Cave-dwelling species are accustomed to a near-constant climate of temperature and humidity, and any disturbance can be disruptive to the species' life cycles. Though cave wildlife may not always be immediately visible, it is typically nonetheless present in most caves.\nBats are one such fragile species of cave-dwelling animal. Bats which hibernate are most vulnerable during the winter season, when no food supply exists on the surface to replenish the bat's store of energy should it be awakened from hibernation. Bats which migrate are most sensitive during the summer months when they are raising their young. For these reasons, visiting caves inhabited by hibernating bats is discouraged during cold months; and visiting caves inhabited by migratory bats is discouraged during the warmer months when they are most sensitive and vulnerable. Due to an affliction affecting bats in the northeastern US known as white nose syndrome (WNS), the US Fish &amp; Wildlife Service has called for a moratorium effective March 26, 2009, on caving activity in states known to have hibernacula (MD, NY, VT, NH, MA, CT, NJ, PA, VA, and WV) affected by WNS, as well as adjoining states.\nSome cave passages may be marked with flagging tape or other indicators to show biologically, aesthetically, or archaeologically sensitive areas. Marked paths may show ways around notably fragile areas such as a pristine floor of sand or silt which may be thousands of years old, dating from the last time water flowed through the cave. Such deposits may easily be spoiled forever by a single misplaced step. Active formations such as flowstone can be similarly marred with a muddy footprint or handprint, and ancient human artifacts, such as fiber products, may even crumble to dust under all but the most gentle touch.\nIn 1988, concerned that cave resources were becoming increasingly damaged through unregulated use, Congress enacted the Federal Cave Resources Protection Act, giving land management agencies in the United States expanded authority to manage cave conservation on public land.\nIn Europe there have been some panoramic 360\u00b0 records and VR projects as a means of sharing interesting caves or quarries:\nCaving organizations.\nCavers in many countries have created organizations for the administration and oversight of caving activities within their nations. The oldest of these is the French Federation of Speleology (originally Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 de sp\u00e9l\u00e9ologie) founded by \u00c9douard-Alfred Martel in 1895, which produced the first periodical journal in speleology, \"Spelunca\". The first University-based speleological institute in the world was founded in 1920 in Cluj-Napoca, Romania, by Emil Racovita, a Romanian biologist, zoologist, speleologist and explorer of Antarctica.\nThe British Speleological Association was established in 1935 and the National Speleological Society in the US was founded in 1941 (originally formed as the Speleological Society of the District of Columbia on May 6, 1939).\nAn international speleological congress was proposed at a meeting in Valence-sur-Rhone, France in 1949 and first held in 1953 in Paris. The International Union of Speleology (UIS) was founded in 1965."}
{"id": "5778", "revid": "1022202367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5778", "title": "Cave", "text": "A cave or cavern is a natural void in the ground, specifically a space large enough for a human to enter. Caves often form by the weathering of rock and often extend deep underground. The word \"cave\" can also refer to much smaller openings such as sea caves, rock shelters, and grottos, though strictly speaking a cave is exogene, meaning it is deeper than its opening is wide, and a rock shelter is endogene.\nSpeleology is the science of exploration and study of all aspects of caves and the cave environment. Visiting or exploring caves for recreation may be called \"caving\", \"potholing\", or \"spelunking\".\nFormation types.\nThe formation and development of caves is known as \"speleogenesis\"; it can occur over the course of millions of years. Caves can range widely in size, and are formed by various geological processes. These may involve a combination of chemical processes, erosion by water, tectonic forces, microorganisms, pressure, and atmospheric influences. Isotopic dating techniques can be applied to cave sediments, to determine the timescale of the geological events which formed and shaped present-day caves.\nIt is estimated that a cave cannot be more than vertically beneath the surface due to the pressure of overlying rocks. This does not, however, impose a maximum depth for a cave which is measured from its highest entrance to its lowest point, as the amount of rock above the lowest point is dependent on the topography of the landscape above it. For karst caves the maximum depth is determined on the basis of the lower limit of karst forming processes, coinciding with the base of the soluble carbonate rocks. Most caves are formed in limestone by dissolution.\nCaves can be classified in various other ways as well, including a contrast between active and relict: active caves have water flowing through them; relict caves do not, though water may be retained in them. Types of active caves include inflow caves (\"into which a stream sinks\"), outflow caves (\"from which a stream emerges\"), and through caves (\"traversed by a stream\").\nSolutional.\nSolutional caves or karst caves are the most frequently occurring caves. Such caves form in rock that is soluble; most occur in limestone, but they can also form in other rocks including chalk, dolomite, marble, salt, and gypsum. Rock is dissolved by natural acid in groundwater that seeps through bedding planes, faults, joints, and comparable features. Over time cracks enlarge to become caves and cave systems.\nThe largest and most abundant solutional caves are located in limestone. Limestone dissolves under the action of rainwater and groundwater charged with H2CO3 (carbonic acid) and naturally occurring organic acids. The dissolution process produces a distinctive landform known as \"karst\", characterized by sinkholes and underground drainage. Limestone caves are often adorned with calcium carbonate formations produced through slow precipitation. These include flowstones, stalactites, stalagmites, helictites, soda straws and columns. These secondary mineral deposits in caves are called \"speleothems\".\nThe portions of a solutional cave that are below the water table or the local level of the groundwater will be flooded.\nLechuguilla Cave in New Mexico and nearby Carlsbad Cavern are now believed to be examples of another type of solutional cave. They were formed by H2S (hydrogen sulfide) gas rising from below, where reservoirs of oil give off sulfurous fumes. This gas mixes with groundwater and forms H2SO4 (sulfuric acid). The acid then dissolves the limestone from below, rather than from above, by acidic water percolating from the surface.\nPrimary.\nCaves formed at the same time as the surrounding rock are called primary caves.\nLava tubes are formed through volcanic activity and are the most common primary caves. As lava flows downhill, its surface cools and solidifies. Hot liquid lava continues to flow under that crust, and if most of it flows out, a hollow tube remains. Such caves can be found in the Canary Islands, Jeju-do, the basaltic plains of Eastern Idaho, and in other places. Kazumura Cave near Hilo, Hawaii is a remarkably long and deep lava tube; it is .\nLava caves include but are not limited to lava tubes. Other caves formed through volcanic activity include rifts, lava molds, open vertical conduits, inflationary, blisters, among others.\nSea or littoral.\nSea caves are found along coasts around the world. A special case is littoral caves, which are formed by wave action in zones of weakness in sea cliffs. Often these weaknesses are faults, but they may also be dykes or bedding-plane contacts. Some wave-cut caves are now above sea level because of later uplift. Elsewhere, in places such as Thailand's Phang Nga Bay, solutional caves have been flooded by the sea and are now subject to littoral erosion. Sea caves are generally around in length, but may exceed .\nCorrasional or erosional.\nCorrasional or erosional caves are those that form entirely by erosion by flowing streams carrying rocks and other sediments. These can form in any type of rock, including hard rocks such as granite. Generally there must be some zone of weakness to guide the water, such as a fault or joint. A subtype of the erosional cave is the wind or aeolian cave, carved by wind-born sediments. Many caves formed initially by solutional processes often undergo a subsequent phase of erosional or vadose enlargement where active streams or rivers pass through them.\nGlacier.\nGlacier caves are formed by melting ice and flowing water within and under glaciers. The cavities are influenced by the very slow flow of the ice, which tends to collapse the caves again. Glacier caves are sometimes misidentified as \"ice caves\", though this latter term is properly reserved for bedrock caves that contain year-round ice formations.\nFracture.\nFracture caves are formed when layers of more soluble minerals, such as gypsum, dissolve out from between layers of less soluble rock. These rocks fracture and collapse in blocks of stone.\nTalus.\nTalus caves are formed by the openings among large boulders that have fallen down into a random heap, often at the bases of cliffs. These unstable deposits are called talus or scree, and may be subject to frequent rockfalls and landslides.\nAnchialine.\nAnchialine caves are caves, usually coastal, containing a mixture of freshwater and saline water (usually sea water). They occur in many parts of the world, and often contain highly specialized and endemic fauna.\nGeographic distribution.\nCaves are found throughout the world, although the distribution of documented cave system is heavily skewed towards those countries where caving has been popular for many years (such as France, Italy, Australia, the UK, the United States, etc.). As a result, explored caves are found widely in Europe, Asia, North America and Oceania, but are sparse in South America, Africa, and Antarctica.\nThis is a rough generalization, as large expanses of North America and Asia contain no documented caves, whereas areas such as the Madagascar dry deciduous forests and parts of Brazil contain many documented caves. As the world's expanses of soluble bedrock are researched by cavers, the distribution of documented caves is likely to shift. For example, China, despite containing around half the world's exposed limestone\u2014more than \u2014has relatively few documented caves.\nEcology.\nCave-inhabiting animals are often categorized as troglobites (cave-limited species), troglophiles (species that can live their entire lives in caves, but also occur in other environments), trogloxenes (species that use caves, but cannot complete their life cycle fully in caves) and accidentals (animals not in one of the previous categories). Some authors use separate terminology for aquatic forms (for example, stygobites, stygophiles, and stygoxenes).\nOf these animals, the troglobites are perhaps the most unusual organisms. Troglobitic species often show a number of characteristics, termed troglomorphic, associated with their adaptation to subterranean life. These characteristics may include a loss of pigment (often resulting in a pale or white coloration), a loss of eyes (or at least of optical functionality), an elongation of appendages, and an enhancement of other senses (such as the ability to sense vibrations in water). Aquatic troglobites (or stygobites), such as the endangered Alabama cave shrimp, live in bodies of water found in caves and get nutrients from detritus washed into their caves and from the feces of bats and other cave inhabitants. Other aquatic troglobites include cave fish, and cave salamanders such as the olm and the Texas blind salamander.\nCave insects such as Oligaphorura (formerly Archaphorura) schoetti are troglophiles, reaching in length. They have extensive distribution and have been studied fairly widely. Most specimens are female, but a male specimen was collected from St Cuthberts Swallet in 1969.\nBats, such as the gray bat and Mexican free-tailed bat, are trogloxenes and are often found in caves; they forage outside of the caves. Some species of cave crickets are classified as trogloxenes, because they roost in caves by day and forage above ground at night.\nBecause of the fragility of cave ecosystems, and the fact that cave regions tend to be isolated from one another, caves harbor a number of endangered species, such as the Tooth cave spider, liphistius trapdoor spider, and the gray bat.\nCaves are visited by many surface-living animals, including humans. These are usually relatively short-lived incursions, due to the lack of light and sustenance.\nCave entrances often have typical florae. For instance, in the eastern temperate United States, cave entrances are most frequently (and often densely) populated by the bulblet fern, \"Cystopteris bulbifera\".\nArchaeological and cultural importance.\nThroughout history, primitive peoples have made use of caves. The earliest human fossils found in caves come from a series of caves near Krugersdorp and Mokopane in South Africa. The cave sites of Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai B, Drimolen, Malapa, Cooper's D, Gladysvale, Gondolin and Makapansgat have yielded a range of early human species dating back to between three and one million years ago, including \"Australopithecus africanus\", \"Australopithecus sediba\" and \"Paranthropus robustus\". However, it is not generally thought that these early humans were living in the caves, but that they were brought into the caves by carnivores that had killed them.\nThe first early hominid ever found in Africa, the Taung Child in 1924, was also thought for many years to come from a cave, where it had been deposited after being predated on by an eagle. However, this is now debated (Hopley et al., 2013; Am. J. Phys. Anthrop.). Caves do form in the dolomite of the Ghaap Plateau, including the Early, Middle and Later Stone Age site of Wonderwerk Cave; however, the caves that form along the escarpment's edge, like that hypothesised for the Taung Child, are formed within a secondary limestone deposit called tufa. There is numerous evidence for other early human species inhabiting caves from at least one million years ago in different parts of the world, including \"Homo erectus\" in China at Zhoukoudian, \"Homo rhodesiensis\" in South Africa at the Cave of Hearths (Makapansgat), \"Homo neandertalensis\" and \"Homo heidelbergensis\" in Europe at Archaeological Site of Atapuerca, \"Homo floresiensis\" in Indonesia, and the Denisovans in southern Siberia.\nIn southern Africa, early modern humans regularly used sea caves as shelter starting about 180,000 years ago when they learned to exploit the sea for the first time (Marean et al., 2007; Nature). The oldest known site is PP13B at Pinnacle Point. This may have allowed rapid expansion of humans out of Africa and colonization of areas of the world such as Australia by 60\u201350,000 years ago. Throughout southern Africa, Australia, and Europe, early modern humans used caves and rock shelters as sites for rock art, such as those at Giants Castle. Caves such as the yaodong in China were used for shelter; other caves were used for burials (such as rock-cut tombs), or as religious sites (such as ). Among the known sacred caves are China's Cave of a Thousand Buddhas and the sacred caves of Crete.\nCaves and acoustics.\nThe importance of sound in caves predates a modern understanding of acoustics. Archaeologists have uncovered relationships between paintings of dots and lines, in specific areas of resonance, within the caves of Spain and France, as well as instruments depicting paleolithic motifs, indicators of musical events and rituals. Clusters of paintings were often founds in areas with notable acoustics, sometimes even replicating the sounds of the animals depicted on the walls. The human voice was also theorized to be used as an echolocation device to navigate darker areas of the caves where torches were less useful. Dots of red ochre are often found in spaces with the highest resonance, where the production of paintings was too difficult. Here, singing is to be the most efficient way to explore caves. \nCaves continue to provide usage for modern-day explorers of acoustics. Today Cumberland Caverns provides one of the best examples for modern musical usages of caves. Not only are caves utilized for the reverberations, but for the dampening qualities of their abnormal faces as well. The irregularities in the walls of the Cumberland Caverns diffuse sounds bouncing off the walls and give the space and almost recording studio-like quality. During the 20th century musicians began to explore the possibility of using caves as locations as clubs and concert halls, including the likes of Dinah Shore, Roy Acuff, and Benny Goodman. Unlike today, these early performances were typically held in the mouths of the caves, as the lack of technology made depths of the interior inaccessible with musical equipment. In Luray Caverns, Virginia, a functioning organ has been developed that generates sound by mallets striking stalactites, each with a different pitch."}
{"id": "5780", "revid": "4938", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5780", "title": "Chaco Canyon", "text": ""}
{"id": "5781", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5781", "title": "Chinese numerals", "text": "Chinese numerals are words and characters used to denote numbers in Chinese.\nToday, speakers of Chinese use three written numeral systems: the system of Arabic numerals used worldwide, and two indigenous systems. The more familiar indigenous system is based on Chinese characters that correspond to numerals in the spoken language. These may be shared with other languages of the Chinese cultural sphere such as Korean, Japanese, and Vietnamese. Most people and institutions in China and Taiwan primarily use the Arabic or mixed Arabic-Chinese systems for convenience, with traditional Chinese numerals used in finance, mainly for writing amounts on checks, banknotes, some ceremonial occasions, some boxes, and on commercials.\nThe other indigenous system is the Suzhou numerals, or \"huama\", a positional system, the only surviving form of the rod numerals. These were once used by Chinese mathematicians, and later in Chinese markets, such as those in Hong Kong before the 1990s, but have been gradually supplanted by Arabic (and also Roman) numerals.\nCharacters used to represent numbers.\nThe Chinese character numeral system consists of the Chinese characters used by the Chinese written language to write spoken numerals. Similar to spelling-out numbers in English (e.g., \"one thousand nine hundred forty-five\"), it is not an independent system \"per se\". Since it reflects spoken language, it does not use the positional system as in Arabic numerals, in the same way that spelling out numbers in English does not.\nStandard numbers.\nThere are characters representing the numbers zero through nine, and other characters representing larger numbers such as tens, hundreds, thousands and so on. There are two sets of characters for Chinese numerals: one for everyday writing, known as \"xi\u01ceoxi\u011b\" (), and one for use in commercial or financial contexts, known as \"d\u00e0xi\u011b\" (). The latter arose because the characters used for writing numerals are geometrically simple, so simply using those numerals cannot prevent forgeries in the same way spelling numbers out in English would. A forger could easily change the everyday characters \u4e09\u5341 (30) to \u4e94\u5343 (5000) just by adding a few strokes. That would not be possible when writing using the financial characters \u53c3\u62fe (30) and \u4f0d\u4edf (5000). They are also referred to as \"banker's numerals\", \"anti-fraud numerals\", or \"banker's anti-fraud numerals\". For the same reason, rod numerals were never used in commercial records.\nT denotes Traditional Chinese characters, while S denotes Simplified Chinese characters.\nCharacters with military usage.\nIn the People's Liberation Army of the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China Armed Forces of Taiwan, some numbers will have altered names when used for clearer radio communications. They are:\nLarge numbers.\nFor numbers larger than 10,000, similarly to the long and short scales in the West, there have been four systems in ancient and modern usage. The original one, with unique names for all powers of ten up to the 14th, is ascribed to the Yellow Emperor in the 6th century book by Zhen Luan, \"Wujing suanshu\" (Arithmetic in Five Classics). In modern Chinese only the second system is used, in which the same ancient names are used, but each represents a number 10,000 (myriad, \u842c w\u00e0n) times the previous:\nIn practice, this situation does not lead to ambiguity, with the exception of \u5146 (zh\u00e0o), which means 1012 according to the system in common usage throughout the Chinese communities as well as in Japan and Korea, but has also been used for 106 in recent years (especially in mainland China for megabyte). To avoid problems arising from the ambiguity, the PRC government never uses this character in official documents, but uses \u4e07\u4ebf (w\u00e0ny\u00ec) or \u592a (t\u00e0i, as the translation for \"tera\") instead. Partly due to this, combinations of \u4e07 and \u4ebf are often used instead of the larger units of the traditional system as well, for example \u4ebf\u4ebf (y\u00ecy\u00ec) instead of \u4eac. The ROC government in Taiwan uses \u5146 (zh\u00e0o) to mean 1012 in official documents.\nLarge numbers from Buddhism.\nNumerals beyond \u8f09 z\u01cei come from Buddhist texts in Sanskrit, but are mostly found in ancient texts. Some of the following words are still being used today, but may have transferred meanings.\nSmall numbers.\nThe following are characters used to denote small order of magnitude in Chinese historically. With the introduction of SI units, some of them have been incorporated as SI prefixes, while the rest have fallen into disuse.\nSI prefixes.\nIn the People's Republic of China, the early translation for the SI prefixes in 1981 was different from those used today. The larger (\u5146, \u4eac, \u5793, \u79ed, \u7a70) and smaller Chinese numerals (\u5fae, \u7e96, \u6c99, \u5875, \u6e3a) were defined as translation for the SI prefixes as \"mega\", \"giga\", \"tera\", \"peta\", \"exa\", \"micro\", \"nano\", \"pico\", \"femto\", \"atto\", resulting in the creation of yet more values for each numeral.\nThe Republic of China (Taiwan) defined \u767e\u842c as the translation for \"mega\" and \u5146 as the translation for \"tera\". This translation is widely used in official documents, academic communities, informational industries, etc. However, the civil broadcasting industries sometimes use \u5146\u8d6b to represent \"megahertz\".\nToday, the governments of both China and Taiwan use phonetic transliterations for the SI prefixes. However, the governments have each chosen different Chinese characters for certain prefixes. The following table lists the two different standards together with the early translation.\nReading and transcribing numbers.\nWhole numbers.\nMultiple-digit numbers are constructed using a multiplicative principle; first the digit itself (from 1 to 9), then the place (such as 10 or 100); then the next digit.\nIn Mandarin, the multiplier (\"li\u01ceng\") is often used rather than (\"\u00e8r\") for all numbers 200 and greater with the \"2\" numeral (although as noted earlier this varies from dialect to dialect and person to person). Use of both \u5169 (\"li\u01ceng\") or \u4e8c (\"\u00e8r\") are acceptable for the number 200. When writing in the Cantonese dialect, \u4e8c (\"yi6\") is used to represent the \"2\" numeral for all numbers. In the southern Min dialect of Chaozhou (Teochew), \u5169 (\"no6\") is used to represent the \"2\" numeral in all numbers from 200 onwards. Thus:\nFor the numbers 11 through 19, the leading \"one\" () is usually omitted. In some dialects, like Shanghainese, when there are only two significant digits in the number, the leading \"one\" and the trailing zeroes are omitted. Sometimes, the one before \"ten\" in the middle of a number, such as 213, is omitted. Thus:\nNotes:\nIn certain older texts like the Protestant Bible or in poetic usage, numbers such as 114 may be \"written\" as [100] [10] [4] ().\nOutside of Taiwan, digits are sometimes grouped by myriads instead of thousands. Hence it is more convenient to think of numbers here as in groups of four, thus 1,234,567,890 is regrouped here as 12,3456,7890. Larger than a myriad, each number is therefore four zeroes longer than the one before it, thus 10000 \u00d7 () = (). If one of the numbers is between 10 and 19, the leading \"one\" is omitted as per the above point. Hence (numbers in parentheses indicate that the number has been written as one number rather than expanded):\nIn Taiwan, pure Arabic numerals are officially always and only grouped by thousands. Unofficially, they are often not grouped, particularly for numbers below 100,000. Mixed Arabic-Chinese numerals are often used in order to denote myriads. This is used both officially and unofficially, and come in a variety of styles:\nInterior zeroes before the unit position (as in 1002) must be spelt explicitly. The reason for this is that trailing zeroes (as in 1200) are often omitted as shorthand, so ambiguity occurs. One zero is sufficient to resolve the ambiguity. Where the zero is before a digit other than the units digit, the explicit zero is not ambiguous and is therefore optional, but preferred. Thus:\nFractional values.\nTo construct a fraction, the denominator is written first, followed by , then the literary possessive particle , and lastly the numerator. This is the opposite of how fractions are read in English, which is numerator first. Each half of the fraction is written the same as a whole number. For example, to express \"two thirds\", the structure \"three parts of-this two\" is used. Mixed numbers are written with the whole-number part first, followed by , then the fractional part.\nPercentages are constructed similarly, using as the denominator. (The number 100 is typically expressed as , like the English \"one hundred\". However, for percentages, is used on its own.)\nBecause percentages and other fractions are formulated the same, Chinese are more likely than not to express 10%, 20% etc. as \"parts of 10\" (or 1/10, 2/10, etc. i.e. ; \"sh\u00ed f\u0113nzh\u012b y\u012b\", ; \"sh\u00ed f\u0113nzh\u012b \u00e8r\", etc.) rather than \"parts of 100\" (or 10/100, 20/100, etc. i.e. ; \"b\u01cei f\u0113nzh\u012b sh\u00ed\", ; \"b\u01cei f\u0113nzh\u012b \u00e8rsh\u00ed\", etc.)\nIn Taiwan, the most common formation of percentages in the spoken language is the number per hundred followed by the word ; \"p\u0101\", a contraction of the Japanese ; \"p\u0101sento\", itself taken from the English \"percent\". Thus 25% is ; \"\u00e8rsh\u00edw\u01d4 p\u0101\".\nDecimal numbers are constructed by first writing the whole number part, then inserting a point (), and finally the fractional part. The fractional part is expressed using only the numbers for 0 to 9, similarly to English.\n functions as a number and therefore requires a measure word. For example: .\nOrdinal numbers.\nOrdinal numbers are formed by adding (\"sequence\") before the number.\nThe Heavenly Stems are a traditional Chinese ordinal system.\nNegative numbers.\nNegative numbers are formed by adding f\u00f9 () before the number.\nUsage.\nChinese grammar requires the use of classifiers (measure words) when a numeral is used together with a noun to express a quantity. For example, \"three people\" is expressed as , \"three ( particle) person\", where / \"\" is a classifier. There exist many different classifiers, for use with different sets of nouns, although / is the most common, and may be used informally in place of other classifiers.\nChinese uses cardinal numbers in certain situations in which English would use ordinals. For example, (literally \"three story/storey\") means \"third floor\" (\"second floor\" in British ). Likewise, (literally \"twenty-one century\") is used for \"21st century\".\nNumbers of years are commonly spoken as a sequence of digits, as in (\"two zero zero one\") for the year 2001. Names of months and days (in the Western system) are also expressed using numbers: (\"one month\") for January, etc.; and (\"week one\") for Monday, etc. There is only one exception: Sunday is , or informally , both literally \"week day\". When meaning \"week\", \" and \" are interchangeable. \" or \" means \"day of worship\". Chinese Catholics call Sunday \" \", \"Lord's day\".\nFull dates are usually written in the format 2001\u5e741\u670820\u65e5 for January 20, 2001 (using \"year\", \"month\", and \"day\") \u2013 all the numbers are read as cardinals, not ordinals, with no leading zeroes, and the year is read as a sequence of digits. For brevity the , and may be dropped to give a date composed of just numbers. For example \"6-4\" in Chinese is \"six-four\", short for \"month six, day four\" i.e. June Fourth, a common Chinese shorthand for the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests (because of the violence that occurred on June 4). For another example 67, in Chinese is sixty seven, short for year nineteen sixty seven, a common Chinese shorthand for the Hong Kong 1967 leftist riots.\nCounting rod and Suzhou numerals.\nIn the same way that Roman numerals were standard in ancient and medieval Europe for mathematics and commerce, the Chinese formerly used the rod numerals, which is a positional system. The Suzhou numerals () system is a variation of the Southern Song rod numerals. Nowadays, the \"hu\u0101m\u01ce\" system is only used for displaying prices in Chinese markets or on traditional handwritten invoices.\nHand gestures.\nThere is a common method of using of one hand to signify the numbers one to ten. While the five digits on one hand can express the numbers one to five, six to ten have special signs that can be used in commerce or day-to-day communication.\nHistorical use of numerals in China.\nMost Chinese numerals of later periods were descendants of the Shang dynasty oracle numerals of the 14th century BC. The oracle bone script numerals were found on tortoise shell and animal bones. In early civilizations, the Shang were able to express any numbers, however large, with only nine symbols and a counting board.\nSome of the bronze script numerals such as 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12, and 13 became part of the system of rod numerals.\nIn this system, horizontal rod numbers are used for the tens, thousands, hundred thousands etc. It's written in \"Sunzi Suanjing\" that \"one is vertical, ten is horizontal\".\nThe counting rod numerals system has place value and decimal numerals for computation, and was used widely by Chinese merchants, mathematicians and astronomers from the Han dynasty to the 16th century.\nIn 690 AD, Empress W\u01d4 promulgated Zetian characters, one of which was \"\u3007\". The word is now used as a synonym for the number zero.\nAlexander Wylie, Christian missionary to China, in 1853 already refuted the notion that \"the Chinese numbers were written in words at length\", and stated that in ancient China, calculation was carried out by means of counting rods, and \"the written character is evidently a rude presentation of these\". After being introduced to the rod numerals, he said \"Having thus obtained a simple but effective system of figures, we find the Chinese in actual use of a method of notation depending on the theory of local value [i.e. place-value], several centuries before such theory was understood in Europe, and while yet the science of numbers had scarcely dawned among the Arabs.\"\nDuring the Ming and Qing dynasties (after Arabic numerals were introduced into China), some Chinese mathematicians used Chinese numeral characters as positional system digits. After the Qing period, both the Chinese numeral characters and the Suzhou numerals were replaced by Arabic numerals in mathematical writings.\nCultural influences.\nTraditional Chinese numeric characters are also used in Japan and Korea and were used in Vietnam before the 20th century. In vertical text (that is, read top to bottom), using characters for numbers is the norm, while in horizontal text, Arabic numerals are most common. Chinese numeric characters are also used in much the same formal or decorative fashion that Roman numerals are in Western cultures. Chinese numerals may appear together with Arabic numbers on the same sign or document."}
{"id": "5783", "revid": "38206049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5783", "title": "Computer program", "text": "A computer program is a collection of instructions that can be executed by a computer to perform a specific task. \nA computer program is usually written by a computer programmer in a programming language. From the program in its human-readable form of source code, a compiler or assembler can derive machine code\u2014a form consisting of instructions that the computer can directly execute. Alternatively, a computer program may be executed with the aid of an interpreter.\nA collection of computer programs, libraries, and related data are referred to as software. Computer programs may be categorized along functional lines, such as application software and system software. The underlying method used for some calculation or manipulation is known as an algorithm.\nHistory.\nCode-breaking algorithms have existed for centuries. In the 9th century, the Arab mathematician Al-Kindi described a cryptographic algorithm for deciphering encrypted code, in \"A Manuscript On Deciphering Cryptographic Messages\". He gave the first description of cryptanalysis by frequency analysis, the earliest code-breaking algorithm.\nEarly programmable machines.\nThe earliest programmable machines preceded the invention of the digital computer. As early as the 9th century, a programmable music sequencer was invented by the Persian Banu Musa brothers, who described an automated mechanical flute player in the \"Book of Ingenious Devices\". In 1206, the Arab engineer Al-Jazari invented a programmable drum machine where musical mechanical automata could be made to play different rhythms and drum patterns. In 1801, Joseph-Marie Jacquard devised a loom that would weave a pattern by following a series of perforated cards. Patterns could be woven and repeated by arranging the cards.\nAnalytical Engine.\nIn 1837, Charles Babbage was inspired by Jacquard's loom to attempt to build the Analytical Engine.\nThe names of the components of the calculating device were borrowed from the textile industry. In the textile industry, yarn was brought from the store to be milled. The device would have had a \"store\"\u2014memory to hold 1,000 numbers of 40 decimal digits each. Numbers from the \"store\" would then have then been transferred to the \"mill\" (analogous to the CPU of a modern machine), for processing. A \"thread\" is the execution of programmed instructions by the device. It was programmed using two sets of perforated cards\u2014one to direct the operation and the other for the input variables.\n However, after more than 17,000 pounds of the British government's money, the thousands of cogged wheels and gears never fully worked together.\nDuring a nine-month period in 1842\u201343, Ada Lovelace translated the memoir of Italian mathematician Luigi Menabrea. The memoir covered the Analytical Engine. The translation contained Note G which completely detailed a method for calculating Bernoulli numbers using the Analytical Engine. This note is recognized by some historians as the world's first written computer program.\nUniversal Turing machine.\nIn 1936, Alan Turing introduced the Universal Turing machine\u2014a theoretical device that can model every computation that can be performed on a Turing complete computing machine.\nIt is a finite-state machine that has an infinitely long read/write tape. The machine can move the tape back and forth, changing its contents as it performs an algorithm. The machine starts in the initial state, goes through a sequence of steps, and halts when it encounters the halt state.\nThis machine is considered by some to be the origin of the stored-program computer\u2014used by John von Neumann (1946) for the \"Electronic Computing Instrument\" that now bears the von Neumann architecture name.\nEarly programmable computers.\nThe Z3 computer, invented by Konrad Zuse (1941) in Germany, was a digital and programmable computer. A digital computer uses electricity as the calculating component. The Z3 contained 2,400 relays to create the circuits. The circuits provided a binary, floating-point, nine-instruction computer. Programming the Z3 was through a specially designed keyboard and punched tape.\nThe Electronic Numerical Integrator And Computer (Fall 1945) was a Turing complete, general-purpose computer that used 17,468 vacuum tubes to create the circuits. At its core, it was a series of Pascalines wired together. Its 40 units weighed 30 tons, occupied , and consumed $650 per hour (in 1940s currency) in electricity when idle. It had 20 base-10 accumulators. Programming the ENIAC took up to two months. Three function tables were on wheels and needed to be rolled to fixed function panels. Function tables were connected to function panels using heavy black cables. Each function table had 728 rotating knobs. Programming the ENIAC also involved setting some of the 3,000 switches. Debugging a program took a week. The programmers of the ENIAC were women who were known collectively as the \"ENIAC girls\" and included Jean Jennings Bartik, Betty Holberton, Marlyn Wescoff, Kathleen McNulty, Ruth Teitelbaum, and Frances Spence.\nThe ENIAC featured parallel operations. Different sets of accumulators could simultaneously work on different algorithms. It used punched card machines for input and output, and it was controlled with a clock signal. It ran for eight years, calculating hydrogen bomb parameters, predicting weather patterns, and producing firing tables to aim artillery guns. \nThe Manchester Baby (June 1948) was a stored-program computer. Programming transitioned away from moving cables and setting dials; instead, a computer program was stored in memory as numbers. Only three bits of memory were available to store each instruction, so it was limited to eight instructions. 32 switches were available for programming.\nLater computers.\nComputers manufactured until the 1970s had front-panel switches for programming. The computer program was written on paper for reference. An instruction was represented by a configuration of on/off settings. After setting the configuration, an execute button was pressed. This process was then repeated. Computer programs also were manually input via paper tape or punched cards. After the medium was loaded, the starting address was set via switches, and the execute button pressed.\nIn 1961, the Burroughs B5000 was built specifically to be programmed in the ALGOL 60 language. The hardware featured circuits to ease the compile phase.\nIn 1964, the IBM System/360 was a line of six computers each having the same instruction set architecture. The Model 30 was the smallest and least expensive. Customers could upgrade and retain the same application software. Each System/360 model featured multiprogramming. With operating system support, multiple programs could be in memory at once. When one was waiting for input/output, another could compute. Each model also could emulate other computers. Customers could upgrade to the System/360 and retain their IBM 7094 or IBM 1401 application software.\nComputer programming.\nComputer programming is the process of writing or editing source code. Editing source code involves testing, analyzing, refining, and sometimes coordinating with other programmers on a jointly developed program. A person who practices this skill is referred to as a computer programmer, software developer, and sometimes coder.\nThe sometimes lengthy process of computer programming is usually referred to as software development. The term software engineering is becoming popular as the process is seen as an engineering discipline.\nProgramming languages.\nComputer programs can be categorized by the programming language paradigm used to produce them. Two of the main paradigms are imperative and declarative.\nImperative languages.\n\"Imperative programming languages\" specify a sequential algorithm using declarations, expressions, and statements:\nOne criticism of imperative languages is the side effect of an assignment statement on a class of variables called non-local variables.\nDeclarative languages.\n\"Declarative programming languages\" describe \"what\" computation should be performed and not \"how\" to compute it. Declarative programs omit the control flow and are considered \"sets\" of instructions. Two broad categories of declarative languages are functional languages and logical languages. The principle behind functional languages (like Haskell) is to not allow side effects, which makes it easier to reason about programs like mathematical functions. The principle behind logical languages (like Prolog) is to define the problem to be solved\u00a0\u2013 the goal\u00a0\u2013 and leave the detailed solution to the Prolog system itself. The goal is defined by providing a list of subgoals. Then each subgoal is defined by further providing a list of its subgoals, etc. If a path of subgoals fails to find a solution, then that subgoal is backtracked and another path is systematically attempted.\nCompilation and interpretation.\nA computer program in the form of a human-readable, computer programming language is called source code. Source code may be converted into an executable image by a compiler or assembler, or executed immediately with the aid of an interpreter.\nCompilers are used to translate source code from a programming language into either object code or machine code. Object code needs further processing to become machine code, and machine code consists of the central processing unit's native instructions, ready for execution. Compiled computer programs are commonly referred to as executables, binary images, or simply as binaries\u00a0\u2013 a reference to the binary file format used to store the executable code.\nSome compiled and assembled object programs need to be combined as modules with a linker utility in order to produce an executable program.\nInterpreters are used to execute source code from a programming language line-by-line. The interpreter decodes each statement and performs its behavior. One advantage of interpreters is that they can easily be extended to an interactive session. The programmer is presented with a prompt, and individual lines of code are typed in and performed immediately.\nThe main disadvantage of interpreters is computer programs run slower than when compiled. Interpreting code is slower because the interpreter must decode each statement and then perform it. However, software development may be faster using an interpreter because testing is immediate when the compiling step is omitted. Another disadvantage of interpreters is an interpreter must be present on the executing computer. By contrast, compiled computer programs need no compiler present during execution.\nJust in time compilers pre-compile computer programs just before execution. For example, the Java virtual machine Hotspot contains a Just In Time Compiler which selectively compiles Java bytecode into machine code \u2013 but only code which Hotspot predicts is likely to be used many times.\nEither compiled or interpreted programs might be executed in a batch process without human interaction.\nScripting languages are often used to create batch processes. One common scripting language is Unix shell, and its executing environment is called the command-line interface.\nNo properties of a programming language require it to be exclusively compiled or exclusively interpreted. The categorization usually reflects the most popular method of language execution. For example, Java is thought of as an interpreted language and C a compiled language, despite the existence of Java compilers and C interpreters.\nStorage and execution.\nTypically, computer programs are stored in non-volatile memory until requested either directly or indirectly to be executed by the computer user. Upon such a request, the program is loaded into random-access memory, by a computer program called an operating system, where it can be accessed directly by the central processor. The central processor then executes (\"runs\") the program, instruction by instruction, until termination. A program in execution is called a process. Termination is either by normal self-termination, by user intervention, or by error\u00a0\u2013 software or hardware error.\nSimultaneous execution.\nMany operating systems support multitasking which enables many computer programs to appear to run simultaneously on one computer. Operating systems may run multiple programs through process scheduling\u00a0\u2013 a software mechanism to switch the CPU among processes often so users can interact with each program while it runs. Within hardware, modern day multiprocessor computers or computers with multicore processors may run multiple programs.\nSelf-modifying programs.\nA computer program in execution is normally treated as being different from the data the program operates on. However, in some cases, this distinction is blurred when a computer program modifies itself. The modified computer program is subsequently executed as part of the same program. Self-modifying code is possible for programs written in machine code, assembly language, Lisp, C, COBOL, PL/1, and Prolog.\nFunctional categories.\nComputer programs may be categorized along functional lines. The main functional categories are application software and system software. System software includes the operating system which couples computer hardware with application software. The purpose of the operating system is to provide an environment in which application software executes in a convenient and efficient manner. In addition to the operating system, system software includes embedded programs, boot programs, and micro programs. Application software designed for end users have a user interface. Application software not designed for the end user includes middleware, which couples one application with another. Application software also includes utility programs. The distinction between system software and application software is under debate.\nApplication software.\nThere are many types of application software:\nUtility programs.\nUtility programs are application programs designed to aid system administrators and computer programmers.\nOperating system.\nAn operating system is the low-level software that supports a computer's basic functions, such as scheduling tasks and controlling peripherals.\nIn the 1950s, the programmer, who was also the operator, would write a program and run it. After the program finished executing, the output may have been printed, or it may have been punched onto paper tape or cards for later processing.\nMore often than not the program did not work. The programmer then looked at the console lights and fiddled with the console switches. If less fortunate, a memory printout was made for further study. In the 1960s, programmers reduced the amount of wasted time by automating the operator's job. A program called an \"operating system\" was kept in the computer at all times.\nOriginally, operating systems were programmed in assembly; however, modern operating systems are typically written in C.\nBoot program.\nA stored-program computer requires an initial computer program stored in its read-only memory to boot. The boot process is to identify and initialize all aspects of the system, from processor registers to device controllers to memory contents. Following the initialization process, this initial computer program loads the operating system and sets the program counter to begin normal operations.\nEmbedded programs.\nIndependent of the host computer, a hardware device might have embedded firmware to control its operation. Firmware is used when the computer program is rarely or never expected to change, or when the program must not be lost when the power is off.\nMicrocode programs.\nMicrocode programs control some central processing units and some other hardware. This code moves data between the registers, buses, arithmetic logic units, and other functional units in the CPU. Unlike conventional programs, microcode is not usually written by, or even visible to, the end users of systems, and is usually provided by the manufacturer, and is considered internal to the device."}
{"id": "5785", "revid": "73920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5785", "title": "Crime", "text": "In ordinary language, a crime is an unlawful act punishable by a state or other authority. The term \"crime\" does not, in modern criminal law, have any simple and universally accepted definition, though statutory definitions have been provided for certain purposes. The most popular view is that crime is a category created by law; in other words, something is a crime if declared as such by the relevant and applicable law. One proposed definition is that a crime or offence (or criminal offence) is an act harmful not only to some individual but also to a community, society, or the state (\"a public wrong\"). Such acts are forbidden and punishable by law.\nThe notion that acts such as murder, rape, and theft are to be prohibited exists worldwide. What precisely is a criminal offence is defined by criminal law of each country. While many have a catalogue of crimes called the criminal code, in some common law countries no such comprehensive statute exists.\nThe state (government) has the power to severely restrict one's liberty for committing a crime. In modern societies, there are procedures to which investigations and trials must adhere. If found guilty, an offender may be sentenced to a form of reparation such as a community sentence, or, depending on the nature of their offence, to undergo imprisonment, life imprisonment or, in some jurisdictions, execution.\nUsually, to be classified as a crime, the \"act of doing something criminal\" (\"actus reus\") mustwith certain exceptionsbe accompanied by the \"intention to do something criminal\" (\"mens rea\").\nWhile every crime violates the law, not every violation of the law counts as a crime. Breaches of private law (torts and breaches of contract) are not automatically punished by the state, but can be enforced through civil procedure. The world of crime and criminals is often called \"the underworld.\"\nOverview.\nWhen informal relationships prove insufficient to establish and maintain a desired social order, a government or a state may impose more formalized or stricter systems of social control. With institutional and legal machinery at their disposal, agents of the state can compel populations to conform to codes and can opt to punish or attempt to reform those who do not conform.\nAuthorities employ various mechanisms to regulate (encouraging or discouraging) certain behaviors in general. Governing or administering agencies may for example codify rules into laws, police citizens and visitors to ensure that they comply with those laws, and implement other policies and practices that legislators or administrators have prescribed with the aim of discouraging or preventing crime. In addition, authorities provide remedies and sanctions, and collectively these constitute a criminal justice system. Legal sanctions vary widely in their severity; they may include (for example) incarceration of temporary character aimed at reforming the convict. Some jurisdictions have penal codes written to inflict permanent harsh punishments: legal mutilation, capital punishment, or life without parole.\nUsually, a natural person perpetrates a crime, but legal persons may also commit crimes. Historically, several premodern societies believed that non-human animals were capable of committing crimes, and prosecuted and punished them accordingly.\nThe sociologist Richard Quinney has written about the relationship between society and crime. When Quinney states \"crime is a social phenomenon\" he envisages both how individuals conceive crime and how populations perceive it, based on societal norms.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"crime\" is derived from the Latin root , meaning \"I decide, I give judgment\". Originally the Latin word \"cr\u012bmen\" meant \"charge\" or \"cry of distress.\" The Ancient Greek word , from which the Latin cognate derives, typically referred to an intellectual mistake or an offense against the community, rather than a private or moral wrong.\nIn 13th century English \"crime\" meant \"sinfulness\", according to the Online Etymology Dictionary. It was probably brought to England as Old French (12th century form of Modern French \"crime\"), from Latin \"crimen\" (in the genitive case: \"criminis\"). In Latin, \"crimen\" could have signified any one of the following: \"charge, indictment, accusation; crime, fault, offense\".\nThe word may derive from the Latin \"cernere\" \u2013 \"to decide, to sift\" (see crisis, mapped on Kairos and Chronos). But Ernest Klein (citing Karl Brugmann) rejects this and suggests *cri-men, which originally would have meant \"cry of distress\". Thomas G. Tucker suggests a root in \"cry\" words and refers to English plaint, plaintiff, and so on. The meaning \"offense punishable by law\" dates from the late 14th century. The Latin word is glossed in Old English by \"facen\", also \"deceit, fraud, treachery\", [cf. fake]. \"Crime wave\" is first attested in 1893 in American English.\nDefinition.\nEngland and Wales.\nWhether a given act or omission constitutes a crime does not depend on the nature of that act or omission; it depends on the nature of the legal consequences that may follow it. An act or omission is a crime if it is capable of being followed by what are called criminal proceedings.\nThe following definition of \"crime\" was provided by the Prevention of Crimes Act 1871, and applied for the purposes of section 10 of the Prevention of Crime Act 1908:\nScotland.\nFor the purpose of section 243 of the Trade Union and Labour Relations (Consolidation) Act 1992, a crime means an offence punishable on indictment, or an offence punishable on summary conviction, and for the commission of which the offender is liable under the statute making the offence punishable to be imprisoned either absolutely or at the discretion of the court as an alternative for some other punishment.\nSociology.\nA normative definition views crime as deviant behavior that violates prevailing normscultural standards prescribing how humans ought to behave normally. This approach considers the complex realities surrounding the concept of crime and seeks to understand how changing social, political, psychological, and economic conditions may affect changing definitions of crime and the form of the legal, law-enforcement, and penal responses made by society.\nThese structural realities remain fluid and often contentious. For example: as cultures change and the political environment shifts, societies may criminalise or decriminalise certain behaviours, which directly affects the statistical crime rates, influence the allocation of resources for the enforcement of laws, and (re-)influence the general public opinion.\nSimilarly, changes in the collection and/or calculation of data on crime may affect the public perceptions of the extent of any given \"crime problem\". All such adjustments to crime statistics, allied with the experience of people in their everyday lives, shape attitudes on the extent to which the state should use law or social engineering to enforce or encourage any particular social norm. Behaviour can be controlled and influenced by a society in many ways without having to resort to the criminal justice system.\nIndeed, in those cases where no clear consensus exists on a given norm, the drafting of criminal law by the group in power to prohibit the behaviour of another group may seem to some observers an improper limitation of the second group's freedom, and the ordinary members of society have less respect for the law or laws in generalwhether the authorities actually enforce the disputed law or not.\nOther definitions.\nLegislatures can pass laws (called \"mala prohibita\") that define crimes against social norms. These laws vary from time to time and from place to place: note variations in gambling laws, for example, and the prohibition or encouragement of duelling in history. Other crimes, called \"mala in se\", count as outlawed in almost all societies, (murder, theft and rape, for example).\nEnglish criminal law and the related criminal law of Commonwealth countries can define offences that the courts alone have developed over the years, without any actual legislation: common law offences. The courts used the concept of \"malum in se\" to develop various common law offences.\nCriminalization.\nOne can view criminalization as a procedure deployed by society as a preemptive harm-reduction device, using the threat of punishment as a deterrent to anyone proposing to engage in the behavior causing harm. The state becomes involved because governing entities can become convinced that the costs of not criminalizing (through allowing the harms to continue unabated) outweigh the costs of criminalizing it (restricting individual liberty, for example, to minimize harm to others).\nStates control the process of criminalization because:\nLabelling theory.\nThe label of \"crime\" and the accompanying social stigma normally confine their scope to those activities seen as injurious to the general population or to the state, including some that cause serious loss or damage to individuals. Those who apply the labels of \"crime\" or \"criminal\" intend to assert the hegemony of a dominant population, or to reflect a consensus of condemnation for the identified behavior and to justify any punishments prescribed by the state (in the event that standard processing tries and convicts an accused person of a crime).\nNatural-law theory.\nJustifying the state's use of force to coerce compliance with its laws has proven a consistent theoretical problem. One of the earliest justifications involved the theory of natural law. This posits that the nature of the world or of human beings underlies the standards of morality or constructs them. Thomas Aquinas wrote in the 13th century: \"the rule and measure of human acts is the reason, which is the first principle of human acts\". He regarded people as by nature rational beings, concluding that it becomes morally appropriate that they should behave in a way that conforms to their rational nature. Thus, to be valid, any law must conform to natural law and coercing people to conform to that law is morally acceptable. In the 1760s, William Blackstone described the thesis:\nBut John Austin (1790\u20131859), an early positivist, applied utilitarianism in accepting the calculating nature of human beings and the existence of an objective morality. He denied that the legal validity of a norm depends on whether its content conforms to morality. Thus in Austinian terms, a moral code can objectively determine what people ought to do, the law can embody whatever norms the legislature decrees to achieve social utility, but every individual remains free to choose what to do. Similarly, H.L.A. Hart saw the law as an aspect of sovereignty, with lawmakers able to adopt any law as a means to a moral end.\nThus the necessary and sufficient conditions for the truth of a proposition of law simply involved internal logic and consistency, and that the state's agents used state power with responsibility. Ronald Dworkin rejects Hart's theory and proposes that all individuals should expect the equal respect and concern of those who govern them as a fundamental political right. He offers a theory of compliance overlaid by a theory of deference (the citizen's duty to obey the law) and a theory of enforcement, which identifies the legitimate goals of enforcement and punishment. Legislation must conform to a theory of legitimacy, which describes the circumstances under which a particular person or group is entitled to make law, and a theory of legislative justice, which describes the law they are entitled or obliged to make.\nThere are natural-law theorists who have accepted the idea of enforcing the prevailing morality as a primary function of the law. This view entails the problem that it makes any moral criticism of the law impossible: if conformity with natural law forms a necessary condition for legal validity, all valid law must, by definition, count as morally just. Thus, on this line of reasoning, the legal validity of a norm necessarily entails its moral justice.\nOne can solve this problem by granting some degree of moral relativism and accepting that norms may evolve over time and, therefore, one can criticize the continued enforcement of old laws in the light of the current norms. People may find such law acceptable, but the use of state power to coerce citizens to comply with that law lacks moral justification. More recent conceptions of the theory characterise crime as the violation of individual rights.\nSince society considers so many rights as natural (hence the term \"right\") rather than man-made, what constitutes a crime also counts as natural, in contrast to laws (seen as man-made). Adam Smith illustrates this view, saying that a smuggler would be an excellent citizen, \"...had not the laws of his country made that a crime which nature never meant to be so.\"\nNatural-law theory therefore distinguishes between \"criminality\" (which derives from human nature) and \"illegality\" (which originates with the interests of those in power). Lawyers sometimes express the two concepts with the phrases \"malum in se\" and \"malum prohibitum\" respectively. They regard a \"crime \"malum in se\"\" as inherently criminal; whereas a \"crime \"malum prohibitum\"\" (the argument goes) counts as criminal only because the law has decreed it so.\nIt follows from this view that one can perform an illegal act without committing a crime, while a criminal act could be perfectly legal. Many Enlightenment thinkers (such as Adam Smith and the American Founding Fathers) subscribed to this view to some extent, and it remains influential among so-called classical liberals and libertarians.\nHistory.\nSome religious communities regard sin as a crime; some may even highlight the crime of sin very early in legendary or mythological accounts of originsnote the tale of Adam and Eve and the theory of original sin. What one group considers a crime may cause or ignite war or conflict. However, the earliest known civilizations had codes of law, containing both civil and penal rules mixed together, though not always in recorded form.\nAncient Near East.\nThe Sumerians produced the earliest surviving written codes. Urukagina (reigned , short chronology) had an early code that has not survived; a later king, Ur-Nammu, left the earliest extant written law system, the Code of Ur-Nammu (), which prescribed a formal system of penalties for specific cases in 57 articles. The Sumerians later issued other codes, including the \"code of Lipit-Ishtar\". This code, from the 20th century BCE, contains some fifty articles, and scholars have reconstructed it by comparing several sources. \nSuccessive legal codes in Babylon, including the code of Hammurabi (), reflected Mesopotamian society's belief that law derived from the will of the gods (see Babylonian law).\nMany states at this time functioned as theocracies, with codes of conduct largely religious in origin or reference. In the Sanskrit texts of Dharma\u015b\u0101stra (), issues such as legal and religious duties, code of conduct, penalties and remedies, etc. have been discussed and forms one of the elaborate and earliest source of legal code.\nSir Henry Maine studied the ancient codes available in his day, and failed to find any criminal law in the \"modern\" sense of the word. While modern systems distinguish between offences against the \"state\" or \"community\", and offences against the \"individual\", the so-called penal law of ancient communities did not deal with \"crimes\" (Latin: \"crimina\"), but with \"wrongs\" (Latin: \"delicta\"). Thus the Hellenic laws treated all forms of theft, assault, rape, and murder as private wrongs, and left action for enforcement up to the victims or their survivors. The earliest systems seem to have lacked formal courts.\nRome and its legacy in Europe.\nThe Romans systematized law and applied their system across the Roman Empire. Again, the initial rules of Roman law regarded assaults as a matter of private compensation. The most significant Roman law concept involved \"dominion\". The \"pater familias\" owned all the family and its property (including slaves); the \"pater\" enforced matters involving interference with any property. The \"Commentaries\" of Gaius (written between 130 and 180 AD) on the Twelve Tables treated \"furtum\" (in modern parlance: \"theft\") as a tort.\nSimilarly, assault and violent robbery involved trespass as to the \"pater's\" property (so, for example, the rape of a slave could become the subject of compensation to the \"pater\" as having trespassed on his \"property\"), and breach of such laws created a \"vinculum juris\" (an obligation of law) that only the payment of monetary compensation (modern \"damages\") could discharge. Similarly, the consolidated Teutonic laws of the Germanic tribes, included a complex system of monetary compensations for what courts would consider the complete range of criminal offences against the person, from murder down.\nEven though Rome abandoned its Britannic provinces around 400 AD, the Germanic mercenarieswho had largely become instrumental in enforcing Roman rule in Britanniaacquired ownership of land there and continued to use a mixture of Roman and Teutonic Law, with much written down under the early Anglo-Saxon kings. But only when a more centralized English monarchy emerged following the Norman invasion, and when the kings of England attempted to assert power over the land and its peoples, did the modern concept emerge, namely of a crime not only as an offence against the \"individual\", but also as a wrong against the \"state\".\nThis idea came from common law, and the earliest conception of a criminal act involved events of such major significance that the \"state\" had to usurp the usual functions of the civil tribunals, and direct a special law or \"privilegium\" against the perpetrator. All the earliest English criminal trials involved wholly extraordinary and arbitrary courts without any settled law to apply, whereas the civil (delictual) law operated in a highly developed and consistent manner (except where a king wanted to raise money by selling a new form of writ). The development of the idea that the \"state\" dispenses justice in a court only emerges in parallel with or after the emergence of the concept of sovereignty.\nIn continental Europe, Roman law persisted, but with a stronger influence from the Christian Church.\nCoupled with the more diffuse political structure based on smaller feudal units, various legal traditions emerged, remaining more strongly rooted in Roman jurisprudence, but modified to meet the prevailing political climate.\nIn Scandinavia the effect of Roman law did not become apparent until the 17th century, and the courts grew out of the \"things\"the assemblies of the people. The people decided the cases (usually with largest freeholders dominating). This system later gradually developed into a system with a royal judge nominating a number of the most esteemed men of the parish as his board, fulfilling the function of \"the people\" of yore.\nFrom the Hellenic system onwards, the policy rationale for requiring the payment of monetary compensation for wrongs committed has involved the avoidance of feuding between clans and families.\nIf compensation could mollify families' feelings, this would help to keep the peace. On the other hand, the institution of oaths also played down the threat of feudal warfare. Both in archaic Greece and in medieval Scandinavia, an accused person walked free if he could get a sufficient number of male relatives to swear him not guilty. (Compare the United Nations Security Council, in which the veto power of the permanent members ensures that the organization does not become involved in crises where it could not enforce its decisions.)\nThese means of restraining private feuds did not always work, and sometimes prevented the fulfillment of justice. But in the earliest times the \"state\" did not always provide an independent policing force. Thus criminal law grew out of what 21st-century lawyers would call torts; and, in real terms, many acts and omissions classified as crimes actually overlap with civil-law concepts.\nThe development of sociological thought from the 19th century onwards prompted some fresh views on crime and criminality, and fostered the beginnings of criminology as a study of crime in society. Nietzsche noted a link between crime and creativityin \"The Birth of Tragedy\" he asserted: \"The best and brightest that man can acquire he must obtain by crime\". In the 20th century, Michel Foucault in \"Discipline and Punish\" made a study of criminalization as a coercive method of state control.\nClassification and categorisation.\nCategorisation by type.\nThe following classes of offences are used, or have been used, as legal terms:\nResearchers and commentators have classified crimes into the following categories, in addition to those above:\nCategorisation by penalty.\nOne can categorise crimes depending on the related punishment, with sentencing tariffs prescribed in line with the perceived seriousness of the offence. Thus fines and noncustodial sentences may address the crimes seen as least serious, with lengthy imprisonment or (in some jurisdictions) capital punishment reserved for the most serious.\nCommon law.\nUnder the common law of England, crimes were classified as either treason, felony or misdemeanour, with treason sometimes being included with the felonies. This system was based on the perceived seriousness of the offence. It is still used in the United States but the distinction between felony and misdemeanour is abolished in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.\nClassification by mode of trial.\nThe following classes of offence are based on mode of trial:\nClassification by origin.\nIn common law countries, crimes may be categorised into common law offences and statutory offences. In the US, Australia and Canada (in particular), they are divided into federal crimes and under state crimes.\nU.S. classification.\nIn the United States since 1930, the FBI has tabulated Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) annually from crime data submitted by law enforcement agencies across the United States.\nOfficials compile this data at the city, county, and state levels into the UCR. They classify violations of laws based on common law as Part I (index) crimes in UCR data. These are further categorized as violent or property crimes. Part I violent crimes include murder and criminal homicide (voluntary manslaughter), forcible rape, aggravated assault, and robbery; while Part I property crimes include burglary, arson, larceny/theft, and motor-vehicle theft. All other crimes count come under Part II.\nFor convenience, such lists usually include infractions although, in the U.S., they may come into the sphere not of the criminal law, but rather of the civil law. Compare tortfeasance.\nBooking arrests require detention for a time-frame ranging 1 to 24 hours.\nReports, studies and organizations.\nThere are several national and International organizations offering studies and statistics about global and local crime activity, such as United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the United States of America Overseas Security Advisory Council (OSAC) safety report or national reports generated by the law-enforcement authorities of EU state member reported to the Europol.\nOffence in common law jurisdictions.\nIn England and Wales, as well as in Hong Kong, the term \"offence\" means the same thing as, and is interchangeable with, the term \"crime\", They are further split into:\nCauses and correlates of crime.\nMany different causes and correlates of crime have been proposed with varying degree of empirical support. They include socioeconomic, psychological, biological, and behavioral factors. Controversial topics include media violence research and effects of gun politics.\nEmotional state (both chronic and current) have a tremendous impact on individual thought processes and, as a result, can be linked to criminal activities. The positive psychology concept of Broaden and Build posits that cognitive functioning expands when an individual is in a good-feeling emotional state and contracts as emotional state declines. In positive emotional states an individual is able to consider more possible solutions to problems, but in lower emotional states fewer solutions can be ascertained. The narrowed thought-action repertoires can result in the only paths perceptible to an individual being ones they would never use if they saw an alternative, but if they can't conceive of the alternatives that carry less risk they will choose one that they can see. Criminals who commit even the most horrendous of crimes, such as mass murders, did not see another solution.\nCrimes in international law.\nCrimes defined by treaty as crimes against international law include:\nFrom the point of view of state-centric law, extraordinary procedures (international courts or national courts operating with universal jurisdiction) may prosecute such crimes. Note the role of the International Criminal Court at The Hague in the Netherlands.\nReligion and crime.\nDifferent religious traditions may promote distinct norms of behaviour, and these in turn may clash or harmonise with the perceived interests of a state. Socially accepted or imposed religious morality has influenced secular jurisdictions on issues that may otherwise concern only an individual's conscience. Activities sometimes criminalized on religious grounds include (for example) alcohol consumption (prohibition), abortion and stem-cell research. In various historical and present-day societies, institutionalized religions have established systems of earthly justice that punish crimes against the divine will and against specific devotional, organizational and other rules under specific codes, such as Roman Catholic canon law.\nMilitary jurisdictions and states of emergency.\nIn the military sphere, authorities can prosecute both regular crimes and specific acts (such as mutiny or desertion) under martial-law codes that either supplant or extend civil codes in times of (for example) war.\nMany constitutions contain provisions to curtail freedoms and criminalize otherwise tolerated behaviors under a state of emergency in the event of war, natural disaster or civil unrest. Undesired activities at such times may include assembly in the streets, violation of curfew, or possession of firearms.\nEmployee crime.\nTwo common types of employee crime exist: embezzlement and wage theft.\nThe complexity and anonymity of computer systems may help criminal employees camouflage their operations. The victims of the most costly scams include banks, brokerage houses, insurance companies, and other large financial institutions.\nIn the United States, it is estimated that workers are not paid at least $19 billion every year in overtime and that in total $40 billion to $60 billion are lost annually due to all forms of wage theft. This compares to national annual losses of $340 million due to robbery, $4.1 billion due to burglary, $5.3 billion due to larceny, and $3.8 billion due to auto theft in 2012. In Singapore, as in the United States, wage theft was found to be widespread and severe. In a 2014 survey it was found that as many as one-third of low wage male foreign workers in Singapore, or about 130,000, were affected by wage theft from partial to full denial of pay."}
{"id": "5786", "revid": "24134703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5786", "title": "California Institute of Technology", "text": "The California Institute of Technology (Caltech) is a private research university in Pasadena, California. The university is known for its strength in science and engineering, and is one among a small group of institutes of technology in the United States which is primarily devoted to the instruction of pure and applied sciences.\nCaltech was founded as a preparatory and vocational school by Amos G. Throop in 1891 and began attracting influential scientists such as George Ellery Hale, Arthur Amos Noyes, and Robert Andrews Millikan in the early 20th century. The vocational and preparatory schools were disbanded and spun off in 1910 and the college assumed its present name in 1920. In 1934, Caltech was elected to the Association of American Universities, and the antecedents of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which Caltech continues to manage and operate, were established between 1936 and 1943 under Theodore von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n.\nCaltech has six academic divisions with strong emphasis on science and engineering, managing $332\u00a0million in 2011 in sponsored research. Its primary campus is located approximately northeast of downtown Los Angeles. First-year students are required to live on campus, and 95% of undergraduates remain in the on-campus House System at Caltech. Although Caltech has a strong tradition of practical jokes and pranks, student life is governed by an honor code which allows faculty to assign take-home examinations. The Caltech Beavers compete in 13 intercollegiate sports in the NCAA Division III's Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SCIAC).\n, there are 76 Nobel laureates who have been affiliated with Caltech, including 40 alumni and faculty members (41 prizes, with chemist Linus Pauling being the only individual in history to win two unshared prizes); in addition, 4 Fields Medalists and 6 Turing Award winners have been affiliated with Caltech. There are 8 Crafoord Laureates and 56 non-emeritus faculty members (as well as many emeritus faculty members) who have been elected to one of the United States National Academies, 4 Chief Scientists of the U.S. Air Force and 71\u00a0have won the United States National Medal of Science or Technology. Numerous faculty members are associated with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute as well as NASA. According to a 2015 Pomona College study, Caltech ranked number one in the U.S. for the percentage of its graduates who go on to earn a PhD.\nHistory.\nThroop College.\nCaltech started as a vocational school founded in present-day Old Pasadena on Fair Oaks Avenue and Chestnut Street on September 23, 1891 by local businessman and politician Amos G. Throop. The school was known successively as Throop University, Throop Polytechnic Institute (and Manual Training School) and Throop College of Technology before acquiring its current name in 1920. The vocational school was disbanded and the preparatory program was split off to form the independent Polytechnic School in 1907.\nAt a time when scientific research in the United States was still in its infancy, George Ellery Hale, a solar astronomer from the University of Chicago, founded the Mount Wilson Observatory in 1904. He joined Throop's board of trustees in 1907, and soon began developing it and the whole of Pasadena into a major scientific and cultural destination. He engineered the appointment of James A. B. Scherer, a literary scholar untutored in science but a capable administrator and fund-raiser, to Throop's presidency in 1908. Scherer persuaded retired businessman and trustee Charles W. Gates to donate $25,000 in seed money to build Gates Laboratory, the first science building on campus.\nWorld Wars.\nIn 1910, Throop moved to its current site. Arthur Fleming donated the land for the permanent campus site. Theodore Roosevelt delivered an address at Throop Institute on March 21, 1911, and he declared:\nI want to see institutions like Throop turn out perhaps ninety-nine of every hundred students as men who are to do given pieces of industrial work better than any one else can do them; I want to see those men do the kind of work that is now being done on the Panama Canal and on the great irrigation projects in the interior of this country\u2014and the one-hundredth man I want to see with the kind of cultural scientific training that will make him and his fellows the matrix out of which you can occasionally develop a man like your great astronomer, George Ellery Hale.\nIn the same year, a bill was introduced in the California Legislature calling for the establishment of a publicly funded \"California Institute of Technology\", with an initial budget of a million dollars, ten times the budget of Throop at the time. The board of trustees offered to turn Throop over to the state, but the presidents of Stanford University and the University of California successfully lobbied to defeat the bill, which allowed Throop to develop as the only scientific research-oriented education institute in southern California, public or private, until the onset of the World War II necessitated the broader development of research-based science education. The promise of Throop attracted physical chemist Arthur Amos Noyes from MIT to develop the institution and assist in establishing it as a center for science and technology.\nWith the onset of World War I, Hale organized the National Research Council to coordinate and support scientific work on military problems. While he supported the idea of federal appropriations for science, he took exception to a federal bill that would have funded engineering research at land-grant colleges, and instead sought to raise a $1\u00a0million national research fund entirely from private sources. To that end, as Hale wrote in \"The New York Times\":\nThroop College of Technology, in Pasadena California has recently afforded a striking illustration of one way in which the Research Council can secure co-operation and advance scientific investigation. This institution, with its able investigators and excellent research laboratories, could be of great service in any broad scheme of cooperation. President Scherer, hearing of the formation of the council, immediately offered to take part in its work, and with this object, he secured within three days an additional research endowment of one hundred thousand dollars.\nThrough the National Research Council, Hale simultaneously lobbied for science to play a larger role in national affairs, and for Throop to play a national role in science. The new funds were designated for physics research, and ultimately led to the establishment of the Norman Bridge Laboratory, which attracted experimental physicist Robert Andrews Millikan from the University of Chicago in 1917. During the course of the war, Hale, Noyes and Millikan worked together in Washington on the NRC. Subsequently, they continued their partnership in developing Caltech.\nUnder the leadership of Hale, Noyes, and Millikan (aided by the booming economy of Southern California), Caltech grew to national prominence in the 1920s and concentrated on the development of Roosevelt's \"Hundredth Man\". On November 29, 1921, the trustees declared it to be the express policy of the institute to pursue scientific research of the greatest importance and at the same time \"to continue to conduct thorough courses in engineering and pure science, basing the work of these courses on exceptionally strong instruction in the fundamental sciences of mathematics, physics, and chemistry; broadening and enriching the curriculum by a liberal amount of instruction in such subjects as English, history, and economics; and vitalizing all the work of the Institute by the infusion in generous measure of the spirit of research\". In 1923, Millikan was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics. In 1925, the school established a department of geology and hired William Bennett Munro, then chairman of the division of History, Government, and Economics at Harvard University, to create a division of humanities and social sciences at Caltech. In 1928, a division of biology was established under the leadership of Thomas Hunt Morgan, the most distinguished biologist in the United States at the time, and discoverer of the role of genes and the chromosome in heredity. In 1930, Kerckhoff Marine Laboratory was established in Corona del Mar under the care of Professor George MacGinitie. In 1926, a graduate school of aeronautics was created, which eventually attracted Theodore von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n. K\u00e1rm\u00e1n later helped create the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and played an integral part in establishing Caltech as one of the world's centers for rocket science. In 1928, construction of the Palomar Observatory began.\nMillikan served as \"Chairman of the Executive Council\" (effectively Caltech's president) from 1921 to 1945, and his influence was such that the institute was occasionally referred to as \"Millikan's School.\" Millikan initiated a visiting-scholars program soon after joining Caltech. Notable scientists who accepted his invitation include Paul Dirac, Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger, Werner Heisenberg, Hendrik Lorentz and Niels Bohr. Albert Einstein arrived on the Caltech campus for the first time in 1931 to polish up his Theory of General Relativity, and he returned to Caltech subsequently as a visiting professor in 1932 and 1933.\nDuring World War II, Caltech was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission. The United States Navy also maintained a naval training school for aeronautical engineering, resident inspectors of ordinance and naval material, and a liaison officer to the National Defense Research Committee on campus.\nProject Vista.\nFrom April to December 1951, Caltech was the host of a federal classified study, Project Vista. The selection of Caltech as host for the project was based on the university's expertise in rocketry and nuclear physics. In response to the war in Korea and the pressure from the Soviet Union, the project was Caltech's way of assisting the federal government in its effort to increase national security. The project was created to study new ways of improving the relationship between tactical air support and ground troops. The Army, Air Force, and Navy sponsored the project; however, it was under contract with the Army. The study was named after the hotel, Vista del Arroyo Hotel, which housed the study. The study operated under a committee with the supervision of President Lee A. DuBridge. William A. Fowler, a professor at Caltech, was selected as research director. More than a fourth of Caltech's faculty and a group of outside scientists staffed the project. Moreover, the number increases if one takes into account visiting scientists, military liaisons, secretarial, and security staff. In compensation for its participation, the university received about $750,000.\nPost-war growth.\nFrom the 1950s to 1970s, Caltech was the home of Murray Gell-Mann and Richard Feynman, whose work was central to the establishment of the Standard Model of particle physics. Feynman was also widely known outside the physics community as an exceptional teacher and a colorful, unconventional character.\nDuring Lee A. DuBridge's tenure as Caltech's president (1946\u20131969), Caltech's faculty doubled and the campus tripled in size. DuBridge, unlike his predecessors, welcomed federal funding of science. New research fields flourished, including chemical biology, planetary science, nuclear astrophysics, and geochemistry. A 200-inch telescope was dedicated on nearby Palomar Mountain in 1948 and remained the world's most powerful optical telescope for over forty years.\nCaltech opened its doors to female undergraduates during the presidency of Harold Brown in 1970, and they made up 14% of the entering class. The portion of female undergraduates has been increasing since then.\nProtests by Caltech students are rare. The earliest was a 1968 protest outside the NBC Burbank studios, in response to rumors that NBC was to cancel \"\". In 1973, the students from Dabney House protested a presidential visit with a sign on the library bearing the simple phrase \"Impeach Nixon\". The following week, Ross McCollum, president of the National Oil Company, wrote an open letter to Dabney House stating that in light of their actions he had decided not to donate one million dollars to Caltech. The Dabney family, being Republicans, disowned Dabney House after hearing of the protest.\n21st century.\nSince 2000, the Einstein Papers Project has been located at Caltech. The project was established in 1986 to assemble, preserve, translate, and publish papers selected from the literary estate of Albert Einstein and from other collections.\nIn fall 2008, the freshman class was 42% female, a record for Caltech's undergraduate enrollment. In the same year, the Institute concluded a six-year-long fund-raising campaign. The campaign raised more than $1.4\u00a0billion from about 16,000 donors. Nearly half of the funds went into the support of Caltech programs and projects.\nIn 2010, Caltech, in partnership with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and headed by Professor Nathan Lewis, established a DOE Energy Innovation Hub aimed at developing revolutionary methods to generate fuels directly from sunlight. This hub, the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, will receive up to $122\u00a0million in federal funding over five years.\nSince 2012, Caltech began to offer classes through massive open online courses (MOOCs) under Coursera, and from 2013, edX.\nJean-Lou Chameau, the eighth president, announced on February 19, 2013, that he would be stepping down to accept the presidency at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology. Thomas F. Rosenbaum was announced to be the ninth president of Caltech on October 24, 2013, and his term began on July 1, 2014.\nIn 2019, Caltech received a gift of $750\u00a0million for sustainability research from the Resnick family of The Wonderful Company. The gift is the largest ever for environmental sustainability research and the second-largest private donation to a US academic institution (after Bloomberg's gift of $1.8\u00a0billion to Johns Hopkins University in 2018).\nOn account of President Robert A. Millikan's affiliation with the Human Betterment Foundation, in January 2021, the Caltech Board of Trustees authorized the removal of Millikan's name (and the names of five other historical figures affiliated with the Foundation), from campus buildings.\nCampus.\nCaltech's primary campus is located in Pasadena, California, approximately northeast of downtown Los Angeles. It is within walking distance of Old Town Pasadena and the Pasadena Playhouse District and therefore the two locations are frequent getaways for Caltech students.\nIn 1917 Hale hired architect Bertram Goodhue to produce a master plan for the campus. Goodhue conceived the overall layout of the campus and designed the physics building, Dabney Hall, and several other structures, in which he sought to be consistent with the local climate, the character of the school, and Hale's educational philosophy. Goodhue's designs for Caltech were also influenced by the traditional Spanish mission architecture of Southern California.\nDuring the 1960s, Caltech underwent considerable expansion, in part due to the philanthropy of alumnus Arnold O. Beckman. In 1953, Beckman was asked to join the Caltech Board of Trustees. In 1964, he became its chairman. Over the next few years, as Caltech's president emeritus David Baltimore describes it, Arnold Beckman and his wife Mabel \"shaped the destiny of Caltech\".\nIn 1971 a magnitude-6.6 earthquake in San Fernando caused some damage to the Caltech campus. Engineers who evaluated the damage found that two historic buildings dating from the early days of the Institute\u2014Throop Hall and the Goodhue-designed Culbertson Auditorium\u2014had cracked.\nNew additions to the campus include the Cahill Center for Astronomy and Astrophysics and the Walter and Leonore Annenberg Center for Information Science and Technology, which opened in 2009, and the Warren and Katherine Schlinger Laboratory for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering followed in March 2010. The institute also concluded an upgrading of the south houses in 2006. In late 2010, Caltech completed a 1.3 MW solar array projected to produce approximately 1.6 GWh in 2011.\nOrganization and administration.\nCaltech is incorporated as a non-profit corporation and is governed by a privately appointed 46-member board of trustees who serve five-year terms of office and retire at the age of 72. The current board is chaired by David L. Lee, co-founder of Global Crossing Ltd. The Trustees elect a President to serve as the chief executive officer of the Institute and administer the affairs on the institute on behalf of the board, a Provost who serves as the chief academic officer of the Institute below the President, and ten other vice presidential and other senior positions. Former Georgia Tech provost Jean-Lou Chameau became the eighth president of Caltech on September 1, 2006, replacing David Baltimore who had served since 1997. Chameau's compensation for 2008\u20132009 totaled $799,472. Chameau served until June 30, 2013. Thomas F. Rosenbaum was announced to be the ninth president of Caltech on October 24, 2013, and his term began on July 1, 2014. Caltech's endowment is governed by a permanent Trustee committee and administered by an Investment Office.\nThe institute is organized into six primary academic divisions: Biology and Biological Engineering, Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Engineering and Applied Science, Geological and Planetary Sciences, Humanities and Social Sciences, Physics, Mathematics, and Astronomy. The voting faculty of Caltech include all professors, instructors, research associates and fellows, and the University Librarian. Faculty are responsible for establishing admission requirements, academic standards, and curricula. The Faculty Board is the faculty's representative body and consists of 18 elected faculty representatives as well as other senior administration officials. Full-time professors are expected to teach classes, conduct research, advise students, and perform administrative work such as serving on committees.\nFounded in 1930s, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) is a federally funded research and development center (FFRDC) owned by NASA and operated as a division of Caltech through a contract between NASA and Caltech. In 2008, JPL spent over $1.6\u00a0billion on research and development and employed over 5,000 project-related and support employees. The JPL Director also serves as a Caltech Vice President and is responsible to the President of the Institute for the management of the laboratory.\nAcademics.\nCaltech is a small four-year, highly residential research university with slightly more students in graduate programs than undergraduate. The institute has been accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges since 1949. Caltech is on the quarter system: the fall term starts in late September and ends before Christmas, the second term starts after New Year's Day and ends in mid-March, and the third term starts in late March or early April and ends in early June.\nRankings.\nFor 2020, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranked Caltech as tied for 12th in the United States among national universities overall, 8th for most innovative, and 11th for best value. \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" also ranked the graduate programs in chemistry and earth sciences first among national universities.\nCaltech was ranked 1st internationally between 2011 and 2016 by the \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\". Caltech was ranked as the best university in the world in two categories: Engineering &amp; Technology and Physical Sciences. It was also found to have the highest faculty citation rate in the world.\nAdmissions.\nFor the Class of 2023 (enrolled Fall 2019), Caltech received 8,367 applications and accepted 6.4% of applicants; 235 enrolled. The class included 44% women and 56% men. 32% were of underrepresented ancestry, and 6% were foreign students.\nAdmission to Caltech is extremely rigorous and requires the highest test scores in the nation. The middle 50% range of SAT scores for enrolled freshmen for the class of 2023 were 740\u2013780 for evidence-based reading and writing and 790\u2013800 for math, and 1530\u20131570 total. The middle 50% range ACT Composite score was 35\u201336. The SAT Math Level 2 middle 50% range was 800\u2013800. The middle 50% range for the SAT Physics Subject Test was 760\u2013800; SAT Chemistry Subject Test was 760\u2013800; \nSAT Biology Subject Tests was 760\u2013800\nTuition and financial aid.\nUndergraduate tuition for the 2013\u20132014 school year was $39,990 and total annual costs were estimated to be $58,755. In 2012\u20132013, Caltech awarded $17.1\u00a0million in need-based aid, $438k in non-need-based aid, and $2.51\u00a0million in self-help support to enrolled undergraduate students. The average financial aid package of all students eligible for aid was $38,756 and students graduated with an average debt of $15,090.\nUndergraduate program.\nThe full-time, four-year undergraduate program emphasizes instruction in the arts and sciences and has high graduate coexistence. Caltech offers 24 majors (called \"options\") and six minors across all six academic divisions. Caltech also offers interdisciplinary programs in Applied Physics, Biochemistry, Bioengineering, Computation and Neural Systems, Control and Dynamical Systems, Environmental Science and Engineering, Geobiology and Astrobiology, Geochemistry, and Planetary Astronomy. The most popular options are Chemical Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Physics.\nPrior to the entering class of 2013, Caltech required students to take a core curriculum of five terms of mathematics, five terms of physics, two terms of chemistry, one term of biology, two terms of lab courses, one term of scientific communication, three terms of physical education, and 12 terms of humanities and social science. Since 2013, only three terms each of mathematics and physics have been required by the institute, with the remaining two terms each required by certain options.\nA typical class is worth 9 academic units and given the extensive core curriculum requirements in addition to individual options' degree requirements, students need to take an average of 40.5 units per term (more than four classes) in order to graduate in four years. 36 units is the minimum full-time load, 48 units is considered a heavy load, and registrations above 51 units require an overload petition. Approximately 20 percent of students double-major. This is achievable since the humanities and social sciences majors have been designed to be done in conjunction with a science major. Although choosing two options in the same division is discouraged, it is still possible.\nFirst-year students are enrolled in first-term classes based upon results of placement exams in math, physics, chemistry, and writing and take all classes in their first two terms on a Pass/Fail basis. There is little competition; collaboration on homework is encouraged and the honor system encourages take-home tests and flexible homework schedules. Caltech offers co-operative programs with other schools, such as the Pasadena Art Center College of Design and Occidental College.\nAccording to a PayScale study, Caltech graduates earn a median early career salary of $83,400 and $143,100 mid-career, placing them in the top 5 among graduates of US colleges and universities. The average net return on investment over a period of 20 years is $887,000, the tenth-highest among US colleges.\nCaltech offers Army and Air Force ROTC in cooperation with the University of Southern California.\nGraduate program.\nThe graduate instructional programs emphasize doctoral studies and are dominated by science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields. The institute offers graduate degree programs for the Master of Science, Engineer's Degree, Doctor of Philosophy, BS/MS and MD/PhD, with the majority of students in the PhD program. The most popular options are Chemistry, Physics, Biology, Electrical Engineering and Chemical Engineering. Applicants for graduate studies are required to take the GRE. GRE Subject scores are either required or strongly recommended by several options. A joint program between Caltech and the Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, and the UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine grants MD/PhD degrees. Students in this program do their preclinical and clinical work at USC or UCLA, and their PhD work with any member of the Caltech faculty, including the Biology, Chemistry, and Engineering and Applied Sciences Divisions. The MD degree would be from USC or UCLA and the PhD would be awarded from Caltech.\nThe research facilities at Caltech are available to graduate students, but there are opportunities for students to work in facilities of other universities, research centers as well as private industries. The graduate student to faculty ratio is 4:1.\nApproximately 99 percent of doctoral students have full financial support. Financial support for graduate students comes in the form of fellowships, research assistantships, teaching assistantships or a combination of fellowship and assistantship support.\nGraduate students are bound by the honor code, as are the undergraduates, and the Graduate Honor Council oversees any violations of the code.\nResearch.\nCaltech is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very High Research Activity\". Caltech was elected to the Association of American Universities in 1934 and remains a research university with \"very high\" research activity, primarily in STEM fields. Caltech manages research expenditures of $270\u00a0million annually, 66th among all universities in the U.S. and 17th among private institutions without medical schools for 2008. The largest federal agencies contributing to research are NASA, National Science Foundation, Department of Health and Human Services, Department of Defense, and Department of Energy. Caltech received $144\u00a0million in federal funding for the physical sciences, $40.8\u00a0million for the life sciences, $33.5\u00a0million for engineering, $14.4\u00a0million for environmental sciences, $7.16\u00a0million for computer sciences, and $1.97\u00a0million for mathematical sciences in 2008.\nThe institute was awarded an all-time high funding of $357\u00a0million in 2009. Active funding from the National Science Foundation Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Science (MPS) for Caltech stands at $343\u00a0million , the highest for any educational institution in the nation, and higher than the total funds allocated to any state except California and New York.\nIn 2005, Caltech had dedicated to research: to physical sciences, to engineering, and to biological sciences.\nIn addition to managing JPL, Caltech also operates the Palomar Observatory in San Diego County, the Owens Valley Radio Observatory in Bishop, California, the Submillimeter Observatory and W. M. Keck Observatory at the Mauna Kea Observatory, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory at Livingston, Louisiana and Richland, Washington, and Kerckhoff Marine Laboratory in Corona del Mar, California. The Institute launched the Kavli Nanoscience Institute at Caltech in 2006, the Keck Institute for Space Studies in 2008, and is also the current home for the Einstein Papers Project. The Spitzer Science Center (SSC), part of the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center located on the Caltech campus, is the data analysis and community support center for NASA's Spitzer Space Telescope.\nCaltech partnered with UCLA to establish a Joint Center for Translational Medicine (UCLA-Caltech JCTM), which conducts experimental research into clinical applications, including the diagnosis and treatment of diseases such as cancer.\nCaltech operates several TCCON stations as part of an international collaborative effort of measuring greenhouse gases globally. One station is on campus.\nUndergraduates at Caltech are also encouraged to participate in research. About 80% of the class of 2010 did research through the annual Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships (SURF) program at least once during their stay, and many continued during the school year. Students write and submit SURF proposals for research projects in collaboration with professors, and about 70 percent of applicants are awarded SURFs. The program is open to both Caltech and non-Caltech undergraduate students. It serves as preparation for graduate school and helps to explain why Caltech has the highest percentage of alumni who go on to receive a PhD of all the major universities.\nThe licensing and transferring of technology to the commercial sector is managed by the Office of Technology Transfer (OTT). OTT protects and manages the intellectual property developed by faculty members, students, other researchers, and JPL technologists. Caltech receives more invention disclosures per faculty member than any other university in the nation. , 1891 patents were granted to Caltech researchers since 1969.\nStudent life.\nHouse system.\nDuring the early 20th century, a Caltech committee visited several universities and decided to transform the undergraduate housing system from fraternities to a house system. Four south houses (or \"hovses\", as styled in the stone engravings) were built: Blacker House, Dabney House, Fleming House and Ricketts House. In the 1960s, three north houses were built: Lloyd House, Page House, and Ruddock House, and during the 1990s, Avery House. The four south houses closed for renovation in 2005 and reopened in 2006. The latest addition to residential life at Caltech is Bechtel Residence, which opened in 2018. It is not affiliated with the house system. All first- and second-year students live on campus in the house system or in the Bechtel Residence.\nOn account of Albert B. Ruddock's affiliation with the Human Betterment Foundation, in January 2021, the Caltech Board of Trustees authorized the removal of Ruddock's name from campus buildings.\nAthletics.\nCaltech has athletic teams in baseball, men's and women's basketball, cross country, men's and women's soccer, swimming and diving, men's and women's tennis, track and field, women's volleyball, and men's and women's water polo. Caltech's mascot is the Beaver, a homage to nature's engineer. Its teams are members of the NCAA Division III and compete in the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SCIAC), which Caltech co-founded in 1915.\nOn January 6, 2007, the Beavers' men's basketball team snapped a 207-game losing streak to Division III schools, beating Bard College 81\u201352. It was their first Division III victory since 1996.\nUntil their win over Occidental College on February 22, 2011 the team had not won a game in SCIAC play since 1985. Ryan Elmquist's free throw with 3.3 seconds in regulation gave the Beavers the victory. The documentary film \"Quantum Hoops\" concerns the events of the Beavers' 2005\u201306 season.\nOn January 13, 2007, the Caltech women's basketball team snapped a 50-game losing streak, defeating the Pomona-Pitzer Sagehens 55\u201353. The women's program, which entered the SCIAC in 2002, garnered their first conference win. On the bench as honorary coach for the evening was Dr. Robert Grubbs, 2005 Nobel laureate in Chemistry. The team went on to beat Whittier College on February 10, for its second SCIAC win, and placed its first member on the All Conference team. The 2006\u20132007 season is the most successful season in the history of the program.\nIn 2007, 2008, and 2009, the women's table tennis team (a club team) competed in nationals. The women's Ultimate club team, known as \"Snatch\", has also been very successful in recent years, ranking 44 of over 200 college teams in the Ultimate Player's Association.\nOn February 2, 2013, the Caltech baseball team ended a 228-game losing streak, the team's first win in nearly 10 years.\nThe track and field team plays at the South Athletic Field in Tournament Park, the site of the first Rose Bowl Game.\nThe school also sponsored a football team prior to 1976, which played part of its home schedule at the Rose Bowl, or, as Caltech students put it, \"to the largest number of empty seats in the nation\".\nPerforming and visual arts.\nThe Caltech/Occidental College Orchestra is a full seventy-piece orchestra composed of students, faculty, and staff at Caltech and nearby Occidental College. The orchestra gives three pairs of concerts annually, at both Caltech and Occidental College. There are also two Caltech Jazz Bands and a Concert Band, as well as an active chamber music program. For vocal music, Caltech has a mixed-voice Glee Club and the smaller Chamber Singers. The theater program at Caltech is known as TACIT, or Theater Arts at the California Institute of Technology. There are two to three plays organized by TACIT per year, and they were involved in the production of the , released in 2011.\nStudent life traditions.\nAnnual events.\nEvery Halloween, Dabney House conducts the infamous \"Millikan pumpkin-drop experiment\" from the top of Millikan Library, the highest point on campus. According to tradition, a claim was once made that the shattering of a pumpkin frozen in liquid nitrogen and dropped from a sufficient height would produce a triboluminescent spark. This yearly event involves a crowd of observers, who try to spot the elusive spark. The title of the event is an oblique reference to the famous Millikan oil-drop experiment which measured \"e\", the elemental unit of electrical charge.\nOn Ditch Day, the seniors ditch school, leaving behind elaborately designed tasks and traps at the doors of their rooms to prevent underclassmen from entering. Over the years this has evolved to the point where many seniors spend months designing mechanical, electrical, and software obstacles to confound the underclassmen. Each group of seniors designs a \"stack\" to be solved by a handful of underclassmen. The faculty have been drawn into the event as well, and cancel all classes on Ditch Day so the underclassmen can participate in what has become a highlight of the academic year.\nAnother long-standing tradition is the playing of Wagner's \"Ride of the Valkyries\" at 7:00 each morning during finals week with the largest, loudest speakers available. The playing of that piece is not allowed at any other time (except if one happens to be listening to the entire 14 hours and 5 minutes of \"The Ring Cycle\"), and any offender is dragged into the showers to be drenched in cold water fully dressed. \nPranks.\nCaltech students have been known for their many pranks (also known as \"RFs\").\nThe two most famous in recent history are the changing of the Hollywood Sign to read \"Caltech\", by judiciously covering up certain parts of the letters, and the changing of the scoreboard to read Caltech 38, MIT 9 during the 1984 Rose Bowl Game. But the most famous of all occurred during the 1961 Rose Bowl Game, where Caltech students altered the flip-cards that were raised by the stadium attendees to display \"Caltech\", and several other \"unintended\" messages. This event is now referred to as the Great Rose Bowl Hoax.\nIn recent years, pranking has been officially encouraged by Tom Mannion, Caltech's Assistant VP for Student Affairs and Campus Life. \"The grand old days of pranking have gone away at Caltech, and that's what we are trying to bring back,\" reported the \"Boston Globe\".\nIn December 2011, Caltech students went to New York and pulled a prank in Manhattan's Greenwich Village. The prank involved making The Cube sculpture look like the Aperture Science Weighted Companion Cube from the video game \"Portal\".\nCaltech pranks have been documented in three Legends of Caltech books, the most recent of which was edited by alumni Autumn Looijen '99 and Mason Porter '98 and published in May 2007.\nRivalry with MIT.\nIn 2005, a group of Caltech students pulled a string of pranks during MIT's Campus Preview Weekend for admitted students. These include covering up the word Massachusetts in the \"Massachusetts Institute of Technology\" engraving on the main building fa\u00e7ade with a banner so that it read \"That Other Institute of Technology\". A group of MIT hackers responded by altering the banner so that the inscription read \"The Only Institute of Technology.\" Caltech students also passed out T-shirts to MIT's incoming freshman class that had MIT written on the front and \"...because not everyone can go to Caltech\" along with an image of a palm tree on the back.\nMIT retaliated in April 2006, when students posing as the Howe &amp; Ser (Howitzer) Moving Company stole the 130-year-old, 1.7-ton Fleming House cannon and moved it over 3000 miles to their campus in Cambridge, Massachusetts for their 2006 Campus Preview Weekend, repeating a similar prank performed by nearby Harvey Mudd College in 1986. Thirty members of Fleming House traveled to MIT and reclaimed their cannon on April 10, 2006.\nOn April 13, 2007 (Friday the 13th), a group of students from \"The California Tech\", Caltech's campus newspaper, arrived and distributed fake copies of \"The Tech\", MIT's campus newspaper, while prospective students were visiting for their Campus Preview Weekend. Articles included \"MIT Invents the Interweb\", \"Architects Deem Campus 'Unfortunate'\", and \"Infinite Corridor Not Actually Infinite\".\nIn December 2009, some Caltech students declared that MIT had been sold and had become the Caltech East campus. A \"sold\" banner was hung on front of the MIT dome building and a \"Welcome to Caltech East: School of the Humanities\" banner over the Massachusetts Avenue Entrance. Newspapers and T-shirts were distributed, and door labels and fliers in the infinite corridor were put up in accordance with the \"curriculum change.\"\nIn September 2010, MIT students attempted to put a TARDIS, the time machine from the BBC's \"Doctor Who\", onto a roof. Caught in midact, the prank was aborted. In January 2011, Caltech students in conjunction with MIT students helped put the TARDIS on top of Baxter. Caltech students then moved the TARDIS to UC Berkeley and Stanford.\nIn April 2014, during MIT's Campus Preview Weekend, a group of Caltech students handed out mugs emblazoned with the MIT logo on the front and the words \"The Institute of Technology\" on the back. When heated, the mugs turn orange, display a palm tree, and read \"Caltech The Hotter Institute of Technology.\" Identical mugs continue to be sold at the Caltech campus store.\nHonor code.\nLife in the Caltech community is governed by the honor code, which simply states: \"No member of the Caltech community shall take unfair advantage of any other member of the Caltech community.\" This is enforced by a Board of Control, which consists of undergraduate students, and by a similar body at the graduate level, called the Graduate Honor Council.\nThe honor code aims at promoting an atmosphere of respect and trust that allows Caltech students to enjoy privileges that make for a more relaxed atmosphere. For example, the honor code allows professors to make the majority of exams as take-home, allowing students to take them on their own schedule and in their preferred environment.\nThrough the late 1990s, the only exception to the honor code, implemented earlier in the decade in response to changes in federal regulations, concerned the sexual harassment policy. Today, there are myriad exceptions to the honor code in the form of new Institute policies such as the fire policy and alcohol policy. Although both policies are presented in the Honor System Handbook given to new members of the Caltech community, some undergraduates regard them as a slight against the honor code and the implicit trust and respect it represents within the community. In recent years, the Student Affairs Office has also taken up pursuing investigations independently of the Board of Control and Conduct Review Committee, an implicit violation of both the honor code and written disciplinary policy that has contributed to further erosion of trust between some parts of the undergraduate community and the administration.\nNotable people.\n, Caltech has 40 Nobel laureates to its name awarded to 24 alumni, which includes 5 Caltech professors who are also alumni (Carl D. Anderson, Linus Pauling, William A. Fowler, Edward B. Lewis, and Kip Thorne), and 16 non-alumni professors. The total number of Nobel Prizes is 41 because Pauling received prizes in both Chemistry and Peace. Eight faculty and alumni have received a Crafoord Prize from the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, while 58 have been awarded the U.S. National Medal of Science, and 11 have received the National Medal of Technology. One alumnus, Stanislav Smirnov, won the Fields Medal in 2010. Other distinguished researchers have been affiliated with Caltech as postdoctoral scholars (for example, Barbara McClintock, James D. Watson, Sheldon Glashow and John Gurdon) or visiting professors (for example, Albert Einstein, Stephen Hawking and Edward Witten).\nStudents.\nCaltech enrolled 938 undergraduate students and 1,299 graduate students for the 2019\u20132020 school year. Women made up 45% of the undergraduate and 31% of the graduate student body. The racial demographics of the school substantially differ from those of the nation as a whole.\nThe four-year graduation rate is 79% and the six-year rate is 92%, which is low compared to most leading U.S. universities, but substantially higher than it was in the 1960s and 1970s. Students majoring in STEM fields traditionally have graduation rates below 70%.\nAlumni.\nThere are 22,930 total living alumni in the U.S. and around the world. As of October 2020, 24 alumni and 16 non-alumni faculty have won the Nobel Prize. The Turing Award, the \"Nobel Prize of Computer Science\", has been awarded to six alumni, and one has won the Fields Medal.\nMany alumni have participated in scientific research. Some have concentrated their studies on the very small universe of atoms and molecules. Nobel laureate Carl D. Anderson (BS 1927, PhD 1930) proved the existence of positrons and muons, Nobel laureate Edwin McMillan (BS 1928, MS 1929) synthesized the first transuranium element, Nobel laureate Leo James Rainwater (BS 1939) investigated the non-spherical shapes of atomic nuclei, and Nobel laureate Douglas D. Osheroff (BS 1967) studied the superfluid nature of helium-3. Donald Knuth (PhD 1963), the \"father\" of the analysis of algorithms, wrote \"The Art of Computer Programming\" and created the TeX computer typesetting system, which is commonly used in the scientific community. Bruce Reznick (BS 1973) is a mathematician noted for his contributions to number theory and the combinatorial-algebraic-analytic investigations of\u00a0polynomials. Narendra Karmarkar (MS 1979) is known for the interior point method, a polynomial algorithm for linear programming known as Karmarkar's algorithm.\nOther alumni have turned their gaze to the universe. C. Gordon Fullerton (BS 1957, MS 1958) piloted the third Space Shuttle mission. Astronaut (and later, United States Senator) Harrison Schmitt (BS 1957) was the only geologist to have ever walked on the surface of the moon. Astronomer Eugene Merle Shoemaker (BS 1947, MS 1948) co-discovered Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 (a comet which crashed into the planet Jupiter) and was the first person buried on the moon (by having his ashes crashed into the moon). Astronomer George O. Abell (BS 1951, MS 1952, PhD 1957) while a grad student at Caltech participated in the National Geographic Society-Palomar Sky Survey. This ultimately resulted in the publication of the \"Abell Catalogue of Clusters of Galaxies,\" the definitive work in the field.\nUndergraduate alumni founded, or co-founded, companies such as LCD manufacturer Varitronix, Hotmail, Compaq, and MathWorks (which created Matlab), while graduate students founded, or co-founded, companies such as Intel, TRW, and the non-profit educational organization, the Exploratorium.\nArnold Beckman (PhD 1928) invented the pH meter and commercialized it with the founding of Beckman Instruments. His success with that company enabled him to provide seed funding for William Shockley (BS 1932), who had co-invented semiconductor transistors and wanted to commercialize them. Shockley became the founding Director of the Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory division of Beckman Instruments. Shockley had previously worked at Bell Labs, whose first president was another alumnus, Frank Jewett (BS 1898). Because his aging mother lived in Palo Alto, California, Shockley established his laboratory near her in Mountain View, California. Shockley was a co-recipient of the Nobel Prize in physics in 1956, but his aggressive management style and odd personality at the Shockley Lab became unbearable. In late 1957, eight of his researchers resigned and with support from Sherman Fairchild formed Fairchild Semiconductor. Among the \"traitorous eight\" was Gordon E. Moore (PhD 1954), who later left Fairchild to co-found Intel. Other offspring companies of Fairchild Semiconductor include National Semiconductor and Advanced Micro Devices, which in turn spawned more technology companies in the area. Shockley's decision to use silicon instead of germanium as the semiconductor material, coupled with the abundance of silicon semiconductor related companies in the area, gave rise to the term \"Silicon Valley\" to describe that geographic region surrounding Palo Alto.\nCaltech alumni also held public offices, with Mustafa A.G. Abushagur (PhD 1984) the Deputy Prime Minister of Libya and Prime Minister-Elect of Libya, James Fletcher (PhD 1948) the 4th and 7th Administrator of NASA, Steven Koonin (PhD 1972) the Undersecretary of Energy for Science, and Regina Dugan (PhD 1993) the 19th director of DARPA. The 20th director for DARPA, Arati Prabhakar, is also a Caltech alumna (PhD 1984) as well as Charles Elachi (Phd 1971), former director of the Jet Propulsion Lab. Arvind Virmani is a former Chief Economic Adviser to the Government of India. In 2013, President Obama announced the nomination of France Cordova (PhD 1979) as the director of the National Science Foundation and Ellen Williams (PhD 1982) as the director for ARPA-E.\nFaculty and staff.\nRichard Feynman was among the most well-known physicists associated with Caltech, having published the \"Feynman Lectures on Physics\", an undergraduate physics text, and popular science texts such as \"Six Easy Pieces\" for the general audience. The promotion of physics made him a public figure of science, although his Nobel-winning work in quantum electrodynamics was already very established in the scientific community. Murray Gell-Mann, a Nobel-winning physicist, introduced a classification of hadrons and went on to postulate the existence of quarks, which is currently accepted as part of the Standard Model. Long-time Caltech President Robert Andrews Millikan was the first to calculate the charge of the electron with his well-known oil-drop experiment, while Richard Chace Tolman is remembered for his contributions to cosmology and statistical mechanics. 2004 Nobel Prize in Physics winner H. David Politzer is a current professor at Caltech, as is astrophysicist and author Kip Thorne and eminent mathematician Barry Simon. Linus Pauling pioneered quantum chemistry and molecular biology, and went on to discover the nature of the chemical bond in 1939. Seismologist Charles Richter, also an alumnus, developed the magnitude scale that bears his name, the Richter magnitude scale for measuring the power of earthquakes. One of the founders of the geochemistry department, Clair Patterson was the first to accurately determine the age of the Earth via lead:uranium ratio in meteorites. In engineering, Theodore von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n made many key advances in aerodynamics, notably his work on supersonic and hypersonic airflow characterization. A repeating pattern of swirling vortices is named after him, the von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n vortex street. Participants in von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n's GALCIT project included Frank Malina, who helped develop the WAC Corporal, which was the first U.S. rocket to reach the edge of space, Jack Parsons, a pioneer in the development of liquid and solid rocket fuels who designed the first castable composite-based rocket motor, and Qian Xuesen, who was dubbed the \"Father of Chinese Rocketry\". More recently, Michael Brown, a professor of planetary astronomy, discovered many trans-Neptunian objects, most notably the dwarf planet Eris, which prompted the International Astronomical Union to redefine the term \"planet\".\nDavid Baltimore, the Robert A. Millikan Professor of Biology, and Alice Huang, Senior Faculty Associate in Biology, served as the presidents of AAAS from 2007 to 2008 and 2010 to 2011, respectively.\n33% of the faculty are members of the National Academy of Science or Engineering and/or fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. This is the highest percentage of any faculty in the country with the exception of the graduate institution Rockefeller University.\nThe average salary for assistant professors at Caltech is $111,300, associate professors $121,300, and full professors $172,800. Caltech faculty are active in applied physics, astronomy and astrophysics, biology, biochemistry, biological engineering, chemical engineering, computer science, geology, mechanical engineering and physics.\nCaltech startups.\nOver the years Caltech has actively promoted the commercialization of technologies developed within its walls. Through its Office of Technology Transfer &amp; Corporate Partnerships, scientific breakthroughs have led to the transfer of numerous technologies in a wide variety of scientific-related fields such as photovoltaic, radio-frequency identification (RFID), semiconductors, hyperspectral imaging, electronic devices, protein design, solid state amplifiers and many more. Companies such as Contour Energy Systems, Impinj, Fulcrum Microsystems, Nanosys, Inc., Photon etc., Xencor, and Wavestream Wireless have emerged from Caltech.\nIn media and popular culture.\nCaltech has appeared in many works of popular culture, both as itself and in disguised form. On television, it plays a prominent role and is the workplace of all four male lead characters and one female lead character in the sitcom \"The Big Bang Theory\". Caltech is also the inspiration, and frequent film location, for the California Institute of Science in \"Numb3rs\". On film, the Pacific Tech of \"The War of the Worlds\" and \"Real Genius\" is based on Caltech.\nIn nonfiction, two 2007 documentaries examine aspects of Caltech: \"Curious\", its researchers, and \"Quantum Hoops\", its men's basketball team.\nGiven its Los Angeles-area location, the grounds of the Institute are often host to short scenes in movies and television. The Athenaeum dining club appears in the \"Beverly Hills Cop\" series, \"The X-Files\", \"True Romance\", and \"The West Wing\"."}
{"id": "5788", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5788", "title": "Cretaceous-Tertiary Extinction Event", "text": ""}
{"id": "5790", "revid": "1016715059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5790", "title": "Carlo Goldoni", "text": "Carlo Osvaldo Goldoni (, , ; 25 February 1707 \u2013 6 February 1793) was an Italian playwright and librettist from the Republic of Venice. His works include some of Italy's most famous and best-loved plays. Audiences have admired the plays of Goldoni for their ingenious mix of wit and honesty. His plays offered his contemporaries images of themselves, often dramatizing the lives, values, and conflicts of the emerging middle classes. Though he wrote in French and Italian, his plays make rich use of the Venetian language, regional vernacular, and colloquialisms. Goldoni also wrote under the pen name and title \"Polisseno Fegeio, Pastor Arcade\", which he claimed in his memoirs the \"Arcadians of Rome\" bestowed on him.\nBiography.\nMemoirs.\nThere is an abundance of autobiographical information on Goldoni, most of which comes from the introductions to his plays and from his \"Memoirs\". However, these memoirs are known to contain many errors of fact, especially about his earlier years.\nIn these memoirs, he paints himself as a born comedian, careless, light-hearted and with a happy temperament, proof against all strokes of fate, yet thoroughly respectable and honorable.\nEarly life and studies.\nGoldoni was born in Venice in 1707, the son of Margherita Salvioni (or Saioni) and Giulio Goldoni. In his memoirs, Goldoni describes his father as a physician, and claims that he was introduced to theatre by his grandfather Carlo Alessandro Goldoni. In reality, it seems that Giulio was an apothecary; as for the grandfather, he had died four years before Carlo's birth. In any case, Goldoni was deeply interested in theatre from his earliest years, and all attempts to direct his activity into other channels were of no avail; his toys were puppets, and his books, plays.\nHis father placed him under the care of the philosopher Caldini at Rimini but the youth soon ran away with a company of strolling players and returned to Venice. In 1723 his father matriculated him into the stern Collegio Ghislieri in Pavia, which imposed the tonsure and monastic habits on its students. However, he relates in his \"Memoirs\" that a considerable part of his time was spent in reading Greek and Latin comedies. He had already begun writing at this time and, in his third year, he composed a libellous poem (\"Il colosso\") in which he ridiculed the daughters of certain Pavian families. As a result of that incident (and/or of a visit paid with some schoolmates to a local brothel) he was expelled from the school and had to leave the city (1725). He studied law at Udine, and eventually took his degree at University of Modena. He was employed as a law clerk at Chioggia and Feltre, after which he returned to his native city and began practicing.\nEducated as a lawyer, and holding lucrative positions as secretary and counsellor, he seemed, indeed, at one time to have settled down to the practice of law, but following an unexpected summons to Venice, after an absence of several years, he changed his career, and thenceforth he devoted himself to writing plays and managing theatres. His father died in 1731. In 1732, to avoid an unwanted marriage, he left the town for Milan and then for Verona where the theatre manager Giuseppe Imer helped him on his way to becoming a comical poet as well as introducing him to his future wife, Nicoletta Conio. Goldoni returned with her to Venice, where he stayed until 1743.\nTheatrical career.\nGoldoni entered the Italian theatre scene with a tragedy, \"Amalasunta\", produced in Milan. The play was a critical and financial failure.\nSubmitting it to Count Prata, director of the opera, he was told that his piece \"was composed with due regard for the rules of Aristotle and Horace, but not according to those laid down for the Italian drama.\" \"In France\", continued the count, \"you can try to please the public, but here in Italy it is the actors and actresses whom you must consult, as well as the composer of the music and the stage decorators. Everything must be done according to a certain form which I will explain to you.\"\nGoldoni thanked his critic, went back to his inn and ordered a fire, into which he threw the manuscript of his \"Amalasunta\".\nHis next play, \"Belisario\", written in 1734, was more successful, though of its success he afterward professed himself ashamed.\nDuring this period he also wrote librettos for opera seria and served for a time as literary director of the San Giovanni Grisostomo, Venice's most distinguished opera house.\nHe wrote other tragedies for a time, but he was not long in discovering that his bent was for comedy. He had come to realize that the Italian stage needed reforming; adopting Moli\u00e8re as his model, he went to work in earnest and in 1738 produced his first real comedy, \"L'uomo di mondo\" (\"The Man of the World\"). During his many wanderings and adventures in Italy, he was constantly at work and when, at Livorno, he became acquainted with the manager Medebac, he determined to pursue the profession of playwriting in order to make a living. He was employed by Medebac to write plays for his theater in Venice. He worked for other managers and produced during his stay in that city some of his most characteristic works. He also wrote \"Momolo Cortesan\" in 1738. By 1743, he had perfected his hybrid style of playwriting (combining the model of Moli\u00e8re with the strengths of Commedia dell'arte and his own wit and sincerity). This style was typified in \"La Donna di garbo\", the first Italian comedy of its kind.\nAfter 1748, Goldoni collaborated with the composer Baldassare Galuppi, making significant contributions to the new form of 'opera buffa'. Galuppi composed the score for more than twenty of Goldoni's librettos. As with his comedies, Goldoni's \"opera buffa\" integrate elements of the Commedia dell'arte with recognisable local and middle-class realities. His operatic works include two of the most successful musical comedies of the eighteenth century, \"Il filosofo di campagna\" (\"The Country Philosopher\"), set by Galuppi (1752) and \"La buona figliuola\" (\"The Good Girl\"), set by Niccol\u00f2 Piccinni (1760).\nIn 1753, following his return from Bologna, he defected to the Teatro San Luca of the Vendramin family, where he performed most of his plays to 1762.\nMove to France and death.\nIn 1757, he engaged in a bitter dispute with playwright Carlo Gozzi, which left him utterly disgusted with the tastes of his countrymen; so much so that in 1761 he moved to Paris, where he received a position at court and was put in charge of the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien. He spent the rest of his life in France, composing most of his plays in French and writing his memoirs in that language.\nAmong the plays which he wrote in French, the most successful was \"Le bourru bienfaisant\", dedicated to the Marie Ad\u00e9la\u00efde, a daughter of Louis XV and aunt to the dauphin, the future Louis XVI of France. It premiered on 4 February 1771, almost nine months after the dauphin's marriage to Marie Antoinette. Goldoni enjoyed considerable popularity in France; in 1769, when he retired to Versailles, the King gave him a pension. He lost this pension after the French Revolution. The Convention eventually voted to restore his pension the day after his death. It was restored to his widow, at the pleading of the poet Andr\u00e9 Ch\u00e9nier; \"She is old\", he urged, \"she is seventy-six, and her husband has left her no heritage save his illustrious name, his virtues and his poverty.\"\nGoldoni's impact on Italian theatre.\nIn his \"Memoirs\" Goldoni amply discusses the state of Italian comedy when he began writing. At that time, Italian comedy revolved around the conventionality of the Commedia dell'arte, or improvised comedy. Goldoni took to himself the task of superseding the comedy of masks and the comedy of intrigue by representations of actual life and manners through the characters and their behaviors. He rightly maintained that Italian life and manners were susceptible of artistic treatment such as had not been given them before.\nHis works are a lasting monument to the changes that he initiated: a dramatic revolution that had been attempted but not achieved before. Goldoni's importance lay in providing good examples rather than precepts. Goldoni says that he took for his models the plays of Moli\u00e8re and that whenever a piece of his own succeeded he whispered to himself: \"Good, but not yet Moli\u00e8re.\" Goldoni's plays are gentler and more optimistic in tone than Moli\u00e8re's.\nIt was this very success that was the object of harsh critiques by Carlo Gozzi, who accused Goldoni of having deprived the Italian theatre of the charms of poetry and imagination. The great success of Gozzi's fairy dramas so irritated Goldoni that it led to his self-exile to France.\nGoldoni gave to his country a classical form, which, though it has since been cultivated, has yet to be cultivated by a master.\nThemes.\nGoldoni's plays that were written while he was still in Italy ignore religious and ecclesiastical subjects. This may be surprising, considering his staunch Catholic upbringing. No thoughts are expressed about death or repentance in his memoirs or in his comedies. After his move to France, his position became clearer, as his plays took on a clear anti-clerical tone and often satirized the hypocrisy of monks and of the Church.\nGoldoni was inspired by his love of humanity and the admiration he had for his fellow men. He wrote, and was obsessed with, the relationships that humans establish with one another, their cities and homes, the Humanist movement, and the study of philosophy. The moral and civil values that Goldoni promotes in his plays are those of rationality, civility, humanism, the importance of the rising middle-class, a progressive stance to state affairs, honor and honesty. Goldoni had a dislike for arrogance, intolerance and the abuse of power.\nGoldoni's main characters are no abstract examples of human virtue, nor monstrous examples of human vice. They occupy the middle ground of human temperament. Goldoni maintains an acute sensibility for the differences in social classes between his characters as well as environmental and generational changes. Goldoni pokes fun at the arrogant nobility and the pauper who lacks dignity.\nVenetian and Tuscan.\nAs in other theatrical works of the time and place, the characters in Goldoni's Italian comedies spoke originally either the literary Tuscan variety (which became modern Italian) or the Venetian dialect, depending on their station in life. However, in some printed editions of his plays he often turned the Venetian texts into Tuscan, too.\nGoldoni in popular culture.\nOne of his best known works is the comic play \"Servant of Two Masters\", which has been translated and adapted internationally numerous times. In 1966 it was adapted into an opera buffa by the American composer Vittorio Giannini. In 2011, Richard Bean adapted the play for the National Theatre of Great Britain as \"One Man, Two Guvnors\". Its popularity led to a transfer to the West End and in 2012 to Broadway.\nThe film \"Carlo Goldoni \u2013 Venice, Grand Theatre of the World\", directed by Alessandro Bettero, was released in 2007 and is available in English, Italian, French, and Japanese.\nSelected works.\nThe following is a small sampling of Goldoni's enormous output."}
{"id": "5792", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5792", "title": "Continuous probability distribution", "text": ""}
{"id": "5793", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5793", "title": "Cumulative distribution function", "text": "In probability theory and statistics, the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of a real-valued random variable formula_1, or just distribution function of formula_1, evaluated at formula_3, is the probability that formula_1 will take a value less than or equal to formula_3.\nEvery probability distribution supported on the real numbers, discrete or \"mixed\" as well as continuous, is uniquely identified by an upwards continuous monotonic increasing cumulative distribution function formula_6 satisfying formula_7 and formula_8.\nIn the case of a scalar continuous distribution, it gives the area under the probability density function from minus infinity to formula_3. Cumulative distribution functions are also used to specify the distribution of multivariate random variables.\nDefinition.\nThe cumulative distribution function of a real-valued random variable formula_1 is the function given by\nwhere the right-hand side represents the probability that the random variable formula_1 takes on a value less than or\nequal to formula_3. The probability that formula_1 lies in the semi-closed interval formula_14, where formula_15, is therefore\nIn the definition above, the \"less than or equal to\" sign, \"\u2264\", is a convention, not a universally used one (e.g. Hungarian literature uses \"&lt;\"), but the distinction is important for discrete distributions. The proper use of tables of the binomial and Poisson distributions depends upon this convention. Moreover, important formulas like Paul L\u00e9vy's inversion formula for the characteristic function also rely on the \"less than or equal\" formulation.\nIf treating several random variables formula_16 etc. the corresponding letters are used as subscripts while, if treating only one, the subscript is usually omitted. It is conventional to use a capital formula_17 for a cumulative distribution function, in contrast to the lower-case formula_18 used for probability density functions and probability mass functions. This applies when discussing general distributions: some specific distributions have their own conventional notation, for example the normal distribution uses formula_19 and formula_20 instead of formula_17 and formula_18, respectively.\nThe probability density function of a continuous random variable can be determined from the cumulative distribution function by differentiating using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus; i.e. given formula_23,\nas long as the derivative exists.\nThe CDF of a continuous random variable formula_1 can be expressed as the integral of its probability density function formula_26 as follows:\nIn the case of a random variable formula_1 which has distribution having a discrete component at a value formula_29,\nIf formula_31 is continuous at formula_29, this equals zero and there is no discrete component at formula_29.\nProperties.\nEvery cumulative distribution function formula_31 is non-decreasing and right-continuous, which makes it a c\u00e0dl\u00e0g function. Furthermore,\nEvery function with these four properties is a CDF, i.e., for every such function, a random variable can be defined such that the function is the cumulative distribution function of that random variable.\nIf formula_1 is a purely discrete random variable, then it attains values formula_37 with probability formula_38, and the CDF of formula_1 will be discontinuous at the points formula_40:\nIf the CDF formula_31 of a real valued random variable formula_1 is continuous, then formula_1 is a continuous random variable; if furthermore formula_31 is absolutely continuous, then there exists a Lebesgue-integrable function formula_46 such that\nfor all real numbers formula_48 and formula_29. The function formula_26 is equal to the derivative of formula_31 almost everywhere, and it is called the probability density function of the distribution of formula_1.\nExamples.\nAs an example, suppose formula_1 is uniformly distributed on the unit interval formula_54.\nThen the CDF of formula_1 is given by\nSuppose instead that formula_1 takes only the discrete values 0 and 1, with equal probability.\nThen the CDF of formula_1 is given by\nSuppose formula_1 is exponential distributed. Then the CDF of formula_1 is given by\nHere \u03bb &gt; 0 is the parameter of the distribution, often called the rate parameter.\nSuppose formula_1 is normal distributed. Then the CDF of formula_1 is given by\nHere the parameter formula_66 \u00a0is the mean or expectation of the distribution; and formula_67 \u00a0is its standard deviation.\nSuppose formula_1 is binomial distributed. Then the CDF of formula_1 is given by\nHere formula_71 is the probability of success and the function denotes the discrete probability distribution of the number of successes in a sequence of formula_72 independent experiments, and formula_73 is the \"floor\" under formula_74, i.e. the greatest integer less than or equal to formula_74.\nDerived functions.\nComplementary cumulative distribution function (tail distribution).\nSometimes, it is useful to study the opposite question and ask how often the random variable is \"above\" a particular level. This is called the complementary cumulative distribution function (ccdf) or simply the tail distribution or exceedance, and is defined as\nThis has applications in statistical hypothesis testing, for example, because the one-sided p-value is the probability of observing a test statistic \"at least\" as extreme as the one observed. Thus, provided that the test statistic, \"T\", has a continuous distribution, the one-sided p-value is simply given by the ccdf: for an observed value formula_77 of the test statistic\nIn survival analysis, formula_79 is called the survival function and denoted formula_80, while the term \"reliability function\" is common in engineering.\nZ-table:\nOne of the most popular application of cumulative distribution function is standard normal table, also called the unit normal table or Z table, is the value of cumulative distribution function of the normal distribution. It is very useful to use Z-table not only for probabilities below a value which is the original application of cumulative distribution function, but also above and/or between values on standard normal distribution, and it was further extended to any normal distribution.\nFolded cumulative distribution.\nWhile the plot of a cumulative distribution often has an S-like shape, an alternative illustration is the folded cumulative distribution or mountain plot, which folds the top half of the graph over,\nthus using two scales, one for the upslope and another for the downslope. This form of illustration emphasises the median and dispersion (specifically, the mean absolute deviation from the median) of the distribution or of the empirical results.\nInverse distribution function (quantile function).\nIf the CDF \"F\" is strictly increasing and continuous then formula_91 is the unique real number formula_92 such that formula_93. In such a case, this defines the inverse distribution function or quantile function.\nSome distributions do not have a unique inverse (for example in the case where formula_94 for all &lt;math&gt;a&lt;x, causing formula_31 to be constant). This problem can be solved by defining, for formula_96, the generalized inverse distribution function:\nSome useful properties of the inverse cdf (which are also preserved in the definition of the generalized inverse distribution function) are:\nThe inverse of the cdf can be used to translate results obtained for the uniform distribution to other distributions.\nEmpirical distribution function.\nThe empirical distribution function is an estimate of the cumulative distribution function that generated the points in the sample. It converges with probability 1 to that underlying distribution. A number of results exist to quantify the rate of convergence of the empirical distribution function to the underlying cumulative distribution function.\nMultivariate case.\nDefinition for two random variables.\nWhen dealing simultaneously with more than one random variable the joint cumulative distribution function can also be defined. For example, for a pair of random variables formula_117, the joint CDF formula_118 is given by\nwhere the right-hand side represents the probability that the random variable formula_1 takes on a value less than or\nequal to formula_3 and that formula_106 takes on a value less than or\nequal to formula_122.\nExample of joint cumulative distribution function: \nFor two continuous variables \"X\" and \"Y\": formula_123 random variables formula_124, the joint CDF formula_125 is given by\nInterpreting the formula_126 random variables as a random vector formula_127 yields a shorter notation:\nProperties.\nEvery multivariate CDF is:\nThe probability that a point belongs to a hyperrectangle is analogous to the 1-dimensional case:\nComplex case.\nComplex random variable.\nThe generalization of the cumulative distribution function from real to complex random variables is not obvious because expressions of the form formula_132 make no sense. However expressions of the form formula_133 make sense. Therefore, we define the cumulative distribution of a complex random variables via the joint distribution of their real and imaginary parts:\nComplex random vector.\nGeneralization of yields\nas definition for the CDS of a complex random vector formula_136.\nUse in statistical analysis.\nThe concept of the cumulative distribution function makes an explicit appearance in statistical analysis in two (similar) ways. Cumulative frequency analysis is the analysis of the frequency of occurrence of values of a phenomenon less than a reference value. The empirical distribution function is a formal direct estimate of the cumulative distribution function for which simple statistical properties can be derived and which can form the basis of various statistical hypothesis tests. Such tests can assess whether there is evidence against a sample of data having arisen from a given distribution, or evidence against two samples of data having arisen from the same (unknown) population distribution.\nKolmogorov\u2013Smirnov and Kuiper's tests.\nThe Kolmogorov\u2013Smirnov test is based on cumulative distribution functions and can be used to test to see whether two empirical distributions are different or whether an empirical distribution is different from an ideal distribution. The closely related Kuiper's test is useful if the domain of the distribution is cyclic as in day of the week. For instance Kuiper's test might be used to see if the number of tornadoes varies during the year or if sales of a product vary by day of the week or day of the month."}
{"id": "5794", "revid": "38627444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5794", "title": "Central tendency", "text": "In statistics, a central tendency (or measure of central tendency) is a central or typical value for a probability distribution. It may also be called a center or location of the distribution. Colloquially, measures of central tendency are often called \"averages.\" The term \"central tendency\" dates from the late 1920s.\nThe most common measures of central tendency are the arithmetic mean, the median, and the mode. A middle tendency can be calculated for either a finite set of values or for a theoretical distribution, such as the normal distribution. Occasionally authors use central tendency to denote \"the tendency of quantitative data to cluster around some central value.\"\nThe central tendency of a distribution is typically contrasted with its \"dispersion\" or \"variability\"; dispersion and central tendency are the often characterized properties of distributions. Analysis may judge whether data has a strong or a weak central tendency based on its dispersion.\nMeasures.\nThe following may be applied to one-dimensional data. Depending on the circumstances, it may be appropriate to transform the data before calculating a central tendency. Examples are squaring the values or taking logarithms. Whether a transformation is appropriate and what it should be, depend heavily on the data being analyzed.\nAny of the above may be applied to each dimension of multi-dimensional data, but the results may not be invariant to rotations of the multi-dimensional space. In addition, there are the\nSolutions to variational problems.\nSeveral measures of central tendency can be characterized as solving a variational problem, in the sense of the calculus of variations, namely minimizing variation from the center. That is, given a measure of statistical dispersion, one asks for a measure of central tendency that minimizes variation: such that variation from the center is minimal among all choices of center. In a quip, \"dispersion precedes location\". These measures are initially defined in one dimension, but can be generalized to multiple dimensions. This center may or may not be unique. In the sense of spaces, the correspondence is:\nThe associated functions are called -norms: respectively 0-\"norm\", 1-norm, 2-norm, and \u221e-norm. The function corresponding to the 0 space is not a norm, and is thus often referred to in quotes: 0-\"norm\".\nIn equations, for a given (finite) data set , thought of as a vector , the dispersion about a point is the \"distance\" from to the constant vector in the -norm (normalized by the number of points ):\nFor and these functions are defined by taking limits, respectively as and . For the limiting values are and or , so the difference becomes simply equality, so the 0-norm counts the number of \"unequal\" points. For the largest number dominates, and thus the \u221e-norm is the maximum difference.\nUniqueness.\nThe mean (\"L\"2 center) and midrange (\"L\"\u221e center) are unique (when they exist), while the median (\"L\"1 center) and mode (\"L\"0 center) are not in general unique. This can be understood in terms of convexity of the associated functions (coercive functions).\nThe 2-norm and \u221e-norm are strictly convex, and thus (by convex optimization) the minimizer is unique (if it exists), and exists for bounded distributions. Thus standard deviation about the mean is lower than standard deviation about any other point, and the maximum deviation about the midrange is lower than the maximum deviation about any other point.\nThe 1-norm is not \"strictly\" convex, whereas strict convexity is needed to ensure uniqueness of the minimizer. Correspondingly, the median (in this sense of minimizing) is not in general unique, and in fact any point between the two central points of a discrete distribution minimizes average absolute deviation.\nThe 0-\"norm\" is not convex (hence not a norm). Correspondingly, the mode is not unique \u2013 for example, in a uniform distribution \"any\" point is the mode.\nClustering.\nInstead of a single central point, one can ask for multiple points such that the variation from these points is minimized. This leads to cluster analysis, where each point in the data set is clustered with the nearest \"center\". Most commonly, using the 2-norm generalizes the mean to \"k\"-means clustering, while using the 1-norm generalizes the (geometric) median to \"k\"-medians clustering. Using the 0-norm simply generalizes the mode (most common value) to using the \"k\" most common values as centers.\nUnlike the single-center statistics, this multi-center clustering cannot in general be computed in a closed-form expression, and instead must be computed or approximated by an iterative method; one general approach is expectation\u2013maximization algorithms.\nInformation geometry.\nThe notion of a \"center\" as minimizing variation can be generalized in information geometry as a distribution that minimizes divergence (a generalized distance) from a data set. The most common case is maximum likelihood estimation, where the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) maximizes likelihood (minimizes expected surprisal), which can be interpreted geometrically by using entropy to measure variation: the MLE minimizes cross entropy (equivalently, relative entropy, Kullback\u2013Leibler divergence).\nA simple example of this is for the center of nominal data: instead of using the mode (the only single-valued \"center\"), one often uses the empirical measure (the frequency distribution divided by the sample size) as a \"center\". For example, given binary data, say heads or tails, if a data set consists of 2 heads and 1 tails, then the mode is \"heads\", but the empirical measure is 2/3 heads, 1/3 tails, which minimizes the cross-entropy (total surprisal) from the data set. This perspective is also used in regression analysis, where least squares finds the solution that minimizes the distances from it, and analogously in logistic regression, a maximum likelihood estimate minimizes the surprisal (information distance).\nRelationships between the mean, median and mode.\nFor unimodal distributions the following bounds are known and are sharp:\nwhere \"\u03bc\" is the mean, \"\u03bd\" is the median, \"\u03b8\" is the mode, and \"\u03c3\" is the standard deviation.\nFor every distribution,"}
{"id": "5796", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5796", "title": "Celebrity", "text": "Celebrity is a condition of fame and broad public recognition of an individual or group, or occasionally a character or animal, as a result of the attention given to them by mass media. A person may attain a celebrity status from having great wealth, their participation in sports or the entertainment industry, their position as a political figure, or even from their connection to another celebrity. 'Celebrity' usually implies a favorable public image, as opposed to the neutrals 'famous' or 'notable', or the negatives 'infamous' and 'notorious'.\nHistory.\nIn his 2020 book \"Dead Famous: an unexpected history of celebrity\", British historian Greg Jenner uses the definition:\nAlthough his book is subtitled \"from Bronze Age to Silver Screen\", and despite the fact that \"Until very recently, sociologists argued that \"celebrity\" was invented just over 100 years ago, in the flickering glimmer of early Hollywood\" and the suggestion that some medieval saints might qualify, Jenner asserts that the earliest celebrities lived in the early 1700s, his first example being Henry Sacheverell.\nAthletes in Ancient Greece were welcomed home as heroes, had songs and poems written in their honor, and received free food and gifts from those seeking celebrity endorsement. Ancient Rome similarly lauded actors and notorious gladiators, and Julius Caesar appeared on a coin in his own lifetime (a departure from the usual depiction of battles and divine lineage).\nIn the early 12th century, Thomas Becket became famous following his murder. He was promoted by the Christian Church as a martyr and images of him and scenes from his life became widespread in just a few years. In a pattern often repeated, what started as an explosion of popularity (often referred to with the suffix 'mania') turned into long-lasting fame: pilgrimages to Canterbury Cathedral where he was killed became instantly fashionable and the fascination with his life and death have inspired plays and films.\nThe cult of personality (particularly in the west) can be traced back to the Romantics in the 18th century, whose livelihood as artists and poets depended on the currency of their reputation. The establishment of cultural hot-spots became an important factor in the process of generating fame: for example, London and Paris in the 18th and 19th centuries. Newspapers started including gossip columns and certain clubs and events became places to be seen in order to receive publicity.\nThe movie industry spread around the globe in the first half of the 20th century and now, the familiar concept of the instantly recognizable faces of its superstars. Yet, celebrity was not always tied to actors in films, especially when cinema was starting as a medium. As Paul McDonald states in \"The Star System: Hollywood's Production of Popular Identities\", \"in the first decade of the twentieth century, American film production companies withheld the names of film performers, despite requests from audiences, fearing that public recognition would drive performers to demand higher salaries.\" Public fascination went well beyond the on-screen exploits of movie stars and their private lives became headline news: for example, in Hollywood the marriages of Elizabeth Taylor and in Bollywood the affairs of Raj Kapoor in the 1950s.\nThe second half of the century saw television and popular music bring new forms of celebrity, such as the rock star and the pop group, epitomised by Elvis Presley and the Beatles, respectively. John Lennon's highly controversial 1966 quote: \"We're more popular than Jesus now,\" which he later insisted was not a boast, and that he was not in any way comparing himself with Christ, gives an insight into both the adulation and notoriety that fame can bring. Unlike movies, television created celebrities who were not primarily actors; for example, presenters, talk show hosts, and newsreaders. However, most of these are only famous within the regions reached by their particular broadcaster, and only a few such as Oprah Winfrey, Jerry Springer, or David Frost could be said to have broken through into wider stardom.\nIn the '60s and early '70s, the book publishing industry began to persuade major celebrities to put their names on autobiographies and other titles in a genre called celebrity publishing. In most cases, the book was not written by the celebrity but by a ghost-writer, but the celebrity would then be available for a book tour and appearances on talk shows.\nBecoming a celebrity.\nPeople may become celebrities in a wide range of ways; from their professions, following appearances in the media, or by complete accident. The term \"instant celebrity\" describes someone who becomes a celebrity in a very short time. Someone who achieves a small amount of transient fame (through, say, hype or mass media) may become labeled a \"B-grade celebrity\". Often, the generalization extends to someone who falls short of mainstream or persistent fame but who seeks to extend or exploit it.\nSuccess.\nThere are no guarantees of success for an individual to become a celebrity. Though celebrities come from many different working fields, most celebrities are typically associated with the fields of sports and entertainment, or a person may be a public figure who is commonly recognizable in mass media with commercial and critical acclaim.\nThough glamour and wealth may certainly play a role for only famous celebrities, most people in the sports and entertainments spheres, be it music, film, television, radio, modelling, comedy, literature etc. live in obscurity and only a small percentage achieve fame and fortune.\nOutside of the sports and entertainment sphere, the top inventors, professionals such as doctors, lawyers, and scientists, etc. are unlikely to become celebrities even if they are enormously successful in their field due to society's disinterest in science, invention, medicine, and courtroom law which is not fictional. American microbiologist Maurice Hilleman is credited with saving more lives than any other medical scientist of the 20th century. After Hilleman's death Ralph Nader wrote, \"Yet almost no one knew about him, saw him on television, or read about him in newspapers or magazines. His anonymity, in comparison with Madonna, Michael Jackson, Jose Canseco, or an assortment of grade B actors, tells something about our society's and media's concepts of celebrity; much less of the heroic.\"\nDifficulty.\nMany athletes who are unable to turn professional take a second job or even sometimes abandon their athletic aspirations in order to make ends meet. A small percentage of entertainers and athletes can make a decent living but a vast majority will spend their careers toiling from hard work, determination, rejection, and frequent unemployment. For minor league to amateur athletes, earnings are usually on the lower end of the pay-scale. Many of them take second jobs on the side or even venture into other occupations within the field of sports such as coaching, general management, refereeing, or recruiting and scouting up-and-coming athletes.\nBecoming a celebrity in the U.S..\nThe Screen Actors Guild, a union representing actors and actresses throughout Hollywood reports that the average television and film actor earns less than US$50,000 annually; the median hourly wage for actors was $18.80 in May 2015. Actors sometimes alternate between theater, television, and film or even branch into other occupations within the entertainment industry such as becoming a singer, comedian, producer, or a television host in order to be monetarily diversified, as doing one gig pays comparatively very little. For instance, David Letterman is well known for branching into late night television as a talk show host while honing his skills as a stand-up comedian, Barbra Streisand ventured into acting while operating as a singer, and Clint Eastwood achieved even greater fame in Hollywood as a film director and producer than for his acting credentials.\nAccording to American entertainment magnate Master P, entertainers and professional athletes make up less than 1% of all millionaires in the entire world. Less than 1% of all runway models are known to make more than US$1000 for every fashion showcase. According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, the median wage for commercial and print models was only $11.22 per hour in 2006 and was also listed one of the top ten worst jobs in the United States.\nWealth.\n\"Forbes\" Celebrity 100.\n\"Forbes\" Magazine releases an annual \"Forbes\" Celebrity 100 list of the highest-paid celebrities in the world. The total earnings for all top celebrity 100 earners totaled $4.5 billion in 2010 alone.\nFor instance, Forbes ranked media mogul and talk show host, Oprah Winfrey as the top earner \"Forbes magazine\u2019s annual ranking of the most powerful celebrities\", with earnings of $290 million in the past year. Forbes cites that Lady Gaga reportedly earned over $90 million in 2010. In 2011, golfer Tiger Woods was one of highest-earning celebrity athletes, with an income of $74 million and is consistently ranked one of the highest-paid athletes in the world. In 2013, Madonna was ranked as the fifth most powerful and the highest-earning celebrity of the year with earnings of $125 million. She has consistently been among the most powerful and highest-earning celebrities in the world, occupying the third place in Forbes Celebrity 100 2009 with $110 million of earnings, and getting the tenth place in the 2011 edition of the list with annual earnings equal to $58 million. Beyonc\u00e9 has also appeared in the top ten in 2008, 2009, 2010, 2013, 2017, and topped the list in 2014 with earnings of $115 million.\nEntrepreneurship and endorsements.\nCelebrity endorsements have proven very successful around the world where, due to increasing consumerism, an individual is often considered to own a status symbol when they purchase a celebrity-endorsed product. Although it has become commonplace for celebrities to place their name with endorsements onto products just for quick money, some celebrities have gone beyond merely using their names and have put their entrepreneurial spirit to work by becoming entrepreneurs by attaching themselves in the business aspects of entertainment and building their own business brand beyond their traditional salaried activities. Along with investing their salaried wages into growing business endeavors, several celebrities have become innovative business leaders in their respective industries, gaining the admiration of their peers and contributing to the country's economy.\nNumerous celebrities have ventured into becoming business moguls and established themselves as entrepreneurs, idolizing many well known American business leaders such as Bill Gates and Warren Buffett. For instance, basketball legend Michael Jordan became an active entrepreneur involved with many sports-related ventures including investing a minority stake in the Charlotte Bobcats, Paul Newman started his own salad dressing business after leaving behind a distinguished acting career, and rap musician Birdman started his own record label, clothing line, and an oil business while maintaining a career as a rap artist. Brazilian football legend and World Cup winner Ronaldo became the majority owner of La Liga club Real Valladolid in 2018. Other celebrities such as Tyler Perry, George Lucas, and Steven Spielberg have become successful entrepreneurs through starting their own film production companies and running their own movie studios beyond their traditional activities of screenwriting, directing, animating, producing, and acting.\nVarious examples of celebrity turned entrepreneurs included in the table below are:\nTabloid magazines and talk TV shows bestow a great deal of attention to celebrities. To stay in the public eye and build wealth in addition to their salaried labor, numerous celebrities have participating and branching into various business ventures and endorsements. Many celebrities have participated in many different endorsement opportunities that include: animation, publishing, fashion designing, cosmetics, consumer electronics, household items and appliances, cigarettes, soft drinks and alcoholic beverages, hair care, hairdressing, jewelry design, fast food, credit cards, video games, writing, and toys.\nIn addition to various endorsements, some celebrities have been involved with some business and investment-related ventures also include: and toddler related items, sports team ownership, fashion retailing, establishments such as restaurants, cafes, hotels, and casinos, movie theaters, advertising and event planning, management-related ventures such as sports management, financial services, model management, and talent management, record labels, film production, television production, publishing such as book and music publishing, massage therapy, salons, health and fitness, and real estate.\nAlthough some celebrities have achieved additional financial success from various business ventures, the vast majority of celebrities are not successful businesspeople and still rely on salaried labored wages to earn a living. Most businesses and investments are well known to have a 90 to 95 percent failure rate within the first five years of operation. Not all celebrities eventually succeed with their businesses and other related side ventures. Some celebrities either went broke or filed for bankruptcy as a result of dabbling with such side businesses or endorsements. Though some might question such validity since celebrities themselves are already well known, have mass appeal, and are well exposed to the general public. The average entrepreneur who is not well known and reputable to the general public does not the same marketing flexibility and status-quo as most celebrities allow and have. Therefore, compared to the average person who starts a business, celebrities already have all the cards and odds stacked in their favor. This means they can have an unfair advantage to expose their business ventures and endorsements and can easily capture a more significant amount of market share than the average entrepreneur.\nAs a mass media phenomenon.\nCelebrities often have fame comparable to royalty. As a result, there is a strong public curiosity about their private affairs. The release of Kim Kardashian's sex tape with rapper Ray J in 2003 brought her to a new level of fame, leading to magazine covers, book deals, and reality TV series.\nCelebrities may be resented for their accolades, and the public may have a love/hate relationship with celebrities. Due to the high visibility of celebrities' private lives, their successes and shortcomings are often made very public. Celebrities are alternately portrayed as glowing examples of perfection, when they garner awards, or as decadent or immoral if they become associated with a scandal. When seen in a positive light, celebrities are frequently portrayed as possessing skills and abilities beyond average people; for example, celebrity actors are routinely celebrated for acquiring new skills necessary for filming a role within a very brief time, and to a level that amazes the professionals who train them. Similarly, some celebrities with very little formal education can sometimes be portrayed as experts on complicated issues. Some celebrities have been very vocal about their political views. For example, Matt Damon expressed his displeasure with 2008 US vice presidential nominee Sarah Palin, as well as with the 2011 United States debt-ceiling crisis.\nFamous for being famous.\nFamous for being famous, in popular culture terminology, refers to someone who attains celebrity status for no particular identifiable reason, or who achieves fame through association with a celebrity. The term is a pejorative, suggesting that the individual has no particular talents or abilities. Even when their fame arises from a particular talent or action on their part, the term will sometimes still apply if their fame is perceived as disproportionate to what they earned through their own talent or work.\nThe coinages \"famesque\" and \"celebutante\" are of similar pejorative gist.\nInternet celebrities.\nAlso known as being \"internet famous\", contemporary fame does not always involve a physical red carpet.\nOnline fame in Asia.\nA report by BBC highlighted a longtime trend of Asian internet celebrities such as Chinese celebrity Wang Hong (birth name Ling Ling). According to BBC, there are two kinds of online celebrities in China\u2014those who create original content, such as Papi Jiang, who is regularly censored by Chinese authorities for cussing in her videos, and those such as Wang Hong and Zhang Dayi, who fall under the second category, as they have clothing and cosmetics businesses on Taobao, China's equivalent of Amazon.\nSocial networking services and video hosting.\nMost high-profile celebrities participate in social networking services and photo or video hosting platforms such as YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and Snapchat. Social networking services allow celebrities to communicate directly with their fans, removing the middle-man known as traditional media. Social media humanizes celebrities in a way that arouses public fascination as evident by the success of magazines such as \"Us Weekly\" and \"People Weekly\". Celebrity blogging have also spawned stars such as Perez Hilton who is well known for not only blogging but also outing celebrities.\nSocial media and the rise of the smartphone have changed how celebrities are treated and how people gain the platform of fame. Not everything is as concealed as it was back in old Hollywood because now everything is put out on the internet by fans or even the celebrity themselves. Websites like Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and YouTube allow people to become a celebrity overnight. For example, Justin Bieber got his start on YouTube by posting videos of him singing and got discovered. All of his fans got direct contact with his content and were able to interact with him on several social media platforms. Social media has substantially changed what it means to be a celebrity. Instagram and YouTube allow regular people to become rich and famous all from inside their home. It also allows fans to connect with their favorite celebrity without ever meeting them in person. Everything is being shared on social media so it makes it harder for celebrities to live private lives.\nSocial media sites have also contributed to the fame of some celebrities, such as Tila Tequila who became known through MySpace.\nFamilies.\nAnother example of a celebrity is a family that has notable ancestors or is known for its wealth. In some cases, a well-known family is associated with a particular field. For example, the Kennedy family is associated with US politics; The House of Windsor with royalty; The Hilton and Rothschild families with business; the Jackson family with popular music; and the Osbourne, Chaplin, Kardashian, Baldwin, and Barrymore families with television and film.\nRestricted access.\nAccess to celebrities is strictly controlled by their entourage of staff which includes managers, publicists, agents, personal assistants, and bodyguards. Even journalists find it difficult to access celebrities for interviews. Writer and actor Michael Musto said, \"You have to go through many hoops just to talk to a major celebrity. You have to get past three different sets of publicists: the publicist for the event, the publicist for the movie, and then the celebrity's personal publicist. They all have to approve you.\"\nCelebrities often hire one or more bodyguards (or close protection officer) to protect themselves and their families from threats ranging from the mundane (intrusive paparazzi photographers or autograph-seeking fans) to serious (assault, kidnapping, assassination, or stalking). The bodyguard travels with the celebrity during professional activities (movie shoots or concerts) and personal activities such as recreation and errands.\nCelebrities also typically have security staff at their home, to protect them from similar threats.\n15 minutes of fame.\nAndy Warhol famously coined the phrase \"15 minutes of fame\" in reference to short-lived publicity. Certain \"15 minutes of fame\" celebrities can be average people seen with an A-list celebrity, who are sometimes noticed on entertainment news channels such as E! News. These persons are ordinary people becoming celebrities, often based on the ridiculous things they do. \"In fact, many reality show contestants fall into this category: the only thing that qualifies them to be on TV is that they're real.\"\nHealth implications.\nJohn Cleese said being famous offers some advantages such as financial wealth and easier access to things that are more difficult for non-famous people to access, such as the ability to more easily meet other famous or powerful people, but that being famous also often comes with the disadvantage of creating the conditions in which the celebrity finds themselves acting, at least temporarily (although sometimes over extended periods of time), in a superficial, inauthentic fashion.\nCommon threats such as stalking have spawned celebrity worship syndrome where a person becomes overly involved with the details of a celebrity's personal life. Psychologists have indicated that though many people obsess over glamorous film, television, sport and music stars, the disparity in salaries in society seems to value professional athletes and entertainment industry-based professionals. One study found that singers, musicians, actors and athletes die younger on average than writers, composers, academics, politicians and businesspeople, with a greater incidence of cancer and especially lung cancer. However, it was remarked that the reasons for this remained unclear, with theories including innate tendencies towards risk-taking as well as the pressure or opportunities of particular types of fame.\nFurthermore, some have said fame might have negative psychological effects, and may lead to increasingly selfish tendencies and psychopathy. An academic study on the subject said that fame has an addictive quality to it. When a celebrity's fame recedes over time, the celebrity may find it difficult to adjust psychologically.\nRecently, there has been more attention toward the impact celebrities have on health decisions of the population at large. It is believed that the public will follow celebrities' health advice to some extent. This can have positive impacts when the celebrities give solid, evidence-informed health advice, however, it can also have detrimental effects if the health advice is not accurate enough."}
{"id": "5797", "revid": "989726735", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5797", "title": "Cluster sampling", "text": "Cluster sampling is a sampling plan used when mutually homogeneous yet internally heterogeneous groupings are evident in a statistical population. It is often used in marketing research. In this sampling plan, the total population is divided into these groups (known as clusters) and a simple random sample of the groups is selected. The elements in each cluster are then sampled. If all elements in each sampled cluster are sampled, then this is referred to as a \"one-stage\" cluster sampling plan. If a simple random subsample of elements is selected within each of these groups, this is referred to as a \"two-stage\" cluster sampling plan. A common motivation for cluster sampling is to reduce the total number of interviews and costs given the desired accuracy. For a fixed sample size, the expected random error is smaller when most of the variation in the population is present internally within the groups, and not between the groups.\nCluster elements.\nThe population within a cluster should ideally be as heterogeneous as possible, but there should be homogeneity between clusters. Each cluster should be a small-scale representation of the total population. The clusters should be mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive. A random sampling technique is then used on any relevant clusters to choose which clusters to include in the study. In single-stage cluster sampling, all the elements from each of the selected clusters are sampled. In two-stage cluster sampling, a random sampling technique is applied to the elements from each of the selected clusters.\nThe main difference between cluster sampling and stratified sampling is that in cluster sampling the cluster is treated as the sampling unit so sampling is done on a population of clusters (at least in the first stage). In stratified sampling, the sampling is done on elements within each stratum. In stratified sampling, a random sample is drawn from each of the strata, whereas in cluster sampling only the selected clusters are sampled. A common motivation of cluster sampling is to reduce costs by increasing sampling efficiency. This contrasts with stratified sampling where the motivation is to increase precision.\nThere is also multistage cluster sampling, where at least two stages are taken in selecting elements from clusters.\nWhen clusters are of different sizes.\nWithout modifying the estimated parameter, cluster sampling is unbiased when the clusters are approximately the same size. In this case, the parameter is computed by combining all the selected clusters. When the clusters are of different sizes there are several options:\nOne method is to sample clusters and then survey all elements in that cluster. Another method is a two-stage method of sampling a fixed proportion of units (be it 5% or 50%, or another number, depending on cost considerations) from within each of the selected clusters. Relying on the sample drawn from these options will yield an unbiased estimator. However, the sample size is no longer fixed upfront. This leads to a more complicated formula for the standard error of the estimator, as well as issues with the optics of the study plan (since the power analysis and the cost estimations often relate to a specific sample size).\nA third possible solution is to use probability proportionate to size sampling. In this sampling plan, the probability of selecting a cluster is proportional to its size, so that a large cluster has a greater probability of selection than a small cluster. The advantage here is that when clusters are selected with probability proportionate to size, the same number of interviews should be carried out in each sampled cluster so that each unit sampled has the same probability of selection.\nApplications of cluster sampling.\nAn example of cluster sampling is area sampling or geographical cluster sampling. Each cluster is a geographical area. Because a geographically dispersed population can be expensive to survey, greater economy than simple random sampling can be achieved by grouping several respondents within a local area into a cluster. It is usually necessary to increase the total sample size to achieve equivalent precision in the estimators, but cost savings may make such an increase in sample size feasible.\nCluster sampling is used to estimate high mortalities in cases such as wars, famines and natural disasters.\nAdvantage.\nMajor use: when the sampling frame of all elements is not available we can resort only to the cluster sampling.\nMore on cluster sampling.\nTwo-stage cluster sampling.\nTwo-stage cluster sampling, a simple case of multistage sampling, is obtained by selecting cluster samples in the first stage and then selecting a sample of elements from every sampled cluster. Consider a population of \"N\" clusters in total. In the first stage, \"n\" clusters are selected using ordinary cluster sampling method. In the second stage, simple random sampling is usually used. It is used separately in every cluster and the numbers of elements selected from different clusters are not necessarily equal. The total number of clusters \"N\", number of clusters selected \"n\", and numbers of elements from selected clusters need to be pre-determined by the survey designer. Two-stage cluster sampling aims at minimizing survey costs and at the same time controlling the uncertainty related to estimates of interest. This method can be used in health and social sciences. For instance, researchers used two-stage cluster sampling to generate a representative sample of the Iraqi population to conduct mortality surveys. Sampling in this method can be quicker and more reliable than other methods, which is why this method is now used frequently.\nInference when the number of clusters is small.\nCluster sampling methods can lead to significant bias when working with a small number of clusters. For instance, it can be necessary to cluster at the state or city level, units that may be small and fixed in number. Microeconometrics methods for panel data often use short panels, which is analogous to having few observations per clusters and many clusters. The small cluster problem can be viewed as an incidental parameter problem. While the point estimates can be reasonably precisely estimated, if the number of observations per cluster is sufficiently high, we need the number of clusters formula_1 for the asymptotics to kick in. If the number of clusters is low the estimated covariance matrix can be downward biased.\nSmall numbers of clusters is a risk when there is serial correlation or when there is intraclass correlation as in the Moulton context. When having few clusters, we tend to underestimate serial correlation across observations when a random shock occurs, or the intraclass correlation in a Moulton setting. Several studies have highlighted the consequences of serial correlation and highlighted the small-cluster problem.\nIn the framework of the Moulton factor, an intuitive explanation of the small cluster problem can be derived from the formula for the Moulton factor. Assume for simplicity that the number of observation per cluster is fixed at \"n\". Below, formula_2 stands for the covariance matrix adjusted for clustering, formula_3 stands for the covariance matrix not adjusted for clustering, and \u03c1 stands for the intraclass correlation:\nThe ratio on the left-hand side provides an indication of how much the unadjusted scenario overestimates the precision. Therefore, a high number means a strong downward bias of the estimated covariance matrix. A small cluster problem can be interpreted as a large n: when the data is fixed and the number of clusters is low, the number of data within a cluster can be high. It follows that inference when the number of clusters is small will not have correct coverage.\nSeveral solutions for the small cluster problem have been proposed. One can use a bias-corrected cluster-robust variance matrix, make T-distribution adjustments, or use bootstrap methods with asymptotic refinements, such as the percentile-t or wild bootstrap, that can lead to improved finite sample inference. Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008) provide microsimulations for different methods and find that the wild bootstrap performs well in the face of a small number of clusters."}
{"id": "5798", "revid": "6781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5798", "title": "Closeted person", "text": ""}
{"id": "5799", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5799", "title": "Coming out of the closet", "text": ""}
{"id": "5801", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5801", "title": "Catholicism/Councils", "text": ""}
{"id": "5802", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5802", "title": "Catholicism/Council of Trent", "text": ""}
{"id": "5803", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5803", "title": "Catholicism/Second Vatican Council", "text": ""}
{"id": "5804", "revid": "1653549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5804", "title": "Charles Baudelaire", "text": "Charles Pierre Baudelaire (, ; ; 9 April 1821 \u2013 31 August 1867) was a French poet who also produced notable work as an essayist, art critic, as well as one of the first translators of Edgar Allan Poe. His poems exhibit mastery in the handling of rhyme and rhythm, contain an exoticism inherited from Romantics, but are based on observations of real life.\nHis most famous work, a book of lyric poetry titled \"Les Fleurs du mal\" (\"The Flowers of Evil\"), expresses the changing nature of beauty in the rapidly industrializing Paris during the mid-19th century. Baudelaire's highly original style of prose-poetry influenced a whole generation of poets including Paul Verlaine, Arthur Rimbaud and St\u00e9phane Mallarm\u00e9, among many others. He is credited with coining the term modernity (\"modernit\u00e9\") to designate the fleeting, ephemeral experience of life in an urban metropolis, and the responsibility of artistic expression to capture that experience.\nEarly life.\nBaudelaire was born in Paris, France, on 9 April 1821, and baptized two months later at Saint-Sulpice Roman Catholic Church. His father, Joseph-Fran\u00e7ois Baudelaire (1759-1827), a senior civil servant and amateur artist, was 34 years older than Baudelaire's mother, Caroline (n\u00e9e Dufa\u00ffs) (1794-1871). Joseph-Fran\u00e7ois died during Baudelaire's childhood, at rue Hautefeuille, Paris, on February 10, 1827. The following year, Caroline married Lieutenant Colonel Jacques Aupick, who later became a French ambassador to various noble courts. Baudelaire's biographers have often seen this as a crucial moment, considering that finding himself no longer the sole focus of his mother's affection left him with a trauma, which goes some way to explaining the excesses later apparent in his life. He stated in a letter to her that, \"There was in my childhood a period of passionate love for you.\" Baudelaire regularly begged his mother for money throughout his career, often promising that a lucrative publishing contract or journalistic commission was just around the corner.\nBaudelaire was educated in Lyon, where he boarded. At 14, he was described by a classmate as \"much more refined and distinguished than any of our fellow pupils...we are bound to one another...by shared tastes and sympathies, the precocious love of fine works of literature.\" Baudelaire was erratic in his studies, at times diligent, at other times prone to \"idleness\". Later, he attended the Lyc\u00e9e Louis-le-Grand in Paris, studying law, a popular course for those not yet decided on any particular career. He began to frequent prostitutes and may have contracted gonorrhea and syphilis during this period. He also began to run up debts, mostly for clothes. Upon gaining his degree in 1839, he told his brother \"I don't feel I have a vocation for anything.\" His stepfather had in mind a career in law or diplomacy, but instead Baudelaire decided to embark upon a literary career. His mother later recalled: \"Oh, what grief! If Charles had let himself be guided by his stepfather, his career would have been very different...He would not have left a name in literature, it is true, but we should have been happier, all three of us.\"\nHis stepfather sent him on a voyage to Calcutta, India in 1841 in the hope of ending his dissolute habits. The trip provided strong impressions of the sea, sailing, and exotic ports, that he later employed in his poetry. (Baudelaire later exaggerated his aborted trip to create a legend about his youthful travels and experiences, including \"riding on elephants\".) On returning to the taverns of Paris, he began to compose some of the poems of \"Les Fleurs du Mal\". At 21, he received a sizable inheritance but squandered much of it within a few years. His family obtained a decree to place his property in trust, which he resented bitterly, at one point arguing that allowing him to fail financially would have been the one sure way of teaching him to keep his finances in order.\nBaudelaire became known in artistic circles as a dandy and free-spender, going through much of his inheritance and allowance in a short period of time. During this time, Jeanne Duval became his mistress. She was rejected by his family. His mother thought Duval a \"Black Venus\" who \"tortured him in every way\" and drained him of money at every opportunity. Baudelaire made a suicide attempt during this period.\nHe took part in the Revolutions of 1848 and wrote for a revolutionary newspaper. However, his interest in politics was passing, as he was later to note in his journals.\nIn the early 1850s, Baudelaire struggled with poor health, pressing debts, and irregular literary output. He often moved from one lodging to another to escape creditors. He undertook many projects that he was unable to complete, though he did finish translations of stories by Edgar Allan Poe.\nUpon the death of his stepfather in 1857, Baudelaire received no mention in the will but he was heartened nonetheless that the division with his mother might now be mended. At 36, he wrote her: \"believe that I belong to you absolutely, and that I belong only to you.\" His mother died on 16 August 1871, outliving her son by almost four years.\nPublished career.\nHis first published work, under the pseudonym Baudelaire Dufa\u00ffs, was his art review \"Salon of 1845\", which attracted immediate attention for its boldness. Many of his critical opinions were novel in their time, including his championing of Delacroix, and some of his views seem remarkably in tune with the future theories of the Impressionist painters.\nIn 1846, Baudelaire wrote his second Salon review, gaining additional credibility as an advocate and critic of Romanticism. His continued support of Delacroix as the foremost Romantic artist gained widespread notice. The following year Baudelaire's novella \"La Fanfarlo\" was published.\n\"The Flowers of Evil\".\nBaudelaire was a slow and very attentive worker. However, he often was sidetracked by indolence, emotional distress and illness, and it was not until 1857 that he published \"Les Fleurs du mal\" (\"The Flowers of Evil\"), his first and most famous volume of poems. Some of these poems had already appeared in the \"Revue des deux mondes\" (\"Review of Two Worlds\") in 1855, when they were published by Baudelaire's friend Auguste Poulet Malassis. Some of the poems had appeared as \"fugitive verse\" in various French magazines during the previous decade.\nThe poems found a small, yet appreciative audience. However, greater public attention was given to their subject matter. The effect on fellow artists was, as Th\u00e9odore de Banville stated, \"immense, prodigious, unexpected, mingled with admiration and with some indefinable anxious fear\". Gustave Flaubert, recently attacked in a similar fashion for \"Madame Bovary\" (and acquitted), was impressed and wrote to Baudelaire: \"You have found a way to rejuvenate Romanticism...You are as unyielding as marble, and as penetrating as an English mist.\"\nThe principal themes of sex and death were considered scandalous for the period. He also touched on lesbianism, sacred and profane love, metamorphosis, melancholy, the corruption of the city, lost innocence, the oppressiveness of living, and wine. Notable in some poems is Baudelaire's use of imagery of the sense of smell and of fragrances, which is used to evoke feelings of nostalgia and past intimacy.\nThe book, however, quickly became a byword for unwholesomeness among mainstream critics of the day. Some critics called a few of the poems \"masterpieces of passion, art and poetry,\" but other poems were deemed to merit no less than legal action to suppress them. J. Habas led the charge against Baudelaire, writing in \"Le Figaro\": \"Everything in it which is not hideous is incomprehensible, everything one understands is putrid.\" Baudelaire responded to the outcry in a prophetic letter to his mother:\n\"You know that I have always considered that literature and the arts pursue an aim independent of morality. Beauty of conception and style is enough for me. But this book, whose title (\"Fleurs du mal\") says everything, is clad, as you will see, in a cold and sinister beauty. It was created with rage and patience. Besides, the proof of its positive worth is in all the ill that they speak of it. The book enrages people. Moreover, since I was terrified myself of the horror that I should inspire, I cut out a third from the proofs. They deny me everything, the spirit of invention and even the knowledge of the French language. I don't care a rap about all these imbeciles, and I know that this book, with its virtues and its faults, will make its way in the memory of the lettered public, beside the best poems of V. Hugo, Th. Gautier and even Byron.\"\nBaudelaire, his publisher and the printer successfully were prosecuted for creating an offense against public morals. They were fined, but Baudelaire was not imprisoned. Six of the poems were suppressed, but printed later as \"Les \u00c9paves\" (\"The Wrecks\") (Brussels, 1866). Another edition of \"Les Fleurs du mal\", without these poems, but with considerable additions, appeared in 1861. Many notables rallied behind Baudelaire and condemned the sentence. Victor Hugo wrote to him: \"Your \"fleurs du mal\" shine and dazzle like stars...I applaud your vigorous spirit with all my might.\" Baudelaire did not appeal the judgment, but his fine was reduced. Nearly 100 years later, on May 11, 1949, Baudelaire was vindicated, the judgment officially reversed, and the six banned poems reinstated in France.\nIn the poem \"Au lecteur\" (\"To the Reader\") that prefaces \"Les Fleurs du mal\", Baudelaire accuses his readers of hypocrisy and of being as guilty of sins and lies as the poet:\nFinal years.\nBaudelaire next worked on a translation and adaptation of Thomas De Quincey's \"Confessions of an English Opium Eater\". Other works in the years that followed included \"Petits Po\u00e8mes en prose\" (\"Small Prose poems\"); a series of art reviews published in the \"Pays, Exposition universelle\" (\"Country, World Fair\"); studies on Gustave Flaubert (in \"L'Artiste\", October 18, 1857); on Th\u00e9ophile Gautier (\"Revue contemporaine\", September 1858); various articles contributed to Eugene Crepet's \"Po\u00e8tes francais\"; \"Les Paradis artificiels: opium et haschisch\" (\"French poets; Artificial Paradises: opium and hashish\") (1860); and \"Un Dernier Chapitre de l'histoire des oeuvres de Balzac\" (\"A Final Chapter of the history of works of Balzac\") (1880), originally an article \"Comment on paye ses dettes quand on a du g\u00e9nie\" (\"How one pays one's debts when one has genius\"), in which his criticism turns against his friends Honor\u00e9 de Balzac, Th\u00e9ophile Gautier, and G\u00e9rard de Nerval.\nBy 1859, his illnesses, his long-term use of laudanum, his life of stress, and his poverty had taken a toll and Baudelaire had aged noticeably. But at last, his mother relented and agreed to let him live with her for a while at Honfleur. Baudelaire was productive and at peace in the seaside town, his poem \"Le Voyage\" being one example of his efforts during that time. In 1860, he became an ardent supporter of Richard Wagner.\nHis financial difficulties increased again, however, particularly after his publisher Poulet Malassis went bankrupt in 1861. In 1864, he left Paris for Belgium, partly in the hope of selling the rights to his works and to give lectures. His long-standing relationship with Jeanne Duval continued on-and-off, and he helped her to the end of his life. Baudelaire's relationships with actress Marie Daubrun and with courtesan Apollonie Sabatier, though the source of much inspiration, never produced any lasting satisfaction. He smoked opium, and in Brussels he began to drink to excess. Baudelaire suffered a massive stroke in 1866 and paralysis followed. After more than a year of aphasia, he received the last rites of the Catholic Church. The last two years of his life were spent in a semi-paralyzed state in \"maisons de sant\u00e9\" in Brussels and in Paris, where he died on 31 August 1867. Baudelaire is buried in the Cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse, Paris.\nMany of Baudelaire's works were published posthumously. After his death, his mother paid off his substantial debts, and she found some comfort in Baudelaire's emerging fame. \"I see that my son, for all his faults, has his place in literature.\" She lived another four years.\nPoetry.\nBaudelaire is one of the major innovators in French literature. His poetry is influenced by the French romantic poets of the earlier 19th century, although its attention to the formal features of verse connects it more closely to the work of the contemporary \"Parnassians\". As for theme and tone, in his works we see the rejection of the belief in the supremacy of nature and the fundamental goodness of man as typically espoused by the romantics and expressed by them in rhetorical, effusive and public voice in favor of a new urban sensibility, an awareness of individual moral complexity, an interest in vice (linked with decadence) and refined sensual and aesthetic pleasures, and the use of urban subject matter, such as the city, the crowd, individual passers-by, all expressed in highly ordered verse, sometimes through a cynical and ironic voice. Formally, the use of sound to create atmosphere, and of \"symbols\" (images that take on an expanded function within the poem), betray a move towards considering the poem as a self-referential object, an idea further developed by the Symbolists Verlaine and Mallarm\u00e9, who acknowledge Baudelaire as a pioneer in this regard.\nBeyond his innovations in versification and the theories of symbolism and \"correspondences\", an awareness of which is essential to any appreciation of the literary value of his work, aspects of his work that regularly receive much critical discussion include the role of women, the theological direction of his work and his alleged advocacy of \"satanism\", his experience of drug-induced states of mind, the figure of the dandy, his stance regarding democracy and its implications for the individual, his response to the spiritual uncertainties of the time, his criticisms of the bourgeois, and his advocacy of modern music and painting (e.g., Wagner, Delacroix). He made Paris the subject of modern poetry. He brought the city's details to life in the eyes and hearts of his readers.\nCritiques.\nBaudelaire was an active participant in the artistic life of his times. As critic and essayist, he wrote extensively and perceptively about the luminaries and themes of French culture. He was frank with friends and enemies, rarely took the diplomatic approach and sometimes responded violently verbally, that often undermined his cause. His associations were numerous, including Gustave Courbet, Honor\u00e9 Daumier, F\u00e9licien Rops, Franz Liszt, Champfleury, Victor Hugo, Gustave Flaubert, and Balzac.\nEdgar Allan Poe.\nIn 1847, Baudelaire became acquainted with the works of Poe, in which he found tales and poems that had, he claimed, long existed in his own brain but never taken shape. Baudelaire saw in Poe a precursor and tried to be his French contemporary counterpart. From this time until 1865, he was largely occupied with translating Poe's works; his translations were widely praised. Baudelaire was not the first French translator of Poe, but his \"scrupulous translations\" were considered among the best. These were published as \"Histoires extraordinaires\" (\"Extraordinary stories\") (1856), \"Nouvelles histoires extraordinaires\" (\"New extraordinary stories\") (1857), \"Aventures d'Arthur Gordon Pym\", \"\", and \"Histoires grotesques et s\u00e9rieuses\" (\"Grotesque and serious stories\") (1865). Two essays on Poe are to be found in his \"\u0152uvres compl\u00e8tes\" (\"Complete works\") (vols. v. and vi.).\nEug\u00e8ne Delacroix.\nA strong supporter of the Romantic painter Delacroix, Baudelaire called him \"a poet in painting\". Baudelaire also absorbed much of Delacroix's aesthetic ideas as expressed in his journals. As Baudelaire elaborated in his \"Salon of 1846\", \"As one contemplates his series of pictures, one seems to be attending the celebration of some grievous mystery...This grave and lofty melancholy shines with a dull light.. plaintive and profound like a melody by Weber.\" Delacroix, though appreciative, kept his distance from Baudelaire, particularly after the scandal of \"Les Fleurs du mal\". In private correspondence, Delacroix stated that Baudelaire \"really gets on my nerves\" and he expressed his unhappiness with Baudelaire's persistent comments about \"melancholy\" and \"feverishness\".\nRichard Wagner.\nBaudelaire had no formal musical training, and knew little of composers beyond Beethoven and Weber. Weber was in some ways Wagner's precursor, using the leitmotif and conceiving the idea of the \"total art work\" (\"Gesamtkunstwerk\"), both of which gained Baudelaire's admiration. Before even hearing Wagner's music, Baudelaire studied reviews and essays about him, and formulated his impressions. Later, Baudelaire put them into his non-technical analysis of Wagner, which was highly regarded, particularly his essay \"Richard Wagner et Tannh\u00e4user \u00e0 Paris\". Baudelaire's reaction to music was passionate and psychological. \"Music engulfs (possesses) me like the sea.\" After attending three Wagner concerts in Paris in 1860, Baudelaire wrote to the composer: \"I had a feeling of pride and joy in understanding, in being possessed, in being overwhelmed, a truly sensual pleasure like that of rising in the air.\" Baudelaire's writings contributed to the elevation of Wagner and to the cult of Wagnerism that swept Europe in the following decades.\nTh\u00e9ophile Gautier.\nGautier, writer and poet, earned Baudelaire's respect for his perfection of form and his mastery of language, though Baudelaire thought he lacked deeper emotion and spirituality. Both strove to express the artist's inner vision, which Heinrich Heine earlier stated: \"In artistic matters, I am a supernaturalist. I believe that the artist can not find all his forms in nature, but that the most remarkable are revealed to him in his soul.\" Gautier's frequent meditations on death and the horror of life are themes which influenced Baudelaire's writings. In gratitude for their friendship and commonality of vision, Baudelaire dedicated \"Les Fleurs du mal\" to Gautier.\n\u00c9douard Manet.\nManet and Baudelaire became constant companions from around 1855. In the early 1860s, Baudelaire accompanied Manet on daily sketching trips and often met him socially. Manet also lent Baudelaire money and looked after his affairs, particularly when Baudelaire went to Belgium. Baudelaire encouraged Manet to strike out on his own path and not succumb to criticism. \"Manet has great talent, a talent which will stand the test of time. But he has a weak character. He seems to me crushed and stunned by shock.\" In his painting \"Music in the Tuileries\", Manet includes portraits of his friends Th\u00e9ophile Gautier, Jacques Offenbach, and Baudelaire. While it's difficult to differentiate who influenced whom, both Manet and Baudelaire discussed and expressed some common themes through their respective arts. Baudelaire praised the modernity of Manet's subject matter: \"almost all our originality comes from the stamp that 'time' imprints upon our feelings.\" When Manet's famous \"Olympia\" (1863), a portrait of a nude prostitute, provoked a scandal for its blatant realism mixed with an imitation of Renaissance motifs, Baudelaire worked privately to support his friend, though he offered no public defense (he was, however, ill at the time). When Baudelaire returned from Belgium after his stroke, Manet and his wife were frequent visitors at the nursing home and she played passages from Wagner for Baudelaire on the piano.\nNadar.\nNadar (F\u00e9lix Tournachon) was a noted caricaturist, scientist and important early photographer. Baudelaire admired Nadar, one of his close friends, and wrote: \"Nadar is the most amazing manifestation of vitality.\" They moved in similar circles and Baudelaire made many social connections through him. Nadar's ex-mistress Jeanne Duval became Baudelaire's mistress around 1842. Baudelaire became interested in photography in the 1850s, and denouncing it as an art form, advocated its return to \"its real purpose, which is that of being the servant to the sciences and arts\". Photography should not, according to Baudelaire, encroach upon \"the domain of the impalpable and the imaginary\". Nadar remained a stalwart friend right to Baudelaire's last days and wrote his obituary notice in \"Le Figaro\".\nPhilosophy.\nMany of Baudelaire's philosophical proclamations were considered scandalous and intentionally provocative in his time. He wrote on a wide range of subjects, drawing criticism and outrage from many quarters. Along with Poe, Baudelaire named the arch-reactionary Joseph de Maistre as his \"ma\u00eetre \u00e0 penser\" and adopted increasingly aristocratic views. In his journals, he wrote \"There is no form of rational and assured government save an aristocracy. [\u2026] There are but three beings worthy of respect: the priest, the warrior and the poet. To know, to kill and to create. The rest of mankind may be taxed and drudged, they are born for the stable, that is to say, to practise what they call professions.\"\nInfluence and legacy.\nBaudelaire's influence on the direction of modern French (and English) language literature was considerable. The most significant French writers to come after him were generous with tributes; four years after his death, Arthur Rimbaud praised him in a letter as 'the king of poets, a true God'. In 1895, St\u00e9phane Mallarm\u00e9 published \"Le Tombeau de Charles Baudelaire\", a sonnet in Baudelaire's memory. Marcel Proust, in an essay published in 1922, stated that along with Alfred de Vigny, Baudelaire was \"the greatest poet of the nineteenth century\".\nIn the English-speaking world, Edmund Wilson credited Baudelaire as providing an initial impetus for the Symbolist movement by virtue of his translations of Poe. In 1930, T.S. Eliot, while asserting that Baudelaire had not yet received a \"just appreciation\" even in France, claimed that the poet had \"great genius\" and asserted that his \"technical mastery which can hardly be overpraised...has made his verse an inexhaustible study for later poets, not only in his own language\". In a lecture delivered in French on \"Edgar Allan Poe and France\" (Edgar Poe et la France) in Aix-en-Provence in April 1948, Eliot stated that \"I am an English poet of American origin who learnt his art under the aegis of Baudelaire and the Baudelairian lineage of poets.\" Eliot also alluded to Baudelaire's poetry directly in his own poetry. For example, he quoted the last line of Baudelaire's \"Au Lecteur\" in the last line of Section I of \"The Waste Land\".'\nAt the same time that Eliot was affirming Baudelaire's importance from a broadly conservative and explicitly Christian viewpoint, left-wing critics such as Wilson and Walter Benjamin were able to do so from a dramatically different perspective. Benjamin translated Baudelaire's \"Tableaux Parisiens\" into German and published a major essay on translation as the foreword.\nIn the late 1930s, Benjamin used Baudelaire as a starting point and focus for \"Das Passagenwerk\", his monumental attempt at a materialist assessment of 19th-century culture. For Benjamin, Baudelaire's importance lay in his anatomies of the crowd, of the city and of modernity. He says that, in \"Les Fleurs du mal\", \"the specific devaluation of the world of things, as manifested in the commodity, is the foundation of Baudelaire's allegorical intention.\" \nFran\u00e7ois Porche published a poetry collection called \"Charles Baudelaire: Poetry Collection\" in memory of Baudelaire.\nThe novel \"A Singular Conspiracy\" (1974) by Barry Perowne is a fictional treatment of the unaccounted period in Edgar Allan Poe's life from January to May 1844, in which (among other things) Poe becomes involved with a young Baudelaire in a plot to expose Baudelaires' stepfather to blackmail, to free up Baudelaires' patrimony.\nVanderbilt University has \"assembled one of the world's most comprehensive research collections on...Baudelaire\". \"Les Fleurs du mal\" has a number of scholarly references.\nReferences.\nNotes\nSources"}
{"id": "5808", "revid": "1777127", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5808", "title": "Casey at the Bat", "text": "\"Casey at the Bat: A Ballad of the Republic, Sung in the Year 1888\" is a poem written in 1888 by Ernest Thayer. It was first published anonymously in \"The San Francisco Examiner\" (then called \"The Daily Examiner\") on June 3, 1888, under the pen name \"Phin\", based on Thayer's college nickname, \"Phinney\". Featuring a dramatic narrative about a baseball game, the poem was later popularized by DeWolf Hopper in many vaudeville performances. It has become one of the best-known poems in American literature. \nSynopsis.\nA baseball team from the fictional town of \"Mudville\" (the home team) is losing by two runs in its last inning. Both the team and its fans, a crowd of 5,000, believe that they can win if Casey, Mudville's star player, gets to bat. However, Casey is scheduled to be the fifth batter of the inning, and the first two batters (Cooney and Barrows) fail to get on base. The next two batters (Flynn and Jimmy Blake) are perceived to be weak hitters with little chance of reaching base to allow Casey a chance to bat.\nSurprisingly, Flynn hits a single, and Blake follows with a double that allows Flynn to reach third base. Both runners are now in scoring position and Casey represents the potential winning run. Casey is so sure of his abilities that he does not swing at the first two pitches, both called strikes. On the last pitch, the overconfident Casey strikes out swinging, ending the game and sending the crowd home unhappy.\nText.\nThe text is filled with references to baseball as it was in 1888, which in many ways is not far removed from today's version. As a work, the poem encapsulates much of the appeal of baseball, including the involvement of the crowd. It also has a fair amount of baseball jargon that can pose challenges for the uninitiated.\nThis is the complete poem as it originally appeared in \"The Daily Examiner\". After publication, various versions with minor changes were produced.\nInspiration.\nThayer said he chose the name \"Casey\" after a non-player of Irish ancestry he once knew named Daniel H. Casey, and it is open to debate whom, if anyone, he modeled the character after. It has been reported that Thayer's best friend Samuel Winslow, who played baseball at Harvard, was the inspiration for Casey.\nAnother candidate is National League player Mike \"King\" Kelly, who became famous when Boston paid Chicago a record $10,000 for him. He had a personality that fans liked to cheer or jeer. After the 1887 season, Kelly went on a playing tour to San Francisco. Thayer, who wrote \"Casey\" in 1888, covered the San Francisco leg for the \"San Francisco Examiner\".\nThayer, in a letter he wrote in 1905, mentions Kelly as showing \"impudence\" in claiming to have written the poem. The author of the 2004 definitive bio of Kelly\u2014which included a close tracking of his vaudeville career\u2014did not find Kelly claiming to have been the author.\nComposition and publication history.\n\"Casey at the Bat\" was first published in \"The Daily Examiner\" on June 3, 1888.\nA month after the poem was published, it was reprinted as \"Kelly at the Bat\" in the \"New York Sporting Times\".\nAside from omitting the first five verses, the only changes from the original are substitutions of Kelly for Casey, and Boston for Mudville. King Kelly, then of the Boston Beaneaters, was one of baseball's two biggest stars at the time (along with Cap Anson).\nIn 1897, the magazine \"Current Literature\" noted the two versions and said, \"The locality, as originally given, is Mudville, not Boston; the latter was substituted to give the poem local color.\"\nSportswriter Leonard Koppett claimed in a 1979 article that the published poem omits 18 lines penned by Thayer, which change the entire theme of the poem. Koppett said that the full version of the poem takes the pitch count on Casey to full. Meanwhile, his uncle Arnold stirs up wagering action in the stands, before a wink passes between them. Casey throws the game.\nLive performances.\nDeWolf Hopper gave the poem's first stage recitation on August 14, 1888, at New York's Wallack Theatre as part of the comic opera \"Prinz Methusalem\" in the presence of the Chicago and New York baseball teams, the White Stockings and the Giants, respectively; August 14, 1888 was also Thayer's 25th birthday. Hopper became known as an orator of the poem, and recited it more than 10,000 times (by his count\u2014some tabulations are as much as four times higher) before his death.\nOn stage in the early 1890s, baseball star Kelly recited the original \"Casey\" a few dozen times and not the parody. For example, in a review in 1893 of a variety show he was in, the \"Indianapolis News\" said, \"Many who attended the performance had heard of Kelly's singing and his reciting, and many had heard De Wolf Hopper recite 'Casey at the Bat' in his inimitable way. Kelly recited this in a sing-song, school-boy fashion.\" Upon Kelly's death, a writer would say he gained \"considerable notoriety by his ludicrous rendition of 'Casey at the Bat,' with which he concluded his `turn\u2019 [act] at each performance.\"\nDuring the 1980s, the magic/comedy team Penn &amp; Teller performed a version of \"Casey at the Bat\" with Teller (the \"silent\" partner) struggling to escape a straitjacket while suspended upside-down over a platform of sharp steel spikes. The set-up was that Penn Jillette would leap off his chair upon finishing the poem, releasing the rope which supported Teller, and send his partner to a gruesome death if he wasn't free by that time. The drama of the performance was taken up a notch after the third or fourth stanza, when Penn Jillette began to read out the rest of the poem much faster than the opening stanzas, greatly reducing the time that Teller had left to work free from his bonds.\nOn July 4, 2008, Jack Williams recited the poem accompanied by the Boston Pops during the annual Boston Pops Fireworks Spectacular at Boston's Fourth of July Celebration.\nOn July 14, 2013, the jam rock band Furthur performed the poem as part of a second-set medley in center field of Doubleday Field in Cooperstown, New York.\nRecordings.\nThe first recorded version of \"Casey at the Bat\" was made by Russell Hunting, speaking in a broad Irish accent, in 1893; an 1898 cylinder recording of the text made for the Columbia Graphophone label by Hunting can be accessed from the Cylinder Preservation and Digitization Project at the University of California, Santa Barbara Library.\nDeWolf Hopper's more famous recorded recitation was released in October 1906.\nIn 1946, Walt Disney released a recording of the narration of the poem by Jerry Colonna, which accompanied the studio's animated cartoon adaptation of the poem (see below).\nIn 1973, the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra commissioned its former Composer-in-Residence, Frank Proto, to create a work to feature Baseball Hall-of-Famer Johnny Bench with the orchestra. The result \"Casey At The Bat \u2013 an American Folk Tale for Narrator and Orchestra\" was an immediate hit and recorded by Bench and the orchestra. It has since been performed more than 800 times by nearly every major and Metropolitan orchestra in the U.S. and Canada.\nIn 1980, baseball pitcher Tug McGraw recorded \"Casey at The Bat\u2014an American Folk Tale for Narrator and Orchestra\" by Frank Proto with Peter Nero and the Philly Pops.\nIn 1996, actor James Earl Jones recorded the poem with Arranger/Composer Steven Reineke and the Cincinnati Pops Orchestra.\nOn a 1997 CD set with memorable moments and stories from the game of baseball titled \"Take Me Out to the Ball Game\" produced by Jerry Hoffman and Douglas Duer, a Vincent Price oration of the poem is a slightly altered version of the original.\nIn 1998, actor Sir Derek Jacobi recorded the poem with Composer/Arranger Randol Alan Bass and the National Symphony of London, with the composer conducting. This work, titled \"Casey at the Bat\" has been recorded by the Boston Pops Orchestra, Keith Lockhart conducting.\nIn 2013, Dave Jageler and Charlie Slowes, both radio announcers for the Washington Nationals, each made recordings of the poem for the Library of Congress to mark the 125th anniversary of its first publication.\nMudville.\nA rivalry of sorts has developed between two cities claiming to be the Mudville described in the poem.\nResidents of Holliston, Massachusetts, where there is a neighborhood called Mudville, claim it as the Mudville described in the poem. Thayer grew up in nearby Worcester, Massachusetts, where he wrote the poem in 1888; his family owned a wool mill less than from Mudville's baseball field.\nHowever, residents of Stockton, California\u2014which was known for a time as Mudville prior to incorporation in 1850\u2014also lay claim to being the inspiration for the poem. In 1887, Thayer covered baseball for \"The Daily Examiner\"\u2014owned by his Harvard classmate William Randolph Hearst\u2014and is said to have covered the local California League team, the Stockton Ports. For the 1902 season, after the poem became popular, Stockton's team was renamed the Mudville Nine. The team reverted to the Mudville Nine moniker for the 2000 and 2001 seasons. The Visalia Rawhide, another California League team, currently keep Mudville alive by playing in Mudville jerseys on June\u00a03 each year.\nDespite the towns' rival claims, Thayer himself told the \"Syracuse Post-Standard\" that \"the poem has no basis in fact.\"\nAdaptations.\nThe poem has been adapted to diverse types of media:\nDerivations.\nFor a relatively short poem apparently dashed off quickly (and denied by its author for years), \"Casey at the Bat\" had a profound effect on American popular culture. It has been recited, re-enacted, adapted, dissected, parodied, and subjected to just about every other treatment one could imagine.\nSequels.\n\"Casey's Revenge\", by Grantland Rice (1907), gives Casey another chance against the pitcher who had struck him out in the original story. It was written in 1906, and its first known publication was in the quarterly magazine \"The Speaker\" in June 1907, under the pseudonym of James Wilson. In this version, Rice cites the nickname \"Strike-Out Casey\", hence the influence on Casey Stengel's name. Casey's team is down \"three\" runs by the last of the ninth, and once again Casey is down to two strikes\u2014with the bases full this time. However, he connects, hits the ball so far that it is never found.\n\"Casey - Twenty Years Later,\" by Clarence P. McDonald (1908), imagines a different redemption for Casey, long after his retirement. The poem, which was indeed published twenty years after the original, in the San Francisco Examiner, sees Casey attending a championship game between the fictional team of \"Bugville\" and an unspecified opponent. In a losing effort, Bugville's players are benched and injured throughout the game, until the captain is forced to call for a volunteer from the attendees. An aged Casey answers the call and fills the role surprisingly well, culminating with him hitting the game-winning home run, in his first swing at bat. He then reveals his identity to the joyous fans and players.\nParodies.\nOf the many parodies made of the poem, some of the notable ones include:\nTranslations.\nThere are three known translations of the poem into a foreign language, one in French, written in 2007 by French Canadian linguist Paul Laurendeau, with the title \"Casey au b\u00e2ton\", and two in Hebrew. One by the sports journalist Menachem Less titled \"\u05d4\u05ea\u05d5\u05e8 \u05e9\u05dc \u05e7\u05d9\u05d9\u05e1\u05d9 \u05dc\u05d7\u05d1\u05d5\u05d8\" [Hator Shel Casey Lachbot], and the other more recent and more true to the original cadence and style by Jason H. Elbaum called \u05e7\u05b5\u05d9\u05e1\u05b4\u05d9 \u05d1\u05b7\u05bc\u05de\u05b7\u05bc\u05d7\u05b0\u05d1\u05b5\u05bc\u05d8 [Casey BaMachbayt].\nNames.\nCasey Stengel describes in his autobiography how his original nickname \"K.C.\" (for his hometown, Kansas City, Missouri) evolved into \"Casey\". It was influenced not just by the name of the poem, which was widely popular in the 1910s, but also because he tended to strike out frequently in his early career so fans and writers started calling him \"strikeout Casey\".\nContemporary culture.\nGames.\nThe poem is referenced in the Super Nintendo Entertainment System game \"EarthBound\", where a weapon is named the Casey Bat, which is the strongest weapon in the game, but will only hit 25% of the time.\n\"Enter the Gungeon\" features a weapon called \"Casey,\" taking the form of a baseball bat. The quote \"Batting .50\" is displayed when the weapon is picked up.\nTelevision.\nA recurring character in the \"Pok\u00e9mon\" anime, a girl who is a very enthusiastic fan of baseball, is named \"Casey\" in the English version in reference to the poem.\nA baseball-themed episode of The Twilight Zone was named The Mighty Casey in reference to the poem's lead character, though the plot is unrelated.\nIn the show Friends, Ross clarifies how to spell \"Casey\" as in \"at the bat\" in the Season 2, episode 14 titled \"The One with the Prom Video.\"\nIn the show Containment, Season 1, episode 6 takes its name, \u201cHe Stilled the Rising Tumult\u201d, from the poem.\nPostage stamp.\nOn July 11, 1996, the United States Postal Service issued a commemorative stamp depicting \"Mighty Casey.\" The stamp was part of a set commemorating American folk heroes. Other stamps in the set depicted Paul Bunyan, John Henry, and Pecos Bill."}
{"id": "5810", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5810", "title": "Classical guitar", "text": "The classical guitar (also known as the classic guitar, nylon-string guitar or Spanish guitar) is a member of the guitar family used in classical music. An acoustic wooden string instrument with strings made of gut or nylon, it is a precursor of the modern acoustic and electric guitars, both of which use metal strings. Classical guitars are derived from the Spanish vihuela and gittern in the fifteenth and sixteenth century, which later evolved into the seventeenth and eighteenth-century Baroque guitar and later the modern classical guitar in the mid-nineteenth century.\nFor a right-handed player, the traditional classical guitar has twelve frets clear of the body and is properly held on the left leg, so that the hand that plucks or strums the strings does so near the back of the sound hole (this is called the classical position). The modern steel string guitar, on the other hand, usually has fourteen frets clear of the body (see Dreadnought) and is commonly played off the hip.\nThe phrase \"classical guitar\" may refer to either of two concepts other than the instrument itself:\nThe term \"modern classical guitar\" is sometimes used to distinguish the classical guitar from older forms of guitar, which are in their broadest sense also called \"classical\", or more specifically, \"early guitars\". Examples of early guitars include the six-string early romantic guitar (c. 1790\u20131880), and the earlier baroque guitars with five courses.\nThe materials and the methods of classical guitar construction may vary, but the typical shape is either \"modern classical guitar\" or that \"historic classical guitar\" similar to the early romantic guitars of France and Italy. Classical guitar strings once made of gut are now made of materials such as nylon or fluoropolymers, typically with silver-plated copper fine wire wound about the acoustically lower (d-A-E in standard tuning) strings.\nA guitar family tree may be identified. The flamenco guitar derives from the modern classical, but has differences in material, construction and sound.\nToday's \"modern classical guitar\" was established by the late designs of the 19th-century Spanish luthier, Antonio Torres Jurado.\nContexts.\nThe classical guitar has a long history and one is able to distinguish various:\nBoth instrument and repertoire can be viewed from a combination of various perspectives:\nHistorical (chronological period of time)\nGeographical\nCultural\nHistorical perspective.\nEarly guitars.\nWhile \"classical guitar\" is today mainly associated with the modern classical guitar design, there is an increasing interest in early guitars; and understanding the link between historical repertoire and the particular period guitar that was originally used to perform this repertoire. The musicologist and author Graham Wade writes:\nNowadays it is customary to play this repertoire on reproductions of instruments authentically modelled on concepts of musicological research with appropriate adjustments to techniques and overall interpretation. Thus over recent decades we have become accustomed to specialist artists with expertise in the art of vihuela (a 16th-century type of guitar popular in Spain), lute, Baroque guitar, 19th-century guitar, etc.\nDifferent types of guitars have different sound aesthetics, e.g. different colour-spectrum characteristics (the way the sound energy is spread in the fundamental frequency and the overtones), different response, etc. These differences are due to differences in construction; for example, modern classical guitars usually use a different bracing (fan-bracing) from that used in earlier guitars (they had ladder-bracing); and a different voicing was used by the luthier.\nThere is a historical parallel between musical styles (baroque, classical, romantic, flamenco, jazz) and the style of \"sound aesthetic\" of the musical instruments used, for example: Robert de Vis\u00e9e played a baroque guitar with a very different sound aesthetic from the guitars used by Mauro Giuliani and Luigi Legnani \u2013 they used 19th-century guitars. These guitars in turn sound different from the Torres models used by Segovia that are suited for interpretations of romantic-modern works such as Moreno Torroba.\nWhen considering the guitar from a historical perspective, the musical instrument used is as important as the musical language and style of the particular period. As an example: It is impossible to play a historically informed de Visee or Corbetta (baroque guitarist-composers) on a modern classical guitar. The reason is that the baroque guitar used courses, which are two strings close together (in unison), that are plucked together. This gives baroque guitars an unmistakable sound characteristic and tonal texture that is an integral part of an interpretation. Additionally, the sound aesthetic of the baroque guitar (with its strong overtone presence) is very different from modern classical type guitars, as is shown below.\nToday's use of Torres and post-Torres type guitars for repertoire of all periods is sometimes critically viewed: Torres and post-Torres style modern guitars (with their fan-bracing and design) have a thick and strong tone, very suitable for modern-era repertoire. However, they are considered to emphasize the fundamental too heavily (at the expense of overtone partials) for earlier repertoire (Classical/Romantic: Carulli, Sor, Giuliani, Mertz,\u00a0...; Baroque: de Visee,\u00a0...; etc.). \"Andr\u00e9s Segovia presented the Spanish guitar as a versatile model for all playing styles\" to the extent, that still today, \"many guitarists have tunnel-vision of the world of the guitar, coming from the modern Segovia tradition\".\nWhile fan-braced modern classical Torres and post-Torres style instruments coexisted with traditional ladder-braced guitars at the beginning of the 20th century, the traditional forms eventually fell away. Some attribute this to the popularity of Segovia, considering him \"the catalyst for change toward the Spanish design and the so-called 'modern' school in the 1920s and beyond.\" The styles of music performed on ladder-braced guitars were becoming more and more unfashionable; and, e.g. in Germany, musicians were in part turning towards folk music (Schrammel-music and the Contraguitar), but this only remained localized in Germany and Austria and became unfashionable again. On the other hand, Segovia was playing in concerts around the world, popularizing his modern classical guitar, as well as a new style of music in the 1920s: Spanish romantic-modern style with guitar works by Moreno Torroba, de Falla, etc. Some people consider it to have been this influence of Segovia which led to the domination of the Torres instrument. Factories all over the world began producing them in large numbers.\nIt was the 19th-century classical guitarist Francisco T\u00e1rrega who first popularized the Torres design as a classical solo instrument.\nStyle periods.\nRenaissance.\nComposers of the Renaissance period who wrote for four-course guitar include Alonso Mudarra, Miguel de Fuenllana, Adrian Le Roy, , Guillaume de Morlaye, and .\nFour-course guitar\nBaroque.\nSome well known composers of the Baroque guitar were Gaspar Sanz, Robert de Vis\u00e9e, Francesco Corbetta and Santiago de Murcia.\nClassical and romantic.\nFrom approximately 1780 to 1850, the guitar had numerous composers and performers including:\nHector Berlioz studied the guitar as a teenager; Franz Schubert owned at least two and wrote for the instrument; and Ludwig van Beethoven, after hearing Giuliani play, commented the instrument was \"a miniature orchestra in itself\". Niccol\u00f2 Paganini was also a guitar virtuoso and composer. He once wrote: \"I love the guitar for its harmony; it is my constant companion in all my travels\". He also said, on another occasion: \"I do not like this instrument, but regard it simply as a way of helping me to think.\"\nFrancisco T\u00e1rrega.\nThe guitarist and composer Francisco T\u00e1rrega (November 29, 1852 \u2013 December 15, 1909) was one of the great guitar virtuosos and teachers and is considered the father of modern classical guitar playing. As a professor of guitar at the conservatories of Madrid and Barcelona, he defined many elements of the modern classical technique and elevated the importance of the guitar in the classical music tradition.\nModern period.\nAt the beginning of the 1920s, Andr\u00e9s Segovia popularized the guitar with tours and early phonograph recordings. Segovia collaborated with the composers Federico Moreno Torroba and Joaquin Turina with the aim of extending the guitar repertoire with new music. Segovia's tour of South America revitalized public interest in the guitar and helped the guitar music of Manuel Ponce and Heitor Villa-Lobos reach a wider audience. The composers Alexandre Tansman and Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco were commissioned by Segovia to write new pieces for the guitar. Luiz Bonf\u00e1 popularized Brazilian musical styles such as the newly created Bossa Nova, which was well-received by audiences in the USA. \n\"New music\" \u2013 avant-garde.\nThe classical guitar repertoire also includes modern contemporary works \u2013 sometimes termed \"New Music\" \u2013 such as Elliott Carter's \"Changes\", Crist\u00f3bal Halffter's \"Codex I\", Luciano Berio's \"Sequenza XI\", Maurizio Pisati's \"Sette Studi\", Maurice Ohana's \"Si Le Jour Para\u00eet\", Sylvano Bussotti's \"Rara (eco sierologico)\", Ernst Krenek's \"Suite f\u00fcr Guitarre allein, Op. 164\", Franco Donatoni's \"Algo: Due pezzi per chitarra\", Paolo Coggiola's \"Variazioni Notturne\", etc.\nPerformers who are known for including modern repertoire include J\u00fcrgen Ruck, Elena C\u00e0soli, Leo Brouwer (when he was still performing), John Schneider, Reinbert Evers, Maria K\u00e4mmerling, Siegfried Behrend, David Starobin, Mats Scheidegger, Magnus Andersson, etc.\nThis type of repertoire is usually performed by guitarists who have particularly chosen to focus on the avant-garde in their performances.\nWithin the contemporary music scene itself, there are also works which are generally regarded as extreme. These include works such as Brian Ferneyhough's \"Kurze Schatten II\", Sven-David Sandstr\u00f6m's \"away from\" and Rolf Riehm's \"Toccata Orpheus\" etc. which are notorious for their extreme difficulty.\nThere are also a variety of databases documenting modern guitar works such as Sheer Pluck and others.\nBackground.\nThe evolution of the classical guitar and its repertoire spans more than four centuries. It has a history that was shaped by contributions from earlier instruments, such as the lute, the vihuela, and the baroque guitar.\nHistory.\nOverview of the classical guitar's history.\nThe origins of the modern guitar are not known with certainty. Some believe it is indigenous to Europe, while others think it is an imported instrument. Guitar-like instruments appear in ancient carvings and statues recovered from Egyptian, Sumerian, and Babylonian civilizations. This means that the contemporary Iranian instruments such as the tanbur and setar are distantly related to the European guitar, as they all derive ultimately from the same ancient origins, but by very different historical routes and influences.\nDuring the late Middle Ages, gitterns called \"guitars\" were in use, but their construction and tuning was different from modern guitars. The \"guitarra latina\" in Spain had curved sides and a single hole. The \"guitarra morisca\", which appears to have had Moorish influences, had an oval soundbox and many sound holes on its soundboard. By the 15th century, a four-course double-string instrument called the \"vihuela de mano\", that had tuning like the later modern guitar except on one string and similar construction, first appeared in Spain and spread to France and Italy. In the 16th century, a fifth double-string was added. During this time, composers wrote mostly in tablature notation. In the middle of the 16th century, influences from the vihuela and the Renaissance guitar were combined and the baroque five-string guitar appeared in Spain. The baroque guitar quickly superseded the vihuela in popularity in Spain, France and Italy and Italian players and composers became prominent. In the late 18th century the six-string guitar quickly became popular at the expense of the five-string guitars. During the 19th-century the Spanish luthier and player Antonio de Torres gave the modern classical guitar its definitive form, with a broadened body, increased waist curve, thinned belly, improved internal bracing. The modern classical guitar replaced an older form for the accompaniment of song and dance called flamenco, and a modified version, known as the flamenco guitar, was created.\nRenaissance guitar.\nAlonso de Mudarra's book \"Tres Libros de M\u00fasica\", published in Spain in 1546, contains the earliest known written pieces for a four-course guitarra. This four-course \"guitar\" was popular in France, Spain, and Italy. In France this instrument gained popularity among aristocrats. A considerable volume of music was published in Paris from the 1550s to the 1570s: Simon Gorlier's Le Troysi\u00e8me Livre... mis en tablature de Guiterne was published in 1551. In 1551 Adrian Le Roy also published his Premier Livre de Tablature de Guiterne, and in the same year he also published Briefve et facile instruction pour apprendre la tablature a bien accorder, conduire, et disposer la main sur la Guiterne. Robert Ballard, Gr\u00e9goire Brayssing from Augsburg, and Guillaume Morlaye (c. 1510 \u2013 c. 1558) significantly contributed to its repertoire. Morlaye's Le Premier Livre de Chansons, Gaillardes, Pavannes, Bransles, Almandes, Fantasies \u2013 which has a four-course instrument illustrated on its title page \u2013 was published in partnership with Michel Fedenzat, and among other music, they published six books of tablature by lutenist Albert de Rippe (who was very likely Guillaume's teacher).\nVihuela.\nThe written history of the classical guitar can be traced back to the early 16th century with the development of the \"vihuela\" in Spain. While the lute was then becoming popular in other parts of Europe, the Spaniards did not take to it well because of its association with the Moors. Instead, the lute-like vihuela appeared with two more strings that gave it more range and complexity. In its most developed form, the vihuela was a guitar-like instrument with six double strings made of gut, tuned like a modern classical guitar with the exception of the third string, which was tuned half a step lower. It has a high sound and is rather large to hold. Few have survived and most of what is known today come from diagrams and paintings.\n\"Early romantic guitar\" or \"Guitar during the Classical music era\".\nThe earliest extant six-string guitar is believed to have been built in 1779 by Gaetano Vinaccia (1759 \u2013 after 1831) in Naples, Italy; however, the date on the label is a little ambiguous. The Vinaccia family of luthiers is known for developing the mandolin. This guitar has been examined and does not show tell-tale signs of modifications from a double-course guitar.\nThe authenticity of guitars allegedly produced before the 1790s is often in question. This also corresponds to when Moretti's 6-string method appeared, in 1792.\nModern classical guitar.\nThe modern classical guitar (also known as the \"Spanish guitar\"), the immediate forerunner of today's guitars, was developed in the 19th century by Antonio de Torres Jurado, Ignacio Fleta, Hermann Hauser Sr., and Robert Bouchet.\nTechnique.\nThe fingerstyle is used fervently on the modern classical guitar. The thumb traditionally plucks the bass \u2013 or root note \u2013 whereas the fingers ring the melody and its accompanying parts. Noted players were: Francisco T\u00e1rrega, Emilio Pujol, Andr\u00e9s Segovia\nRepertoire.\nIn the 20th century, many non-guitarist composers wrote for the instrument, which previously only players of the instrument had done. These included: Francisco T\u00e1rrega (1852\u20131909), Roberto Gerhard (1896\u20131970), and Heitor Villa-Lobos (1887\u20131959)\nPerformance.\nThe modern classical guitar is usually played in a seated position, with the instrument resting on the left lap \u2013 and the left foot placed on a footstool. Alternatively \u2013 if a footstool is not used \u2013 a \"guitar support\" can be placed between the guitar and the left lap (the support usually attaches to the instrument's side with suction cups). (There are of course exceptions, with some performers choosing to hold the instrument another way.)\nRight-handed players use the fingers of the right hand to pluck the strings, with the thumb plucking from the top of a string downwards (downstroke) and the other fingers plucking from the bottom of the string upwards (upstroke). The little finger in classical technique as it evolved in the 20th century is used only to ride along with the ring finger without striking the strings and to thus physiologically facilitate the ring finger's motion.\nIn contrast, Flamenco technique, and classical compositions evoking Flamenco, employ the little finger semi-independently in the Flamenco four-finger rasgueado, that rapid strumming of the string by the fingers in reverse order employing the back of the fingernail\u2014a familiar characteristic of Flamenco.\nFlamenco technique, in the performance of the rasgueado also uses the upstroke of the four fingers and the downstroke of the thumb: the string is hit not only with the inner, fleshy side of the fingertip but also with the outer, fingernail side. This was also used in a technique of the vihuela called dedillo which has recently begun to be introduced on the classical guitar.\nSome modern guitarists, such as \u0160t\u011bp\u00e1n Rak and Kazuhito Yamashita, use the little finger independently, compensating for the little finger's shortness by maintaining an extremely long fingernail. Rak and Yamashita have also generalized the use of the upstroke of the four fingers and the downstroke of the thumb (the same technique as in the rasgueado of the Flamenco: as explained above the string is hit not only with the inner, fleshy side of the fingertip but also with the outer, fingernail side) both as a free stroke and as a rest stroke.\nDirect contact with strings.\nAs with other plucked instruments (such as the lute), the musician directly touches the strings (usually plucking) to produce the sound. This has important consequences: Different tone/timbre (of a single note) can be produced by plucking the string in different manners and in different positions. For example, plucking an open string will sound brighter than playing the same note(s) on a fretted position (which would have a warmer tone).\nThe instrument's versatility means it can create a variety of tones, but this finger-picking style also makes the instrument harder to learn than a standard acoustic guitar's strumming technique.\nFingering notation.\nIn guitar \"scores\" the five fingers of the right-hand (which pluck the strings) are designated by the first letter of their Spanish names namely p = thumb (\"pulgar\"), i = index finger (\"\u00edndice\"), m = middle finger (\"mayor\"), a = ring finger (\"anular\"), c = little finger or pinky (\"me\u00f1ique/chiquito\")\nThe four fingers of the left hand (which stop the strings) are designated 1 = index, 2 = major, 3 = ring finger, 4 = little finger; 0 designates an open string, that is a string that is not stopped by a finger of the left hand and whose full length thus vibrates when plucked. On the classical guitar thumb of the left hand is never used to stop strings from above (as is done on the electric guitar): the neck of a classical guitar is too wide and the normal position of the thumb used in classical the guitar technique does not make that possible.\nScores (contrary to \"tablatures\") do not systematically indicate the string to be plucked (although in most cases the choice is obvious). When an indication of the string is required the strings are designated 1 to 6 (from the 1st the high E to the 6th the low E) with figures 1 to 6 inside circles.\nThe positions (that is where on the fretboard the first finger of the left hand is placed) are also not systematically indicated, but when they are (mostly in the case of the execution of \"barr\u00e9s\") these are indicated with Roman numerals from the first position I (index finger of the left hand placed on the 1st fret: F-B flat-E flat-A flat-C-F) to the twelfth position XII (the index finger of the left hand placed on the 12th fret: E-A-D-G-B-E; the 12th fret is placed where the body begins) or even higher up to position XIX (the classical guitar most often having 19 frets, with the 19th fret being most often split and not being usable to fret the 3rd and 4th strings).\nAlternation.\nTo achieve tremolo effects and rapid, fluent scale passages, the player must practice alternation, that is, never plucking a string with the same finger twice in a row. \nUsing p to indicate the thumb, i the index finger, m the middle finger and a the ring finger, common alternation patterns include:\nRepertoire.\nMusic written specifically for the classical guitar dates from the addition of the sixth string (the baroque guitar normally had five pairs of strings) in the late 18th century.\nA guitar recital may include a variety of works, e.g. works written originally for the lute or vihuela by composers such as John Dowland (b. England 1563) and Luis de Narv\u00e1ez (b. Spain c. 1500), and also music written for the harpsichord by Domenico Scarlatti (b. Italy 1685), for the baroque lute by Sylvius Leopold Weiss (b. Germany 1687), for the baroque guitar by Robert de Vis\u00e9e (b. France c. 1650) or even Spanish-flavored music written for the piano by Isaac Alb\u00e9niz (b. Spain 1860) and Enrique Granados (b. Spain 1867). The most important composer who did not write for the guitar but whose music is often played on it is Johann Sebastian Bach (b. Germany 1685), whose baroque lute works have proved highly adaptable to the instrument. \nOf music written originally for guitar, the earliest important composers are from the classical period and include Fernando Sor (b. Spain 1778) and Mauro Giuliani (b. Italy 1781), both of whom wrote in a style strongly influenced by Viennese classicism. In the 19th-century guitar composers such as Johann Kaspar Mertz (b. Slovakia, Austria 1806) were strongly influenced by the dominance of the piano. Not until the end of the nineteenth century did the guitar begin to establish its own unique identity. Francisco T\u00e1rrega (b. Spain 1852) was central to this, sometimes incorporating stylized aspects of flamenco's Moorish influences into his romantic miniatures. This was part of late 19th century mainstream European musical nationalism. Alb\u00e9niz and Granados were central to this movement; their evocation of the guitar was so successful that their compositions have been absorbed into the standard guitar repertoire.\nThe steel-string and electric guitars characteristic to the rise of rock and roll in the post-WWII era became more widely played in North America and the English-speaking world. Agust\u00edn Barrios Mangor\u00e9 of Paraguay composed many works and brought into the mainstream the characteristics of Latin American music, as did the Brazilian composer Heitor Villa-Lobos. Andr\u00e9s Segovia commissioned works from Spanish composers such as Federico Moreno Torroba and Joaqu\u00edn Rodrigo, Italians such as Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco and Latin American composers such as Manuel Ponce of Mexico. Other prominent Latin American composers are Leo Brouwer of Cuba, Antonio Lauro of Venezuela and Enrique Solares of Guatemala. Julian Bream of Britain managed to get nearly every British composer from William Walton and Benjamin Britten to Peter Maxwell Davies to write significant works for guitar. Bream's collaborations with tenor Peter Pears also resulted in song cycles by Britten, Lennox Berkeley and others. There are significant works by composers such as Hans Werner Henze of Germany, Gilbert Biberian of England and Roland Chadwick of Australia.\nThe classical guitar also became widely used in popular music and rock &amp; roll in the 1960s after guitarist Mason Williams popularized the instrument in his instrumental hit Classical Gas. Guitarist Christopher Parkening is quoted in the book \"Classical Gas: The Music of Mason Williams\" as saying that it is the most requested guitar piece besides Malague\u00f1a and perhaps the best-known instrumental guitar piece today.\nIn the field of New Flamenco, the works and performances of Spanish composer and player Paco de Luc\u00eda are known worldwide.\nNot many classical guitar concertos were written through history. Nevertheless, some guitar concertos are nowadays widely known and popular, especially Joaqu\u00edn Rodrigo's \"Concierto de Aranjuez\" (with the famous theme from 2nd movement) and \"Fantas\u00eda para un gentilhombre\". Composers, who also wrote famous guitar concertos are: Antonio Vivaldi (originally for mandolin or lute), Mauro Giuliani, Heitor Villa-Lobos, Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco, Manuel Ponce, Leo Brouwer, Lennox Berkeley and Malcolm Arnold. \nNowadays, more and more contemporary composers decide to write a guitar concerto, among them \"Bosco Sacro\" by Federico Biscione, for guitar and string orchestra, is one of the most inspired.\nPhysical characteristics.\nThe classical guitar is distinguished by a number of characteristics:\nParts.\nParts of typical classical guitars, numbered\nFretboard.\nThe fretboard (also called the fingerboard) is a piece of wood embedded with metal frets that constitutes the top of the neck. It is flat or slightly curved. The curvature of the fretboard is measured by the fretboard radius, which is the radius of a hypothetical circle of which the fretboard's surface constitutes a segment. The smaller the fretboard radius, the more noticeably curved the fretboard is. Fretboards are most commonly made of ebony, but may also be made of rosewood, some other hardwood, or of phenolic composite (\"micarta\").\nFrets.\nFrets are the metal strips (usually nickel alloy or stainless steel) embedded along the fingerboard and placed at points that divide the length of string mathematically. The strings' vibrating length is determined when the strings are pressed down behind the frets. Each fret produces a different pitch and each pitch spaced a half-step apart on the 12 tone scale. The ratio of the widths of two consecutive frets is the twelfth root of two (formula_1), whose numeric value is about 1.059463. The twelfth fret divides the string into two exact halves and the 24th fret (if present) divides the string in half yet again. Every twelve frets represents one octave. This arrangement of frets results in equal tempered tuning.\nNeck.\nA classical guitar's frets, fretboard, tuners, headstock, all attached to a long wooden extension, collectively constitute its neck. The wood for the fretboard usually differs from the wood in the rest of the neck. The bending stress on the neck is considerable, particularly when heavier gauge strings are used.\nNeck joint or 'heel'.\nThis is the point where the neck meets the body. In the traditional Spanish neck joint the neck and block are one piece with the sides inserted into slots cut in the block. Other necks are built separately and joined to the body either with a dovetail joint, mortise or flush joint. These joints are usually glued and can be reinforced with mechanical fasteners. Recently many manufacturers use bolt-on fasteners. Bolt-on neck joints were once associated only with less expensive instruments but now some top manufacturers and hand builders are using variations of this method. Some people believed that the Spanish-style one piece neck/block and glued dovetail necks have better sustain, but testing has failed to confirm this.\nWhile most traditional Spanish style builders use the one-piece neck/heel block, Fleta, a prominent Spanish builder, used a dovetail joint due to the influence of his early training in violin making.\nOne reason for the introduction of the mechanical joints was to make it easier to repair necks. This is more of a problem with steel string guitars than with nylon strings, which have about half the string tension. This is why nylon string guitars often don't include a truss rod either.\nBody.\nThe body of the instrument is a major determinant of the overall sound variety for acoustic guitars. The guitar top, or soundboard, is a finely crafted and engineered element often made of spruce or red cedar. Considered the most prominent factor in determining the sound quality of a guitar, this thin (often 2 or 3\u00a0mm thick) piece of wood has a uniform thickness and is strengthened by different types of internal bracing. The back is made in rosewood and Brazilian rosewood is especially coveted, but mahogany or other decorative woods are sometimes used. \nThe majority of the sound is caused by the vibration of the guitar top as the energy of the vibrating strings is transferred to it. Different patterns of wood bracing have been used through the years by luthiers (Torres, Hauser, Ram\u00edrez, Fleta, and C.F. Martin being among the most influential designers of their times); to not only strengthen the top against collapsing under the tremendous stress exerted by the tensioned strings, but also to affect the resonance of the top. Some contemporary guitar makers have introduced new construction concepts such as \"double-top\" consisting of two extra-thin wooden plates separated by Nomex, or carbon-fiber reinforced lattice \u2013 pattern bracing. The back and sides are made out of a variety of woods such as mahogany, maple, cypress Indian rosewood and highly regarded Brazilian rosewood (\"Dalbergia nigra\"). Each one is chosen for its aesthetic effect and structural strength, and such choice can also play a significant role in determining the instrument's timbre. These are also strengthened with internal bracing, and decorated with inlays and purfling.\nThe body of a classical guitar is a resonating chamber that projects the vibrations of the body through a \"sound hole\", allowing the acoustic guitar to be heard without amplification. The sound hole is normally a single round hole in the top of the guitar (under the strings), though some have different placement, shapes, or numbers of holes. How much air an instrument can move determines its maximum volume.\nBinding, purfling and kerfing.\nThe top, back and sides of a classical guitar body are very thin, so a flexible piece of wood called \"kerfing\" (because it is often scored, or \"kerfed\" so it bends with the shape of the rim) is glued into the corners where the rim meets the top and back. This interior reinforcement provides 5 to 20\u00a0mm of solid gluing area for these corner joints.\nDuring final construction, a small section of the outside corners is carved or routed out and filled with binding material on the outside corners and decorative strips of material next to the binding, which are called \"purfling\". This binding serves to seal off the endgrain of the top and back. Binding and purfling materials are generally made of either wood or high-quality plastic materials.\nBridge.\nThe main purpose of the bridge on a classical guitar is to transfer the vibration from the strings to the soundboard, which vibrates the air inside of the guitar, thereby amplifying the sound produced by the strings. The bridge holds the strings in place on the body. Also, the position of the saddle, usually a strip of bone or plastic that supports the strings off the bridge, determines the distance to the nut (at the top of the fingerboard).\nSizes.\nThe modern full-size classical guitar has a scale length of around , with an overall instrument length of . The scale length has remained quite consistent since it was chosen by the originator of the instrument, Antonio de Torres. This length may have been chosen because it's twice the length of a violin string. As the guitar is tuned to one octave below that of the violin, the same size gut could be used for the first strings of both instruments.\nSmaller-scale instruments are produced to assist children in learning the instrument as the smaller scale leads to the frets being closer together, making it easier for smaller hands. The scale-size for the smaller guitars is usually in the range , with an instrument length of . Full-size instruments are sometimes referred to as 4/4, while the smaller sizes are 3/4, 1/2 or 1/4.\nThese sizes are not absolute, as luthiers may choose variations around these nominal scale-lengths;\nGuitars can be described in size from largest to smallest as:\n\u2013 Contra or Octave bass;\n\u2013 Bass baritone or Quint bass;\n\u2013 Prime or Quart bass;\n\u2013 Terz treble;\n\u2013 Alto Requinto;\n\u2013 Quart;\n\u2013 Quint;\n\u2013 Soprano, Octave or Piccolo.\nTuning.\nA variety of different tunings are used. The most common by far, which one could call the \"standard tuning\" is:\nThe above order is the tuning from the \"1st string\" (highest-pitched string e'\u2014spatially the bottom string in playing position) to the \"6th string\" \u2013 lowest-pitched string E\u2014spatially the upper string in playing position, and hence comfortable to pluck with the thumb.\nThe explanation for this \"asymmetrical\" tuning (in the sense that the maj 3rd is not between the two middle strings, as in the tuning of the viola da gamba) is probably that the guitar originated as a 4-string instrument (actually an instrument with 4 double courses of strings, see above) with a maj 3rd between the 2nd and 3rd strings, and it only became a 6-string instrument by gradual addition of a 5th string and then a 6th string tuned a 4th apart:\n\"The development of the modern tuning can be traced in stages. One of the tunings from the 16th century is C-F-A-D. This is equivalent to the top four strings of the modern guitar tuned a tone lower. However, the absolute pitch for these notes is not equivalent to modern \"concert pitch\". The tuning of the four-course guitar was moved up by a tone and toward the end of the 16th century, five-course instruments were in use with an added lower string tuned to A. This produced A-D-G-B-E, one of a wide number of variant tunings of the period. The low E string was added during the 18th century.\"\nThis tuning is such that neighboring strings are at most 5 semitones apart.\nThere are also a variety of commonly used alternate tunings."}
{"id": "5813", "revid": "3022076", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5813", "title": "C. S. Lewis", "text": "Clive Staples Lewis (29 November 1898\u00a0\u2013 22 November 1963) was a Irish-born, British writer and lay theologian. He held academic positions in English literature at both Oxford University (Magdalen College, 1925\u20131954) and Cambridge University (Magdalene College, 1954\u20131963). He is best known for his works of fiction, especially \"The Screwtape Letters\", \"The Chronicles of Narnia\", and \"The Space Trilogy\", and for his non-fiction Christian apologetics, such as \"Mere Christianity\", \"Miracles\", and \"The Problem of Pain\".\nLewis and fellow novelist J. R. R. Tolkien were close friends. They both served on the English faculty at Oxford University and were active in the informal Oxford literary group known as the Inklings. According to Lewis's 1955 memoir \"Surprised by Joy\", he was baptised in the Church of Ireland, but fell away from his faith during adolescence. Lewis returned to Anglicanism at the age of 32, owing to the influence of Tolkien and other friends, and he became an \"ordinary layman of the Church of England\". Lewis's faith profoundly affected his work, and his wartime radio broadcasts on the subject of Christianity brought him wide acclaim.\nLewis wrote more than 30 books which have been translated into more than 30 languages and have sold millions of copies. The books that make up \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" have sold the most and have been popularised on stage, TV, radio, and cinema. His philosophical writings are widely cited by Christian apologists from many denominations.\nIn 1956, Lewis married American writer Joy Davidman; she died of cancer four years later at the age of 45. Lewis died on 22 November 1963 from kidney failure, one week before his 65th birthday. In 2013, on the 50th anniversary of his death, Lewis was honoured with a memorial in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey.\nBiography.\nChildhood.\nClive Staples Lewis was born in Belfast, Ireland, on 29 November 1898. His father was Albert James Lewis (1863\u20131929), a solicitor whose father Richard had come to Ireland from Wales during the mid-19th century. His mother was Florence Augusta Lewis, n\u00e9e Hamilton (1862\u20131908), known as Flora, the daughter of Thomas Hamilton, a Church of Ireland priest, and great granddaughter of both Bishop Hugh Hamilton and John Staples. He had an elder brother, Warren Hamilton Lewis (known as \"Warnie\"). He was baptised on 29 January 1899 by his maternal grandfather in St Mark's Church, Dundela.\nWhen his dog Jacksie was killed by a car, the four-year old Lewis adopted the name Jacksie. At first, he would answer to no other name, but later accepted Jack, the name by which he was known to friends and family for the rest of his life. When he was seven, his family moved into \"Little Lea\", the family home of his childhood, in the Strandtown area of East Belfast.\nAs a boy, Lewis was fascinated with anthropomorphic animals; he fell in love with Beatrix Potter's stories and often wrote and illustrated his own animal stories. He and his brother Warnie created the world of Boxen, inhabited and run by animals. Lewis loved to read; his father's house was filled with books, and he felt that finding a book to read was as easy as walking into a field and \"finding a new blade of grass\".\nLewis was schooled by private tutors until age nine when his mother died in 1908 from cancer. His father then sent him to live and study at Wynyard School in Watford, Hertfordshire. Lewis's brother had enrolled there three years previously. The school was closed not long afterward due to a lack of pupils; the headmaster Robert \"Oldie\" Capron was soon after committed to a psychiatric hospital. Lewis then attended Campbell College in the east of Belfast about a mile from his home, but left after a few months due to respiratory problems. He was then sent to the health-resort town of Malvern, Worcestershire, where he attended the preparatory school Cherbourg House, which Lewis calls \"Chartres\" in his autobiography. It was during this time that Lewis abandoned his childhood Christian faith and became an atheist, becoming interested in mythology and the occult. In September 1913, Lewis enrolled at Malvern College, where he remained until the following June. He found the school socially competitive. After leaving Malvern, he studied privately with William T. Kirkpatrick, his father's old tutor and former headmaster of Lurgan College.\nAs a teenager, Lewis was wonder-struck by the songs and legends of what he called \"Northernness\", the ancient literature of Scandinavia preserved in the Icelandic sagas. These legends intensified an inner longing that he would later call \"joy\". He also grew to love nature; its beauty reminded him of the stories of the North, and the stories of the North reminded him of the beauties of nature. His teenage writings moved away from the tales of Boxen, and he began using different art forms, such as epic poetry and opera, to try to capture his new-found interest in Norse mythology and the natural world. Studying with Kirkpatrick (\"The Great Knock\", as Lewis afterward called him) instilled in him a love of Greek literature and mythology and sharpened his debate and reasoning skills. In 1916, Lewis was awarded a scholarship at University College, Oxford.\n\"My Irish life\".\nLewis experienced a certain cultural shock on first arriving in England: \"No Englishman will be able to understand my first impressions of England,\" Lewis wrote in \"Surprised by Joy\". \"The strange English accents with which I was surrounded seemed like the voices of demons. But what was worst was the English landscape\u00a0... I have made up the quarrel since; but at that moment I conceived a hatred for England which took many years to heal.\"\nFrom boyhood, Lewis had immersed himself in Norse and Greek mythology, and later in Irish mythology and literature. He also expressed an interest in the Irish language, though there is not much evidence that he laboured to learn it. He developed a particular fondness for W. B. Yeats, in part because of Yeats's use of Ireland's Celtic heritage in poetry. In a letter to a friend, Lewis wrote, \"I have here discovered an author exactly after my own heart, whom I am sure you would delight in, W. B. Yeats. He writes plays and poems of rare spirit and beauty about our old Irish mythology.\"\nIn 1921, Lewis met Yeats twice, since Yeats had moved to Oxford. Lewis was surprised to find his English peers indifferent to Yeats and the Celtic Revival movement, and wrote: \"I am often surprised to find how utterly ignored Yeats is among the men I have met: perhaps his appeal is purely Irish\u00a0\u2013 if so, then thank the gods that I am Irish.\" Early in his career, Lewis considered sending his work to the major Dublin publishers, writing: \"If I do ever send my stuff to a publisher, I think I shall try Maunsel, those Dublin people, and so tack myself definitely onto the Irish school.\" After his conversion to Christianity, his interests gravitated towards Christian theology and away from pagan Celtic mysticism.\nLewis occasionally expressed a somewhat tongue-in-cheek chauvinism towards the English. Describing an encounter with a fellow Irishman, he wrote: \"Like all Irish people who meet in England, we ended by criticisms on the invincible flippancy and dullness of the Anglo-Saxon race. After all, there is no doubt, \"ami\", that the Irish are the only people: with all their faults, I would not gladly live or die among another folk.\" Throughout his life, he sought out the company of other Irish people living in England and visited Northern Ireland regularly. In 1958 he spent his honeymoon there at the Old Inn, Crawfordsburn, which he called \"my Irish life\".\nVarious critics have suggested that it was Lewis's dismay over the sectarian conflict in his native Belfast which led him to eventually adopt such an ecumenical brand of Christianity. As one critic has said, Lewis \"repeatedly extolled the virtues of all branches of the Christian faith, emphasising a need for unity among Christians around what the Catholic writer called 'Mere Christianity', the core doctrinal beliefs that all denominations share\". On the other hand, Paul Stevens of the University of Toronto has written that \"Lewis' mere Christianity masked many of the political prejudices of an old-fashioned Ulster Protestant, a native of middle-class Belfast for whom British withdrawal from Northern Ireland even in the 1950s and 1960s was unthinkable.\"\nFirst World War and Oxford University.\nLewis entered Oxford in the 1917 summer term, studying at University College, and shortly after, he joined the Officers' Training Corps at the university as his \"most promising route into the army\". From there, he was drafted into a Cadet Battalion for training. After his training, he was commissioned into the Third Battalion of the Somerset Light Infantry of the British Army as a Second Lieutenant. Within months of entering Oxford, the British Army shipped him to France to fight in the First World War.\nOn his 19th birthday (29 November 1917) he arrived at the front line in the Somme Valley in France, where he experienced trench warfare for the first time. On 15 April 1918, Lewis was wounded and two of his colleagues were killed by a British shell falling short of its target. He suffered from depression and homesickness during his convalescence and, upon his recovery in October, he was assigned to duty in Andover, England. He was demobilized in December 1918 and soon restarted his studies. In a later letter, Lewis cited that his experience of the horror of war, along with the loss of his mother and his unhappiness in school, were the bases of his pessimism and atheism.\nAfter Lewis returned to Oxford University, he received a First in Honour Moderations (Greek and Latin literature) in 1920, a First in Greats (Philosophy and Ancient History) in 1922, and a First in English in 1923. In 1924 he became a philosophy tutor at University College and, in 1925, was elected a Fellow and Tutor in English Literature at Magdalen College, where he served for 29 years until 1954.\nJanie Moore.\nDuring his army training, Lewis shared a room with another cadet, Edward Courtnay Francis \"Paddy\" Moore (1898\u20131918). Maureen Moore, Paddy's sister, said that the two made a mutual pact that if either died during the war, the survivor would take care of both of their families. Paddy was killed in action in 1918 and Lewis kept his promise. Paddy had earlier introduced Lewis to his mother, Janie King Moore, and a friendship quickly sprang up between Lewis, who was 18 when they met, and Janie, who was 45. The friendship with Moore was particularly important to Lewis while he was recovering from his wounds in hospital, as his father did not visit him.\nLewis lived with and cared for Moore until she was hospitalized in the late 1940s. He routinely introduced her as his mother, referred to her as such in letters, and developed a deeply affectionate friendship with her. Lewis's own mother had died when he was a child, and his father was distant, demanding, and eccentric.\nSpeculation regarding their relationship resurfaced with the 1990 publication of A. N. Wilson's biography of Lewis. Wilson (who never met Lewis) attempted to make a case for their having been lovers for a time. Wilson's biography was not the first to address the question of Lewis's relationship with Moore. George Sayer knew Lewis for 29 years, and he had sought to shed light on the relationship during the period of 14 years prior to Lewis's conversion to Christianity. In his biography \"Jack: A Life of C. S. Lewis\", he wrote:\nLater Sayer changed his mind. In the introduction to the 1997 edition of his biography of Lewis he wrote:\nHowever, the romantic nature of the relationship is doubted by other writers; for example, Philip Zaleski and Carol Zaleski write in \"The Fellowship\" that \nLewis spoke well of Mrs. Moore throughout his life, saying to his friend George Sayer, \"She was generous and taught me to be generous, too.\" In December 1917, Lewis wrote in a letter to his childhood friend Arthur Greeves that Janie and Greeves were \"the two people who matter most to me in the world\".\nIn 1930, Lewis moved into The Kilns with his brother Warnie, Mrs. Moore, and her daughter Maureen. The Kilns was a house in the district of Headington Quarry on the outskirts of Oxford, now part of the suburb of Risinghurst. They all contributed financially to the purchase of the house, which passed to Maureen, who by then was Dame Maureen Dunbar, when Warren died in 1973.\nMoore suffered from dementia in her later years and was eventually moved into a nursing home, where she died in 1951. Lewis visited her every day in this home until her death.\nReturn to Christianity.\nLewis was raised in a religious family that attended the Church of Ireland. He became an atheist at age 15, though he later described his young self as being paradoxically \"very angry with God for not existing\" and \"equally angry with him for creating a world\". His early separation from Christianity began when he started to view his religion as a chore and a duty; around this time, he also gained an interest in the occult, as his studies expanded to include such topics. Lewis quoted Lucretius (\"De rerum natura\", 5.198\u20139) as having one of the strongest arguments for atheism:\nwhich he translated poetically as follows:\nLewis's interest in the works of George MacDonald was part of what turned him from atheism. This can be seen particularly well through this passage in Lewis's \"The Great Divorce\", chapter nine, when the semi-autobiographical main character meets MacDonald in Heaven:\nHe eventually returned to Christianity, having been influenced by arguments with his Oxford colleague and Christian friend J. R. R. Tolkien, whom he seems to have met for the first time on 11 May 1926, and the book \"The Everlasting Man\" by G. K. Chesterton. Lewis vigorously resisted conversion, noting that he was brought into Christianity like a prodigal, \"kicking, struggling, resentful, and darting his eyes in every direction for a chance to escape\". He described his last struggle in \"Surprised by Joy\":\nAfter his conversion to theism in 1929, Lewis converted to Christianity in 1931, following a long discussion during a late-night walk along Addison's Walk with his close friends Tolkien and Hugo Dyson. He records making a specific commitment to Christian belief while on his way to the zoo with his brother. He became a member of the Church of England\u00a0\u2013 somewhat to the disappointment of Tolkien, who had hoped that he would join the Catholic Church.\nLewis was a committed Anglican who upheld a largely orthodox Anglican theology, though in his apologetic writings, he made an effort to avoid espousing any one denomination. In his later writings, some believe that he proposed ideas such as purification of venial sins after death in purgatory (\"The Great Divorce\" and \"Letters to Malcolm\") and mortal sin (\"The Screwtape Letters\"), which are generally considered to be Roman Catholic teachings, although they are also widely held in Anglicanism (particularly in high church Anglo-Catholic circles). Regardless, Lewis considered himself an entirely orthodox Anglican to the end of his life, reflecting that he had initially attended church only to receive communion and had been repelled by the hymns and the poor quality of the sermons. He later came to consider himself honoured by worshipping with men of faith who came in shabby clothes and work boots and who sang all the verses to all the hymns. In 1935, Lewis and his brother Warren donated a stained glass window in memory of their parents to their childhood church of St. Mark's, Dundela, Belfast.\nSecond World War.\nAfter the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, the Lewises took child evacuees from London and other cities into The Kilns. Lewis was only 40 when the war started, and he tried to re-enter military service, offering to instruct cadets; but his offer was not accepted. He rejected the recruiting office's suggestion of writing columns for the Ministry of Information in the press, as he did not want to \"write lies\" to deceive the enemy. He later served in the local Home Guard in Oxford.\nFrom 1941 to 1943, Lewis spoke on religious programmes broadcast by the BBC from London while the city was under periodic air raids. These broadcasts were appreciated by civilians and servicemen at that stage. For example, Air Chief Marshal Sir Donald Hardman wrote:\nThe broadcasts were anthologized in \"Mere Christianity\". From 1941, he was occupied at his summer holiday weekends visiting R.A.F. stations to speak on his faith, invited by the R.A.F.'s Chaplain-in-Chief Maurice Edwards.\nIt was also during the same wartime period that Lewis was invited to become first President of the Oxford Socratic Club in January 1942, a position that he enthusiastically held until he resigned on appointment to Cambridge University in 1954.\nHonour declined.\nLewis was named on the last list of honours by George VI in December 1951 as a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) but declined so as to avoid association with any political issues.\nChair at Cambridge University.\nIn 1954, Lewis accepted the newly founded chair of Mediaeval and Renaissance Literature at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he finished his career. He maintained a strong attachment to the city of Oxford, keeping a home there and returning on weekends until his death in 1963.\nJoy Davidman.\nIn later life, Lewis corresponded with Joy Davidman Gresham, an American writer of Jewish background, a former Communist, and a convert from atheism to Christianity. She was separated from her alcoholic and abusive husband, novelist William L. Gresham, and came to England with her two sons, David and Douglas. Lewis at first regarded her as an agreeable intellectual companion and personal friend, and it was on this level that he agreed to enter into a civil marriage contract with her so that she could continue to live in the UK. The civil marriage took place at the register office, 42 St Giles', Oxford, on 23 April 1956. Lewis's brother Warren wrote: \"For Jack the attraction was at first undoubtedly intellectual. Joy was the only woman whom he had met\u00a0... who had a brain which matched his own in suppleness, in width of interest, and in analytical grasp, and above all in humour and a sense of fun.\" After complaining of a painful hip, she was diagnosed with terminal bone cancer, and the relationship developed to the point that they sought a Christian marriage. Since she was divorced, this was not straightforward in the Church of England at the time, but a friend, the Rev. Peter Bide, performed the ceremony at her bed in the Churchill Hospital on 21 March 1957.\nGresham's cancer soon went into remission, and the couple lived together as a family with Warren Lewis until 1960, when her cancer recurred and she died on 13 July. Earlier that year, the couple took a brief holiday in Greece and the Aegean; Lewis was fond of walking but not of travel, and this marked his only crossing of the English Channel after 1918. Lewis's book \"A Grief Observed\" describes his experience of bereavement in such a raw and personal fashion that he originally released it under the pseudonym N. W. Clerk to keep readers from associating the book with him. Ironically, many friends recommended the book to Lewis as a method for dealing with his own grief. After Lewis's death, his authorship was made public by Faber's, with the permission of the executors.\nLewis continued to raise Gresham's two sons after her death. Douglas Gresham is a Christian like Lewis and his mother, while David Gresham turned to his mother's ancestral faith, becoming Orthodox Jewish in his beliefs. His mother's writings had featured the Jews in an unsympathetic manner, particularly on \"shohet\" (ritual slaughterer). David informed Lewis that he was going to become a ritual slaughterer to present this type of Jewish religious functionary to the world in a more favourable light. In a 2005 interview, Douglas Gresham acknowledged that he and his brother were not close, but he did say that they are in email contact. Douglas remains involved in the affairs of the Lewis estate.\nIllness and death.\nIn early June 1961, Lewis began suffering from nephritis, which resulted in blood poisoning. His illness caused him to miss the autumn term at Cambridge, though his health gradually began improving in 1962 and he returned that April. His health continued to improve and, according to his friend George Sayer, Lewis was fully himself by early 1963. On 15 July that year, he fell ill and was admitted to the hospital; he suffered a heart attack at 5:00\u00a0pm the next day and lapsed into a coma, unexpectedly waking the following day at 2:00\u00a0pm. After he was discharged from the hospital, Lewis returned to the Kilns, though he was too ill to return to work. As a result, he resigned from his post at Cambridge in August.\nLewis's condition continued to decline, and he was diagnosed with end-stage kidney failure in mid-November. He collapsed in his bedroom at 5:30\u00a0pm on 22 November, exactly one week before his 65th birthday, and died a few minutes later. He is buried in the churchyard of Holy Trinity Church, Headington, Oxford. His brother Warren died on 9 April 1973 and was buried in the same grave.\nMedia coverage of Lewis's death was almost completely overshadowed by news of the assassination of US President John F. Kennedy, which occurred on the same day (approximately 55 minutes following Lewis's collapse), as did the death of English writer Aldous Huxley, author of \"Brave New World\". This coincidence was the inspiration for Peter Kreeft's book \"Between Heaven and Hell: A Dialog Somewhere Beyond Death with John F. Kennedy, C. S. Lewis, &amp; Aldous Huxley\". Lewis is commemorated on 22 November in the church calendar of the Episcopal Church.\nCareer.\nScholar.\nLewis began his academic career as an undergraduate student at Oxford University, where he won a triple first, the highest honours in three areas of study. He was then elected a Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, where he worked for nearly thirty years, from 1925 to 1954. In 1954, he was awarded the newly founded chair of Mediaeval and Renaissance Literature at Cambridge University, and was elected a fellow of Magdalene College. Concerning his appointed academic field, he argued that there was no such thing as an English Renaissance. Much of his scholarly work concentrated on the later Middle Ages, especially its use of allegory. His \"The Allegory of Love\" (1936) helped reinvigorate the serious study of late medieval narratives such as the \"Roman de la Rose\".\nLewis was commissioned to write the volume \"English Literature in the Sixteenth Century (Excluding Drama)\" for the Oxford History of English Literature. His book \"A Preface to \"Paradise Lost\"\" is still cited as a criticism of that work. His last academic work, \"The Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature\" (1964), is a summary of the medieval world view, a reference to the \"discarded image\" of the cosmos.\nLewis was a prolific writer, and his circle of literary friends became an informal discussion society known as the \"Inklings\", including J. R. R. Tolkien, Nevill Coghill, Lord David Cecil, Charles Williams, Owen Barfield, and his brother Warren Lewis. Glyer points to December 1929 as the Inklings' beginning date. Lewis's friendship with Coghill and Tolkien grew during their time as members of the Kolb\u00edtar, an Old Norse reading group that Tolkien founded and which ended around the time of the inception of the Inklings. At Oxford, he was the tutor of poet John Betjeman, critic Kenneth Tynan, mystic Bede Griffiths, novelist Roger Lancelyn Green and Sufi scholar Martin Lings, among many other undergraduates. Curiously, the religious and conservative Betjeman detested Lewis, whereas the anti-establishment Tynan retained a lifelong admiration for him.\nOf Tolkien, Lewis writes in \"Surprised by Joy\":\nNovelist.\nIn addition to his scholarly work, Lewis wrote several popular novels, including the science fiction \"Space Trilogy\" for adults and the Narnia fantasies for children. Most deal implicitly with Christian themes such as sin, humanity's fall from grace, and redemption.\nHis first novel after becoming a Christian was \"The Pilgrim's Regress\" (1933), which depicted his experience with Christianity in the style of John Bunyan's \"The Pilgrim's Progress\". The book was poorly received by critics at the time, although David Martyn Lloyd-Jones, one of Lewis's contemporaries at Oxford, gave him much-valued encouragement. Asked by Lloyd-Jones when he would write another book, Lewis replied, \"When I understand the meaning of prayer.\"\nThe \"Space Trilogy\" (also called the \"Cosmic Trilogy\" or \"Ransom Trilogy\") dealt with what Lewis saw as the dehumanizing trends in contemporary science fiction. The first book, \"Out of the Silent Planet\", was apparently written following a conversation with his friend J.R.R. Tolkien about these trends. Lewis agreed to write a \"space travel\" story and Tolkien a \"time travel\" one, but Tolkien never completed \"The Lost Road\", linking his Middle-earth to the modern world. Lewis's main character Elwin Ransom is based in part on Tolkien, a fact to which Tolkien alludes in his letters.\nThe second novel, \"Perelandra\", depicts a new Garden of Eden on the planet Venus, a new Adam and Eve, and a new \"serpent figure\" to tempt Eve. The story can be seen as an account of what might have happened if the terrestrial Adam had defeated the serpent and avoided the Fall of Man, with Ransom intervening in the novel to \"ransom\" the new Adam and Eve from the deceptions of the enemy. The third novel, \"That Hideous Strength\", develops the theme of nihilistic science threatening traditional human values, embodied in Arthurian legend.\nMany ideas in the trilogy, particularly opposition to dehumanization as portrayed in the third book, are presented more formally in \"The Abolition of Man\", based on a series of lectures by Lewis at Durham University in 1943. Lewis stayed in Durham, where he says he was overwhelmed by the magnificence of the cathedral. \"That Hideous Strength\" is in fact set in the environs of \"Edgestow\" university, a small English university like Durham, though Lewis disclaims any other resemblance between the two.\nWalter Hooper, Lewis's literary executor, discovered a fragment of another science-fiction novel apparently written by Lewis called \"The Dark Tower\". Ransom appears in the story but it is not clear whether the book was intended as part of the same series of novels. The manuscript was eventually published in 1977, though Lewis scholar Kathryn Lindskoog doubts its authenticity.\n\"The Chronicles of Narnia\" is a series of seven fantasy novels for children and is considered a classic of children's literature. Written between 1949 and 1954 and illustrated by Pauline Baynes, the series is Lewis's most popular work, having sold over 100 million copies in 41 languages . It has been adapted several times, complete or in part, for radio, television, stage and cinema.\nThe books contain Christian ideas intended to be easily accessible to young readers. In addition to Christian themes, Lewis also borrows characters from Greek and Roman mythology, as well as traditional British and Irish fairy tales.\nOther works.\nLewis wrote several works on Heaven and Hell. One of these, \"The Great Divorce\", is a short novella in which a few residents of Hell take a bus ride to Heaven, where they are met by people who dwell there. The proposition is that they can stay if they choose, in which case they can call the place where they had come from \"Purgatory\", instead of \"Hell\", but many find it not to their taste. The title is a reference to William Blake's \"The Marriage of Heaven and Hell\", a concept that Lewis found a \"disastrous error\". This work deliberately echoes two other more famous works with a similar theme: the \"Divine Comedy\" of Dante Alighieri, and Bunyan's \"The Pilgrim's Progress\".\nAnother short work, \"The Screwtape Letters\", which he dedicated to J. R. R. Tolkien, consists of letters of advice from senior demon Screwtape to his nephew Wormwood on the best ways to tempt a particular human and secure his damnation. Lewis's last novel was \"Till We Have Faces\", which he thought of as his most mature and masterly work of fiction but which was never a popular success. It is a retelling of the myth of Cupid and Psyche from the unusual perspective of Psyche's sister. It is deeply concerned with religious ideas, but the setting is entirely pagan, and the connections with specific Christian beliefs are left implicit.\nBefore Lewis's conversion to Christianity, he published two books: \"Spirits in Bondage\", a collection of poems, and \"Dymer\", a single narrative poem. Both were published under the pen name Clive Hamilton. Other narrative poems have since been published posthumously, including \"Launcelot\", \"The Nameless Isle\", and \"The Queen of Drum\".\nHe also wrote \"The Four Loves\", which rhetorically explains four categories of love: friendship, eros, affection, and charity.\nIn 2009, a partial draft was discovered of \"Language and Human Nature\", which Lewis had begun co-writing with J. R. R. Tolkien, but which was never completed.\nChristian apologist.\nLewis is also regarded by many as one of the most influential Christian apologists of his time, in addition to his career as an English professor and an author of fiction. \"Mere Christianity\" was voted best book of the 20th century by \"Christianity Today\" in 2000. He has been called \"The Apostle to the Skeptics\" due to his approach to religious belief as a sceptic, and his following conversion.\nLewis was very interested in presenting an argument from reason against metaphysical naturalism and for the existence of God. \"Mere Christianity\", \"The Problem of Pain\", and \"Miracles\" were all concerned, to one degree or another, with refuting popular objections to Christianity, such as the question, \"How could a good God allow pain to exist in the world?\" He also became a popular lecturer and broadcaster, and some of his writing originated as scripts for radio talks or lectures (including much of \"Mere Christianity\").\nAccording to George Sayer, losing a 1948 debate with Elizabeth Anscombe, also a Christian, led Lewis to re-evaluate his role as an apologist, and his future works concentrated on devotional literature and children's books. Anscombe had a completely different recollection of the debate's outcome and its emotional effect on Lewis. Victor Reppert also disputes Sayer, listing some of Lewis's post-1948 apologetic publications, including the second and revised edition of his \"Miracles\" in 1960, in which Lewis addressed Anscombe's criticism.&lt;ref name=\"Reppert 2005 https://books.google.com/books?id=hn1gaNlri1cC&amp;pg=PA266 266\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Noteworthy too is Roger Teichman's suggestion in \"The Philosophy of Elizabeth Anscombe\" that the intellectual impact of Anscombe's paper on Lewis's philosophical self-confidence should not be over-rated: \"...\u00a0it seems unlikely that he felt as irretrievably crushed as some of his acquaintances have made out; the episode is probably an inflated legend, in the same category as the affair of Wittgenstein's Poker. Certainly, Anscombe herself believed that Lewis's argument, though flawed, was getting at something very important; she thought that this came out more in the improved version of it that Lewis presented in a subsequent edition of \"Miracles\"\u00a0\u2013 though that version also had 'much to criticize in it'.\"\nLewis wrote an autobiography titled \"Surprised by Joy\", which places special emphasis on his own conversion. He also wrote many essays and public speeches on Christian belief, many of which were collected in \"God in the Dock\" and \"The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses\".\nHis most famous works, the \"Chronicles of Narnia\", contain many strong Christian messages and are often considered allegory. Lewis, an expert on the subject of allegory, maintained that the books were not allegory, and preferred to call the Christian aspects of them \"suppositional\". As Lewis wrote in a letter to a Mrs. Hook in December 1958:\n\"Trilemma\".\nIn a much-cited passage from \"Mere Christianity\", Lewis challenged the view that Jesus was a great moral teacher but not God. He argued that Jesus made several implicit claims to divinity, which would logically exclude that claim:\nAlthough this argument is sometimes called \"Lewis's trilemma\", Lewis did not invent it but rather developed and popularised it. It has also been used by Christian apologist Josh McDowell in his book \"More Than a Carpenter\". It has been widely repeated in Christian apologetic literature, but largely ignored by professional theologians and biblical scholars.\nLewis's Christian apologetics, and this argument in particular, have been criticized. Philosopher John Beversluis described Lewis's arguments as \"textually careless and theologically unreliable\", and this particular argument as logically unsound and an example of a false dilemma. Theologian John Hick argues that New Testament scholars do not now support the view that Jesus claimed to be God. New Testament scholar N. T. Wright criticizes Lewis for failing to recognise the significance of Jesus' Jewish identity and setting\u00a0\u2013 an oversight which \"at best, drastically short-circuits the argument\" and which lays Lewis open to criticism that his argument \"doesn't work as history, and it backfires dangerously when historical critics question his reading of the gospels\", although he believes this \"doesn't undermine the eventual claim\".\nLewis used a similar argument in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\", when the old Professor advises the young heroes that their sister's claims of a magical world must logically be taken as either lies, madness, or truth.\nUniversal morality.\nOne of the main theses in Lewis's apologia is that there is a common morality known throughout humanity, which he calls \"natural law\". In the first five chapters of \"Mere Christianity\", Lewis discusses the idea that people have a standard of behaviour to which they expect people to adhere. Lewis claims that people all over the earth know what this law is and when they break it. He goes on to claim that there must be someone or something behind such a universal set of principles.\nLewis also portrays Universal Morality in his works of fiction. In \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" he describes Universal Morality as the \"deep magic\" which everyone knew.\nIn the second chapter of \"Mere Christianity\", Lewis recognises that \"many people find it difficult to understand what this Law of Human Nature\u00a0... is.\" And he responds first to the idea \"that the Moral Law is simply our herd instinct\" and second to the idea \"that the Moral Law is simply a social convention\". In responding to the second idea Lewis notes that people often complain that one set of moral ideas is better than another, but that this actually argues for there existing some \"Real Morality\" to which they are comparing other moralities. Finally, he notes that sometimes differences in moral codes are exaggerated by people who confuse differences in beliefs about morality with differences in beliefs about facts:\nLewis also had fairly progressive views on the topic of \"animal morality\", in particular the suffering of animals, as is evidenced by several of his essays: most notably, \"On Vivisection\" and \"On the Pains of Animals\".\nLegacy.\nLewis continues to attract a wide readership. In 2008, \"The Times\" ranked him eleventh on their list of \"the 50 greatest British writers since 1945\". Readers of his fiction are often unaware of what Lewis considered the Christian themes of his works. His Christian apologetics are read and quoted by members of many Christian denominations. In 2013, on the 50th anniversary of his death, Lewis joined some of Britain's greatest writers recognised at Poets' Corner, Westminster Abbey. The dedication service, at noon on 22 November 2013, included a reading from \"The Last Battle\" by Douglas Gresham, younger stepson of Lewis. Flowers were laid by Walter Hooper, trustee and literary advisor to the Lewis Estate. An address was delivered by former Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams. The floor stone inscription is a quotation from an address by Lewis: \nLewis has been the subject of several biographies, a few of which were written by close friends, such as Roger Lancelyn Green and George Sayer. In 1985, the screenplay \"Shadowlands\" by William Nicholson dramatized Lewis's life and relationship with Joy Davidman Gresham. It was aired on British television starring Joss Ackland and Claire Bloom. This was also staged as a theatre play starring Nigel Hawthorne in 1989 and made into the 1993 feature film \"Shadowlands\" starring Anthony Hopkins and Debra Winger.\nMany books have been inspired by Lewis, including \"A Severe Mercy\" by his correspondent and friend Sheldon Vanauken. \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" has been particularly influential. Modern children's literature has been more or less influenced by Lewis's series, such as Daniel Handler's \"A Series of Unfortunate Events\", Eoin Colfer's \"Artemis Fowl\", Philip Pullman's \"His Dark Materials\", and J. K. Rowling's \"Harry Potter\". Pullman is an atheist and is known to be sharply critical of C. S. Lewis's work, accusing Lewis of featuring religious propaganda, misogyny, racism, and emotional sadism in his books. However, he has also modestly praised \"The Chronicles of Narnia\" for being a \"more serious\" work of literature in comparison with Tolkien's \"trivial\" \"The Lord of the Rings\". Authors of adult fantasy literature such as Tim Powers have also testified to being influenced by Lewis's work.\nIn \"A Sword Between the Sexes? C. S. Lewis and the Gender Debates\", Mary Stewart Van Leeuwen finds in Lewis's work \"a hierarchical and essentialist view of class and gender\" corresponding to an upbringing during the Edwardian era.\nMost of Lewis's posthumous work has been edited by his literary executor Walter Hooper. Kathryn Lindskoog, an independent Lewis scholar, argued that Hooper's scholarship is not reliable and that he has made false statements and attributed forged works to Lewis. C. S. Lewis's stepson Douglas Gresham denies the forgery claims, saying, \"The whole controversy thing was engineered for very personal reasons\u00a0... Her fanciful theories have been pretty thoroughly discredited.\"\nA bronze statue of Lewis's character Digory from \"The Magician's Nephew\" stands in Belfast's Holywood Arches in front of the Holywood Road Library.\nSeveral C. S. Lewis Societies exist around the world, including one which was founded in Oxford in 1982. The C.S. Lewis Society at the University of Oxford meets at Pusey House during term time to discuss papers on the life and works of Lewis and the other Inklings, and generally appreciate all things Lewisian.\nLive-action film adaptations have been made of three of \"The Chronicles of Narnia: \" (2005), ' (2008) and ' (2010).\nLewis is featured as a main character in \"The Chronicles of the Imaginarium Geographica\" series by James A. Owen. He is one of two characters in Mark St. Germain's 2009 play \"Freud's Last Session\", which imagines a meeting between Lewis, aged 40, and Sigmund Freud, aged 83, at Freud's house in Hampstead, London, in 1939, as the Second World War is about to break out.\nThe CS Lewis Nature Reserve, on ground owned by Lewis, lies behind his house, The Kilns. There is public access."}
{"id": "5814", "revid": "323921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5814", "title": "Chinese dominoes", "text": "Chinese dominoes are used in several tile-based games, namely, tien gow, pai gow, tiu u and kap tai shap. In Cantonese they are called (), which literally means \"bone tiles\"; it is also the name of a northern Chinese game, where the rules are quite different from the southern Chinese version of tien gow.\nHistory.\nMing author Xie Zhaozhe (1567\u20131624) records the legend of dominoes having been presented to Song Emperor Huizong in 1112. However the contemporary Li Qingzhao (1084 \u2013 ) made no mention of dominoes in her compendium of games. The oldest confirmed written mention of dominoes in China comes from the \"Former Events in Wulin\" (i.e. the capital Hangzhou) written by the Yuan Dynasty (1271\u20131368) author Zhou Mi (1232\u20131298), who listed \"pupai\" (gambling plaques or dominoes) as well as dice as items sold by peddlers during the reign of Song Emperor Xiaozong (). Andrew Lo asserts that Zhou Mi meant dominoes when referring to \"pupai\", since the Ming author Lu Rong (1436\u20131494) explicitly defined \"pupai\" as dominoes (in regards to a story of a suitor who won a maiden's hand by drawing out four winning \"pupai\" from a set). Tiles dating from the 12th to 14th centuries have survived. Unlike most modern tiles they are white with black and red pips.\nDuring the Qing dynasty (1644-1912), the suits known as \"Chinese\" and \"barbarian\" were renamed to \"civil\" and \"military\" respectively to avoid offending the ruling Manchus. Tiles with blank ends, like those found in Western \"double-six\" dominoes, once existed during the 17th century. These games employed two sets of \"double-six\" tiles. It is possible that these were the types of dominoes that made it to Europe the following century.\nDeck composition and ranking.\nEach tile pattern in the Chinese domino set is made up of the outcome of a throw of two six-sided dice. Each combination is only used once, so there are 21 unique possible patterns. Eleven of these 21 unique patterns are repeated to make a total of 32 tiles in a Chinese dominoes set. The tile set consists of 32 tiles in two \"suits\" or groups called \"military\" and \"civil\". There are no markings on the tiles to distinguish these suits; a player must simply remember which tiles belong to which group.\nThe tile set contains two each of eleven civil suit tiles (6-6, 1-1, 4-4, 1-3, 5-5, 3-3, 2-2, 5-6, 4-6, 1-6, 1-5) and one each of ten military suit tiles (3-6, 4-5; 2-6, 3-5; 2-5, 3-4; 2-4; 1-4, 2-3; 1-2). Each civil tile also has a Chinese name (and common rough translation to English): The 6-6 is \"tin\" ( heaven), 1-1 is \"dei\" ( earth), 4-4 is \"yan\" ( man), 1-3 is \"ngo\" ( goose or harmony), 5-5 is \"mui\" ( plum flower), 3-3 is \"cheung\" ( long), 2-2 is \"ban\" ( board), 5-6 is \"fu\" ( hatchet), 4-6 is \"ping\" ( partition), 1-6 is \"tsat\" () (long leg seven), and 1-5 is \"luk\" () (big head six).\nThe civil tiles are ranked according to the Chinese cultural significance of the tile names, and must be memorized. The hendiatris of () dates back for over two thousand years while the harmony () of the three have been in dice and domino games since at least the Ming dynasty. Remembering the suits and rankings of the tiles is easier if one understands the Chinese names of the tiles and the symbolism behind them. The military tiles are named and ranked according to the total points on the tiles. For example, the \"nines\" (3-6 and 4-5) rank higher than the \"eights\" (2-6 and 3-5).\nThe military tiles (since there is only one each) are also considered to be five mixed \"pairs\" (for example, the 3-6 and 4-5 tiles \"match\" because they have same total points and both in the military suit). Among the military tiles, individual tiles of the same pair (such as 1-4 and 2-3) rank equally. The 2-4 and 1-2 are an odd pair. They are the only tiles in the whole set that don't match other tiles in the normal sense. This pair when played together is considered a suit on its own, called the \"gi jun\" ( supreme). It is the highest ranking pair in the game of Pai Gow, though the tiles rank low individually (in their normal order). When a tile of this pair is played individually in the game of Tien Gow, each takes its regular ranking among other military suit tiles according to the total points. The rankings of the individual tiles are similar in most games. However, the ranking of combination tiles is slightly different in Pai Gow and Tien Gow.\nUsing the same coloring scheme of the traditional Chinese dice, every half-domino with 1 or 4 pips has those pips colored red (for example, the 4-5 domino has four red pips and five white pips). The only exception is the pair of 6-6 tiles. Half of the pips on the 6-6 domino are colored red to make them stand out as the top ranking tiles.\nThere are also sets with where the tiles have Xiangqi characters next to the pips. As Xiangqi also has 32 pieces, these dual use sets can be used to play Giog. Variant sets include the Digging Flowers () game in which some tiles have flowers or frames printed on them while others have their values duplicated and may have mahjong type flower and blank tiles.\nBone Tiles game.\nThe eponymous game of Bone Tiles (\"g\u01d4p\u00e1i\" in Mandarin) is played in northern and central China and as far south as Hunan. The name suggests that it is or became the default game played with dominoes in those regions. It is a trick-taking game similar to Tien Gow but has been simplified. In single-tile tricks, the civil and military suits have been merged into a single suit. In double-tile tricks, there is a new ranking order similar to Pai Gow. Triple-tile and quadruple-tile tricks are not allowed as in older versions of Tien Gow. Scoring has been simplified to number of stacks won."}
{"id": "5816", "revid": "2340490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5816", "title": "Cenozoic", "text": "The Cenozoic ( ; ) is Earth's current geological era, representing the last 66million years of Earth's history. It is characterized by the dominance of mammals, birds and flowering plants, a cooling and drying climate, and the current configuration of continents. It is the latest of three geological eras since complex life evolved, preceded by the Mesozoic and Paleozoic. It started with the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, when many species, including the non-avian dinosaurs, became extinct in an event attributed by most experts to the impact of a large asteroid or other celestial body, the Chicxulub impactor.\nThe Cenozoic is also known as the Age of Mammals because the terrestrial animals that dominated both hemispheres were mammalsthe eutherians (placentals) in the northern hemisphere and the metatherians (marsupials, now mainly restricted to Australia) in the southern hemisphere. The extinction of many groups allowed mammals and birds to greatly diversify so that large mammals and birds dominated the Earth. The continents also moved into their current positions during this era.\nThe Earth's climate had begun a drying and cooling trend, culminating in the glaciations of the Pleistocene Epoch, and partially offset by the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum.\nNomenclature.\n\"Cenozoic\" derives from the Greek words ( 'new') and ( 'life'). The name was proposed in 1840 by the British geologist John Phillips (1800\u20131874), who originally spelled it \"Kainozoic\". The era is also known as the \"C\u00e6nozoic, Caenozoic,\" or \"Cainozoic\" ().\nIn name, the Cenozoic () is comparable to the preceding Mesozoic ('middle life') and Paleozoic ('old life') eras, as well as to the Proterozoic ('earlier life') eon.\nDivisions.\nThe Cenozoic is divided into three periods: the Paleogene, Neogene, and Quaternary; and seven epochs: the Paleocene, Eocene, Oligocene, Miocene, Pliocene, Pleistocene, and Holocene. The Quaternary Period was officially recognized by the International Commission on Stratigraphy in June 2009. In 2004, the Tertiary Period was officially replaced by the Paleogene and Neogene periods. The common use of epochs during the Cenozoic helps paleontologists better organize and group the many significant events that occurred during this comparatively short interval of time. Knowledge of this era is more detailed than any other era because of the relatively young, well-preserved rocks associated with it.\nPaleogene.\nThe Paleogene spans from the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs, 66 million years ago, to the dawn of the Neogene, 23.03 million years ago. It features three epochs: the Paleocene, Eocene and Oligocene. \nThe Paleocene epoch lasted from 66 million to 56 million years ago. Modern placental mammals originated during this time. The Paleocene is a transitional point between the devastation that is the K\u2013Pg extinction event, and the rich jungle environment that is the Early Eocene. The Early Paleocene saw the recovery of the earth. The continents began to take their modern shape, but all the continents and the subcontinent of India were separated from each other. Afro-Eurasia was separated by the Tethys Sea, and the Americas were separated by the strait of Panama, as the isthmus had not yet formed. This epoch featured a general warming trend, with jungles eventually reaching the poles. The oceans were dominated by sharks as the large reptiles that had once predominated were extinct. Archaic mammals filled the world such as creodonts (extinct carnivores, unrelated to existing Carnivora).\nThe Eocene Epoch ranged from 56 million years to 33.9 million years ago. In the Early-Eocene, species living in dense forest were unable to evolve into larger forms, as in the Paleocene. All known mammals were under 10 kilograms. Among them were early primates, whales and horses along with many other early forms of mammals. At the top of the food chains were huge birds, such as Paracrax. The temperature was 30 degrees Celsius with little temperature gradient from pole to pole. In the Mid-Eocene, the Circumpolar-Antarctic current between Australia and Antarctica formed. This disrupted ocean currents worldwide and as a result caused a global cooling effect, shrinking the jungles. This allowed mammals to grow to mammoth proportions, such as whales which, by that time, had become almost fully aquatic. Mammals like \"Andrewsarchus\" were at the top of the food-chain. The Late Eocene saw the rebirth of seasons, which caused the expansion of savanna-like areas, along with the evolution of grass. The end of the Eocene was marked by the Eocene-Oligocene extinction event, the European face of which is known as the Grande Coupure.\nThe Oligocene Epoch spans from 33.9 million to 23.03 million years ago. The Oligocene featured the expansion of grass which had led to many new species to evolve, including the first elephants, cats, dogs, marsupials and many other species still prevalent today. Many other species of plants evolved in this period too. A cooling period featuring seasonal rains was still in effect. Mammals still continued to grow larger and larger.\nNeogene.\nThe Neogene spans from 23.03 million to 2.58 million years ago. It features 2 epochs: the Miocene, and the Pliocene.\nThe Miocene epoch spans from 23.03 to 5.333 million years ago and is a period in which grass spread further, dominating a large portion of the world, at the expense of forests. Kelp forests evolved, encouraging the evolution of new species, such as sea otters. During this time, perissodactyla thrived, and evolved into many different varieties. Apes evolved into 30 species. The Tethys Sea finally closed with the creation of the Arabian Peninsula, leaving only remnants as the Black, Red, Mediterranean and Caspian Seas. This increased aridity. Many new plants evolved: 95% of modern seed plants evolved in the mid-Miocene.\nThe Pliocene epoch lasted from 5.333 to 2.58 million years ago. The Pliocene featured dramatic climactic changes, which ultimately led to modern species of flora and fauna. The Mediterranean Sea dried up for several million years (because the ice ages reduced sea levels, disconnecting the Atlantic from the Mediterranean, and evaporation rates exceeded inflow from rivers). \"Australopithecus\" evolved in Africa, beginning the human branch. The isthmus of Panama formed, and animals migrated between North and South America during the great American interchange, wreaking havoc on local ecologies. Climatic changes brought: savannas that are still continuing to spread across the world; Indian monsoons; deserts in central Asia; and the beginnings of the Sahara desert. The world map has not changed much since, save for changes brought about by the glaciations of the Quaternary, such as the Great Lakes, Hudson Bay, and the Baltic sea.\nQuaternary.\nThe Quaternary spans from 2.58 million years ago to present day, and is the shortest geological period in the Phanerozoic Eon. It features modern animals, and dramatic changes in the climate. It is divided into two epochs: the Pleistocene and the Holocene.\nThe Pleistocene lasted from 2.58 million to 11,700 years ago. This epoch was marked by ice ages as a result of the cooling trend that started in the Mid-Eocene. There were at least four separate glaciation periods marked by the advance of ice caps as far south as 40\u00b0 N in mountainous areas. Meanwhile, Africa experienced a trend of desiccation which resulted in the creation of the Sahara, Namib, and Kalahari deserts. Many animals evolved including mammoths, giant ground sloths, dire wolves, saber-toothed cats, and most famously \"Homo sapiens\". 100,000 years ago marked the end of one of the worst droughts in Africa, and led to the expansion of primitive humans. As the Pleistocene drew to a close, a major extinction wiped out much of the world's megafauna, including some of the hominid species, such as Neanderthals. All the continents were affected, but Africa to a lesser extent. It still retains many large animals, such as hippos.\nThe Holocene began 11,700 years ago and lasts to the present day. All recorded history and \"the Human history\" lies within the boundaries of the Holocene epoch. Human activity is blamed for a mass extinction that began roughly 10,000 years ago, though the species becoming extinct have only been recorded since the Industrial Revolution. This is sometimes referred to as the \"Sixth Extinction\". It is often cited that over 322 recorded species have become extinct due to human activity since the Industrial Revolution, but the rate may be as high as 500 veterbrate species alone, the majority of which have occurred after 1900.\nAnimal life.\nEarly in the Cenozoic, following the K-Pg event, the planet was dominated by relatively small fauna, including small mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians. From a geological perspective, it did not take long for mammals and birds to greatly diversify in the absence of the dinosaurs that had dominated during the Mesozoic. Some flightless birds grew larger than humans. These species are sometimes referred to as \"terror birds,\" and were formidable predators. Mammals came to occupy almost every available niche (both marine and terrestrial), and some also grew very large, attaining sizes not seen in most of today's terrestrial mammals.\nEarly animals were the Entelodon, Paraceratherium (a hornless rhinoceros relative) and Basilosaurus (an early whale). The extinction of many large diapsid groups, such as the non-avian dinosaurs, Plesiosauria and Pterosauria allowed mammals and birds to greatly diversify and become the world's predominant fauna.\nTectonics.\nGeologically, the Cenozoic is the era when the continents moved into their current positions. Australia-New Guinea, having split from Pangea during the early Cretaceous, drifted north and, eventually, collided with South-east Asia; Antarctica moved into its current position over the South Pole; the Atlantic Ocean widened and, later in the era (2.8 million years ago), South America became attached to North America with the isthmus of Panama.\nIndia collided with Asia creating the Himalayas; Arabia collided with Eurasia, closing the Tethys Ocean and creating the Zagros Mountains, around .\nThe break-up of Gondwana in Late Cretaceous and Cenozoic times led to a shift in the river courses of various large African rivers including the Congo, Niger, Nile, Orange, Limpopo and Zambezi.\nClimate.\nIn the Cretaceous, the climate was hot and humid with lush forests at the poles, there was no permanent ice and sea levels were around 300 metres higher than today. This continued for the first 10 million years of the Paleocene, culminating in the Paleocene\u2013Eocene Thermal Maximum about . Around the earth entered a period of long term cooling. This was mainly due to the collision of India with Eurasia, which caused the rise of the Himalayas: the upraised rocks eroded and reacted with in the air, causing a long-term reduction in the proportion of this greenhouse gas in the atmosphere. Around permanent ice began to build up on Antarctica. The cooling trend continued in the Miocene, with relatively short warmer periods. When South America became attached to North America creating the Isthmus of Panama around , the Arctic region cooled due to the strengthening of the Humboldt and Gulf Stream currents, eventually leading to the glaciations of the Quaternary ice age, the current interglacial of which is the Holocene Epoch.\nRecent analysis of the geomagnetic reversal frequency, oxygen isotope record, and tectonic plate subduction rate, which are indicators of the changes in the heat flux at the core mantle boundary, climate and plate tectonic activity, shows that all these changes indicate similar rhythms on million years' timescale in the Cenozoic Era occurring with the common fundamental periodicity of \u223c13 Myr during most of the time.\nLife.\nDuring the Cenozoic, mammals proliferated from a few small, simple, generalized forms into a diverse collection of terrestrial, marine, and flying animals, giving this period its other name, the Age of Mammals. The Cenozoic is just as much the age of savannas, the age of co-dependent flowering plants and insects, and the age of birds. Grass also played a very important role in this era, shaping the evolution of the birds and mammals that fed on it. One group that diversified significantly in the Cenozoic as well were the snakes. Evolving in the Cenozoic, the variety of snakes increased tremendously, resulting in many colubrids, following the evolution of their current primary prey source, the rodents.\nIn the earlier part of the Cenozoic, the world was dominated by the gastornithid birds, terrestrial crocodiles like \"Pristichampsus\", and a handful of primitive large mammal groups like uintatheres, mesonychids, and pantodonts. But as the forests began to recede and the climate began to cool, other mammals took over.\nThe Cenozoic is full of mammals both strange and familiar, including chalicotheres, creodonts, whales, primates, entelodonts, saber-toothed cats, mastodons and mammoths, three-toed horses, giant rhinoceros like \"Indricotherium\", the rhinoceros-like brontotheres, various bizarre groups of mammals from South America, such as the vaguely elephant-like pyrotheres and the dog-like marsupial relatives called borhyaenids and the monotremes and marsupials of Australia."}
{"id": "5820", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5820", "title": "Confucianism", "text": "Confucianism, also known as Ruism, is a system of thought and behavior originating in ancient China. Variously described as tradition, a philosophy, a religion, a humanistic or rationalistic religion, a way of governing, or simply a way of life, Confucianism developed from what was later called the Hundred Schools of Thought from the teachings of the Chinese philosopher Confucius (551\u2013479 BCE).\nConfucius considered himself a transmitter of cultural values inherited from the Xia (c. 2070\u20131600 BCE), Shang (c. 1600\u20131046 BCE) and Zhou dynasties (c.\u20091046\u2013256 BCE). Confucianism was suppressed during the Legalist and autocratic Qin dynasty (221\u2013206 BCE), but survived. During the Han dynasty (206 BCE\u2013220 CE), Confucian approaches edged out the \"proto-Taoist\" Huang\u2013Lao as the official ideology, while the emperors mixed both with the realist techniques of Legalism.\nA Confucian revival began during the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907 CE). In the late Tang, Confucianism developed in response to Buddhism and Taoism and was reformulated as Neo-Confucianism. This reinvigorated form was adopted as the basis of the imperial exams and the core philosophy of the scholar official class in the Song dynasty (960\u20131297). The abolition of the examination system in 1905 marked the end of official Confucianism. The intellectuals of the New Culture Movement of the early twentieth century blamed Confucianism for China's weaknesses. They searched for new doctrines to replace Confucian teachings; some of these new ideologies include the \"Three Principles of the People\" with the establishment of the Republic of China, and then Maoism under the People's Republic of China. In the late twentieth century, the Confucian work ethic has been credited with the rise of the East Asian economy.\nWith particular emphasis on the importance of the family and social harmony, rather than on an otherworldly source of spiritual values, the core of Confucianism is humanistic. According to Herbert Fingarette's conceptualisation of Confucianism as a philosophical system which regards \"the secular as sacred\", Confucianism transcends the dichotomy between religion and humanism, considering the ordinary activities of human life\u2014and especially human relationships\u2014as a manifestation of the sacred, because they are the expression of humanity's moral nature (\"x\u00ecng\" ), which has a transcendent anchorage in Heaven (\"Ti\u0101n\" ). While \"Ti\u0101n\" has some characteristics that overlap the category of godhead, it is primarily an \"impersonal\" absolute principle, like the \"D\u00e0o\" () or the \"Brahman\". Confucianism focuses on the practical order that is given by a this-worldly awareness of the \"Ti\u0101n\". Confucian liturgy (called \"r\u00fa\", or sometimes , meaning 'orthopraxy') led by Confucian priests or \"sages of rites\" () to worship the gods in public and ancestral Chinese temples is preferred on certain occasions, by Confucian religious groups and for civil religious rites, over Taoist or popular ritual.\nThe worldly concern of Confucianism rests upon the belief that human beings are fundamentally good, and teachable, improvable, and perfectible through personal and communal endeavor, especially self-cultivation and self-creation. Confucian thought focuses on the cultivation of virtue in a morally organised world. Some of the basic Confucian ethical concepts and practices include \"r\u00e9n\", \"y\u00ec\", and \"l\u01d0\", and \"zh\u00ec\". \"R\u00e9n\" (, 'benevolence' or 'humaneness') is the essence of the human being which manifests as compassion. It is the virtue-form of Heaven. \"Y\u00ec\" () is the upholding of righteousness and the moral disposition to do good. \"L\u01d0\" () is a system of ritual norms and propriety that determines how a person should properly act in everyday life in harmony with the law of Heaven. \"Zh\u00ec\" () is the ability to see what is right and fair, or the converse, in the behaviors exhibited by others. Confucianism holds one in contempt, either passively or actively, for failure to uphold the cardinal moral values of \"r\u00e9n\" and \"y\u00ec\".\nTraditionally, cultures and countries in the East Asian cultural sphere are strongly influenced by Confucianism, including mainland China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Macau, Korea, Japan, and Vietnam, as well as various territories settled predominantly by Han Chinese people, such as Singapore. Today, it has been credited for shaping East Asian societies and overseas Chinese communities, and to some extent, other parts of Asia. In the last decades there have been talks of a \"Confucian Revival\" in the academic and the scholarly community, and there has been a grassroots proliferation of various types of Confucian churches. In late 2015 many Confucian personalities formally established a national Holy Confucian Church () in China to unify the many Confucian congregations and civil society organisations.\nTerminology.\nStrictly speaking, there is no term in Chinese which directly corresponds to \"Confucianism\". In the Chinese language, the character \"r\u00fa\" meaning \"scholar\" or \"learned\" or \"refined man\" is generally used both in the past and the present to refer to things related to Confucianism. The character \"r\u00fa\" in ancient China had diverse meanings. Some examples include \"to tame\", \"to mould\", \"to educate\", \"to refine\". Several different terms, some of which with modern origin, are used in different situations to express different facets of Confucianism, including:\nThree of them use \"r\u00fa\". These names do not use the name \"Confucius\" at all, but instead focus on the ideal of the Confucian man. The use of the term \"Confucianism\" has been avoided by some modern scholars, who favor \"Ruism\" and \"Ruists\" instead. Robert Eno argues that the term has been \"burdened... with the ambiguities and irrelevant traditional associations\". Ruism, as he states, is more faithful to the original Chinese name for the school.\nAccording to Zhou Youguang, \"r\u00fa\" originally referred to shamanic methods of holding rites and existed before Confucius's times, but with Confucius it came to mean devotion to propagating such teachings to bring civilisation to the people. Confucianism was initiated by Confucius, developed by Mencius (c. 372\u2013289 BCE) and inherited by later generations, undergoing constant transformations and restructuring since its establishment, but preserving the principles of humaneness and righteousness at its core.\nFive Classics (, \"W\u01d4j\u012bng\") and the Confucian vision.\nTraditionally, Confucius was thought to be the author or editor of the Five Classics which were the basic texts of Confucianism. The scholar Yao Xinzhong allows that there are good reasons to believe that Confucian classics took shape in the hands of Confucius, but that \"nothing can be taken for granted in the matter of the early versions of the classics\". Professor Yao says that perhaps most scholars today hold the \"pragmatic\" view that Confucius and his followers, although they did not intend to create a system of classics, \"contributed to their formation\". In any case, it is undisputed that for most of the last 2,000 years, Confucius was believed to have either written or edited these texts. \nThe scholar Tu Weiming explains these classics as embodying \"five visions\" which underlie the development of Confucianism:\nDoctrines.\nTheory and theology.\nConfucianism revolves around the pursuit of the unity of the individual self and the God of Heaven (\"Ti\u0101n\" ), or, otherwise said, around the relationship between humanity and Heaven. The principle of Heaven (\"L\u01d0\" or \"D\u00e0o\" ), is the order of the creation and the source of divine authority, monistic in its structure. Individuals may realise their humanity and become one with Heaven through the contemplation of such order. This transformation of the self may be extended to the family and society to create a harmonious fiduciary community. Jo\u00ebl Thoraval studied Confucianism as a diffused civil religion in contemporary China, finding that it expresses itself in the widespread worship of five cosmological entities: Heaven and Earth (\"Di\" ), the sovereign or the government (\"j\u016bn\" ), ancestors (\"q\u012bn\" ) and masters (\"sh\u012b\" ).\nHeaven is not some being pre-existing the temporal world. According to the scholar Stephan Feuchtwang, in Chinese cosmology, which is not merely Confucian but shared by all Chinese religions, \"the universe creates itself out of a primary chaos of material energy\" (\"hundun\" and \"qi\" ), organising through the polarity of yin and yang which characterises any thing and life. Creation is therefore a continuous ordering; it is not a \"creation \"ex nihilo\".\" \"Yin and yang are the invisible and visible, the receptive and the active, the unshaped and the shaped; they characterise the yearly cycle (winter and summer), the landscape (shady and bright), the sexes (female and male), and even sociopolitical history (disorder and order). Confucianism is concerned with finding \"middle ways\" between yin and yang at every new configuration of the world.\"\"\"\nConfucianism conciliates both the inner and outer polarities of spiritual cultivation, that is to say self-cultivation and world redemption, synthesised in the ideal of \"sageliness within and kingliness without\". \"R\u00e9n\", translated as \"humaneness\" or the essence proper of a human being, is the character of compassionate mind; it is the virtue endowed by Heaven and at the same time the means by which man may achieve oneness with Heaven comprehending his own origin in Heaven and therefore divine essence. In the \"D\u00e0t\u00f3ng sh\u016b\" () it is defined as \"to form one body with all things\" and \"when the self and others are not separated ... compassion is aroused\".\n\"Ti\u0101n\" and the gods.\n\"Ti\u0101n\" (), a key concept in Chinese thought, refers to the God of Heaven, the northern culmen of the skies and its spinning stars, earthly nature and its laws which come from Heaven, to \"Heaven and Earth\" (that is, \"all things\"), and to the awe-inspiring forces beyond human control. There are such a number of uses in Chinese thought that it is not possible to give one translation into English.\nConfucius used the term in a mystical way. He wrote in the \"Analects\" (7.23) that Tian gave him life, and that Tian watched and judged (6.28; 9.12). In 9.5 Confucius says that a person may know the movements of the Tian, and this provides with the sense of having a special place in the universe. In 17.19 Confucius says that Tian spoke to him, though not in words. The scholar Ronnie Littlejohn warns that Tian was not to be interpreted as personal God comparable to that of the Abrahamic faiths, in the sense of an otherworldly or transcendent creator. Rather it is similar to what Taoists meant by \"Dao\": \"the way things are\" or \"the regularities of the world\", which Stephan Feuchtwang equates with the ancient Greek concept of \"physis\", \"nature\" as the generation and regenerations of things and of the moral order. Tian may also be compared to the \"Brahman\" of Hindu and Vedic traditions. The scholar Promise Hsu, in the wake of Robert B. Louden, explained 17:19 (\"What does Tian ever say? Yet there are four seasons going round and there are the hundred things coming into being. What does Tian say?\") as implying that even though Tian is not a \"speaking person\", it constantly \"does\" through the rhythms of nature, and communicates \"how human beings ought to live and act\", at least to those who have learnt to carefully listen to it.\nZigong, a disciple of Confucius, said that Tian had set the master on the path to become a wise man (9.6). In 7.23 Confucius says that he has no doubt left that the Tian gave him life, and from it he had developed right virtue ( \"d\u00e9\"). In 8.19 he says that the lives of the sages are interwoven with Tian.\nRegarding personal gods (\"sh\u00e9n\", energies who emanate from and reproduce the Tian) enliving nature, in the \"Analects\" Confucius says that it is appropriate () for people to worship ( \"j\u00ecng\") them, though through proper rites (), implying respect of positions and discretion. Confucius himself was a ritual and sacrificial master. Answering to a disciple who asked whether it is better to sacrifice to the god of the stove or to the god of the family (a popular saying), in 3.13 Confucius says that in order to appropriately pray gods one should first know and respect Heaven. In 3.12 he explains that religious rituals produce meaningful experiences, and one has to offer sacrifices in person, acting in presence, otherwise \"it is the same as not having sacrificed at all\". Rites and sacrifices to the gods have an ethical importance: they generate good life, because taking part in them leads to the overcoming of the self. Analects 10.11 tells that Confucius always took a small part of his food and placed it on the sacrificial bowls as an offering to his ancestors.\nOther movements, such as Mohism which was later absorbed by Taoism, developed a more theistic idea of Heaven. Feuchtwang explains that the difference between Confucianism and Taoism primarily lies in the fact that the former focuses on the realisation of the starry order of Heaven in human society, while the latter on the contemplation of the Dao which spontaneously arises in nature.\nSocial morality and ethics.\nAs explained by Stephan Feuchtwang, the order coming from Heaven preserves the world, and has to be followed by humanity finding a \"middle way\" between yin and yang forces in each new configuration of reality. Social harmony or morality is identified as patriarchy, which is expressed in the worship of ancestors and deified progenitors in the male line, at ancestral shrines.\nConfucian ethical codes are described as humanistic. They may be practiced by all the members of a society. Confucian ethics is characterised by the promotion of virtues, encompassed by the Five Constants, \"W\u01d4ch\u00e1ng\" () in Chinese, elaborated by Confucian scholars out of the inherited tradition during the Han dynasty. The Five Constants are:\nThese are accompanied by the classical \"S\u00ecz\u00ec\" (), that singles out four virtues, one of which is included among the Five Constants:\nThere are still many other elements, such as \"ch\u00e9ng\" (, honesty), \"sh\u00f9\" (, kindness and forgiveness), \"li\u00e1n\" (, honesty and cleanness), \"ch\u01d0\" (, shame, judge and sense of right and wrong), \"y\u01d2ng\" (, bravery), \"w\u0113n\" (, kind and gentle), \"li\u00e1ng\" (, good, kindhearted), \"g\u014dng\" (, respectful, reverent), \"ji\u01cen\" (, frugal), \"r\u00e0ng\" (, modestly, self-effacing).\nHumaneness.\n\"R\u00e9n\" () is the Confucian virtue denoting the good feeling a virtuous human experiences when being altruistic. It is exemplified by a normal adult's protective feelings for children. It is considered the essence of the human being, endowed by Heaven, and at the same time the means by which man may act according to the principle of Heaven (, \"Ti\u0101n l\u01d0\") and become one with it.\nY\u00e1n Hu\u00ed, Confucius's most outstanding student, once asked his master to describe the rules of \"r\u00e9n\" and Confucius replied, \"one should see nothing improper, hear nothing improper, say nothing improper, do nothing improper.\" Confucius also defined \"r\u00e9n\" in the following way: \"wishing to be established himself, seeks also to establish others; wishing to be enlarged himself, he seeks also to enlarge others.\"\nAnother meaning of \"r\u00e9n\" is \"not to do to others as you would not wish done to yourself.\" Confucius also said, \"\"r\u00e9n\" is not far off; he who seeks it has already found it.\" \"R\u00e9n\" is close to man and never leaves him.\nRite and centring.\n\"Li\" () is a classical Chinese word which finds its most extensive use in Confucian and post-Confucian Chinese philosophy. \"Li\" is variously translated as \"rite\" or \"reason,\" \"ratio\" in the pure sense of Vedic \"\u1e5bta\" (\"right,\" \"order\") when referring to the cosmic law, but when referring to its realisation in the context of human social behaviour it has also been translated as \"customs\", \"measures\" and \"rules\", among other terms. \"Li\" also means religious rites which establish relations between humanity and the gods.\nAccording to Stephan Feuchtwang, rites are conceived as \"what makes the invisible visible\", making possible for humans to cultivate the underlying order of nature. Correctly performed rituals move society in alignment with earthly and heavenly (astral) forces, establishing the harmony of the three realms\u2014Heaven, Earth and humanity. This practice is defined as \"centring\" ( \"y\u0101ng\" or \"zh\u014dng\"). Among all things of creation, humans themselves are \"central\" because they have the ability to cultivate and centre natural forces.\n\"Li\" embodies the entire web of interaction between humanity, human objects, and nature. Confucius includes in his discussions of \"li\" such diverse topics as learning, tea drinking, titles, mourning, and governance. Xunzi cites \"songs and laughter, weeping and lamentation... rice and millet, fish and meat... the wearing of ceremonial caps, embroidered robes, and patterned silks, or of fasting clothes and mourning clothes... spacious rooms and secluded halls, soft mats, couches and benches\" as vital parts of the fabric of \"li\".\nConfucius envisioned proper government being guided by the principles of \"li\". Some Confucians proposed that all human beings may pursue perfection by learning and practising \"li\". Overall, Confucians believe that governments should place more emphasis on \"li\" and rely much less on penal punishment when they govern.\nLoyalty.\nLoyalty (, \"zh\u014dng\") is particularly relevant for the social class to which most of Confucius's students belonged, because the most important way for an ambitious young scholar to become a prominent official was to enter a ruler's civil service.\nConfucius himself did not propose that \"might makes right,\" but rather that a superior should be obeyed because of his moral rectitude. In addition, loyalty does not mean subservience to authority. This is because reciprocity is demanded from the superior as well. As Confucius stated \"a prince should employ his minister according to the rules of propriety; ministers should serve their prince with faithfulness (loyalty).\"\nSimilarly, Mencius also said that \"when the prince regards his ministers as his hands and feet, his ministers regard their prince as their belly and heart; when he regards them as his dogs and horses, they regard him as another man; when he regards them as the ground or as grass, they regard him as a robber and an enemy.\" Moreover, Mencius indicated that if the ruler is incompetent, he should be replaced. If the ruler is evil, then the people have the right to overthrow him. A good Confucian is also expected to remonstrate with his superiors when necessary. At the same time, a proper Confucian ruler should also accept his ministers' advice, as this will help him govern the realm better.\nIn later ages, however, emphasis was often placed more on the obligations of the ruled to the ruler, and less on the ruler's obligations to the ruled. Like filial piety, loyalty was often subverted by the autocratic regimes in China. Nonetheless, throughout the ages, many Confucians continued to fight against unrighteous superiors and rulers. Many of these Confucians suffered and sometimes died because of their conviction and action. During the Ming-Qing era, prominent Confucians such as Wang Yangming promoted individuality and independent thinking as a counterweight to subservience to authority. The famous thinker Huang Zongxi also strongly criticised the autocratic nature of the imperial system and wanted to keep imperial power in check.\nMany Confucians also realised that loyalty and filial piety have the potential of coming into conflict with one another. This may be true especially in times of social chaos, such as during the period of the Ming-Qing transition.\nFilial piety.\nIn Confucian philosophy, filial piety (, \"xi\u00e0o\") is a virtue of respect for one's parents and ancestors, and of the hierarchies within society: father\u2013son, elder\u2013junior and male\u2013female. The Confucian classic \"Xiaojing\" (\"Book of Piety\"), thought to be written around the Qin-Han period, has historically been the authoritative source on the Confucian tenet of \"xi\u00e0o\". The book, a conversation between Confucius and his disciple Zeng Shen, is about how to set up a good society using the principle of \"xi\u00e0o\".\nIn more general terms, filial piety means to be good to one's parents; to take care of one's parents; to engage in good conduct not just towards parents but also outside the home so as to bring a good name to one's parents and ancestors; to perform the duties of one's job well so as to obtain the material means to support parents as well as carry out sacrifices to the ancestors; not be rebellious; show love, respect and support; the wife in filial piety must obey her husband absolutely and take care of the whole family wholeheartedly. display courtesy; ensure male heirs, uphold fraternity among brothers; wisely advise one's parents, including dissuading them from moral unrighteousness, for blindly following the parents' wishes is not considered to be \"xiao\"; display sorrow for their sickness and death; and carry out sacrifices after their death.\nFilial piety is considered a key virtue in Chinese culture, and it is the main concern of a large number of stories. One of the most famous collections of such stories is \"The Twenty-four Filial Exemplars\". These stories depict how children exercised their filial piety in the past. While China has always had a diversity of religious beliefs, filial piety has been common to almost all of them; historian Hugh D.R. Baker calls respect for the family the only element common to almost all Chinese believers.\nRelationships.\nSocial harmony results in part from every individual knowing his or her place in the natural order, and playing his or her part well. Reciprocity or responsibility (\"renqing\") extends beyond filial piety and involves the entire network of social relations, even the respect for rulers. This is shown in the story where Duke Jing of Qi asks Confucius about government, by which he meant proper administration so as to bring social harmony.\nParticular duties arise from one's particular situation in relation to others. The individual stands simultaneously in several different relationships with different people: as a junior in relation to parents and elders, and as a senior in relation to younger siblings, students, and others. While juniors are considered in Confucianism to owe their seniors reverence, seniors also have duties of benevolence and concern toward juniors. The same is true with the husband and wife relationship where the husband needs to show benevolence towards his wife and the wife needs to respect the husband in return. This theme of mutuality still exists in East Asian cultures even to this day.\nThe Five Bonds are: ruler to ruled, father to son, husband to wife, elder brother to younger brother, friend to friend. Specific duties were prescribed to each of the participants in these sets of relationships. Such duties are also extended to the dead, where the living stand as sons to their deceased family. The only relationship where respect for elders isn't stressed was the friend to friend relationship, where mutual equal respect is emphasised instead. All these duties take the practical form of prescribed rituals, for instance wedding and death rituals.\n\"Junzi\".\nThe \"junzi\" (, \"j\u016bnz\u01d0\", \"lord's son\") is a Chinese philosophical term often translated as \"gentleman\" or \"superior person\" and employed by Confucius in the \"Analects\" to describe the ideal man. \nIn Confucianism, the sage or wise is the ideal personality; however, it is very hard to become one of them. Confucius created the model of \"junzi\", gentleman, which may be achieved by any individual. Later, Zhu Xi defined \"junzi\" as second only to the sage. There are many characteristics of the \"junzi\": he may live in poverty, he does more and speaks less, he is loyal, obedient and knowledgeable. The \"junzi\" disciplines himself. \"Ren\" is fundamental to become a \"junzi\".\nAs the potential leader of a nation, a son of the ruler is raised to have a superior ethical and moral position while gaining inner peace through his virtue. To Confucius, the \"junzi\" sustained the functions of government and social stratification through his ethical values. Despite its literal meaning, any righteous man willing to improve himself may become a \"junzi\".\nOn the contrary, the \"xiaoren\" (, \"xi\u0103or\u00e9n\", \"small or petty person\") does not grasp the value of virtues and seeks only immediate gains. The petty person is egotistic and does not consider the consequences of his action in the overall scheme of things. Should the ruler be surrounded by \"xiaoren\" as opposed to \"junzi\", his governance and his people will suffer due to their small-mindness. Examples of such \"xiaoren\" individuals may range from those who continually indulge in sensual and emotional pleasures all day to the politician who is interested merely in power and fame; neither sincerely aims for the long-term benefit of others.\nThe \"junzi\" enforces his rule over his subjects by acting virtuously himself. It is thought that his pure virtue would lead others to follow his example. The ultimate goal is that the government behaves much like a family, the \"junzi\" being a beacon of filial piety.\nRectification of names.\nConfucius believed that social disorder often stemmed from failure to perceive, understand, and deal with reality. Fundamentally, then, social disorder may stem from the failure to call things by their proper names, and his solution to this was \"zh\u00e8ngm\u00edng\" (). He gave an explanation of \"zhengming\" to one of his disciples.\nZi-lu said, \"The vassal of Wei has been waiting for you, in order with you to administer the government. What will you consider the first thing to be done?\"\nThe Master replied, \"What is necessary to rectify names.\"\n\"So! indeed!\" said Zi-lu. \"You are wide off the mark! Why must there be such rectification?\"\nThe Master said, \"How uncultivated you are, Yu! The superior man [Junzi] cannot care about the everything, just as he cannot go to check all himself!\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0If names be not correct, language is not in accordance with the truth of things.\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0If language be not in accordance with the truth of things, affairs cannot be carried on to success.\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0When affairs cannot be carried on to success, proprieties and music do not flourish.\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0When proprieties and music do not flourish, punishments will not be properly awarded.\n\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0When punishments are not properly awarded, the people do not know how to move hand or foot.\nTherefore a superior man considers it necessary that the names he uses may be spoken appropriately, and also that what he speaks may be carried out appropriately. What the superior man requires is just that in his words there may be nothing incorrect.\"\nXun Zi chapter (22) \"On the Rectification of Names\" claims the ancient sage-kings chose names () that directly corresponded with actualities (), but later generations confused terminology, coined new nomenclature, and thus could no longer distinguish right from wrong. Since social harmony is of utmost importance, without the proper rectification of names, society would essentially crumble and \"undertakings [would] not [be] completed.\"\nHistory.\nAccording to He Guanghu, Confucianism may be identified as a continuation of the Shang-Zhou (~1600\u2013256 BCE) official religion, or the Chinese aboriginal religion which has lasted uninterrupted for three thousand years. Both the dynasties worshipped the supreme godhead, called \"Shangdi\" ( \"Highest Deity\") or simply \"D\u00ec\" () by the Shang and \"Tian\" ( \"Heaven\") by the Zhou. Shangdi was conceived as the first ancestor of the Shang royal house, an alternate name for him being the \"Supreme Progenitor\" ( \"Sh\u00e0ngji\u01ce\"). In Shang theology, the multiplicity of gods of nature and ancestors were viewed as parts of Di, and the four \"f\u0101ng\" (\"directions\" or \"sides\") and their \"f\u0113ng\" (\"winds\") as his cosmic will. With the Zhou dynasty, which overthrew the Shang, the name for the supreme godhead became \"Tian\" ( \"Heaven\"). While the Shang identified Shangdi as their ancestor-god to assert their claim to power by divine right, the Zhou transformed this claim into a legitimacy based on moral power, the Mandate of Heaven. In Zhou theology, Tian had no singular earthly progeny, but bestowed divine favour on virtuous rulers. Zhou kings declared that their victory over the Shang was because they were virtuous and loved their people, while the Shang were tyrants and thus were deprived of power by Tian.\nJohn C. Didier and David Pankenier relate the shapes of both the ancient Chinese characters for Di and Tian to the patterns of stars in the northern skies, either drawn, in Didier's theory by connecting the constellations bracketing the north celestial pole as a square, or in Pankenier's theory by connecting some of the stars which form the constellations of the Big Dipper and broader Ursa Major, and Ursa Minor (Little Dipper). Cultures in other parts of the world have also conceived these stars or constellations as symbols of the origin of things, the supreme godhead, divinity and royal power. The supreme godhead was also identified with the dragon, symbol of unlimited power (\"qi\"), of the \"protean\" primordial power which embodies both yin and yang in unity, associated to the constellation Draco which winds around the north ecliptic pole, and slithers between the Little and Big Dipper.\nBy the 6th century BCE the power of Tian and the symbols that represented it on earth (architecture of cities, temples, altars and ritual cauldrons, and the Zhou ritual system) became \"diffuse\" and claimed by different potentates in the Zhou states to legitimise economic, political, and military ambitions. Divine right no longer was an exclusive privilege of the Zhou royal house, but might be bought by anyone able to afford the elaborate ceremonies and the old and new rites required to access the authority of Tian.\nBesides the waning Zhou ritual system, what may be defined as \"wild\" ( \"y\u011b\") traditions, or traditions \"outside of the official system\", developed as attempts to access the will of Tian. The population had lost faith in the official tradition, which was no longer perceived as an effective way to communicate with Heaven. The traditions of the (\"Nine Fields\") and of the \"Yijing\" flourished. Chinese thinkers, faced with this challenge to legitimacy, diverged in a \"Hundred Schools of Thought\", each proposing its own theories for the reconstruction of the Zhou moral order.\nConfucius (551\u2013479 BCE) appeared in this period of political decadence and spiritual questioning. He was educated in Shang-Zhou theology, which he contributed to transmit and reformulate giving centrality to self-cultivation and agency of humans, and the educational power of the self-established individual in assisting others to establish themselves (the principle of \"\u00e0ir\u00e9n\", \"loving others\"). As the Zhou reign collapsed, traditional values were abandoned resulting in a period of moral decline. Confucius saw an opportunity to reinforce values of compassion and tradition into society. Disillusioned with the widespread vulgarisation of the rituals to access Tian, he began to preach an ethical interpretation of traditional Zhou religion. In his view, the power of Tian is immanent, and responds positively to the sincere heart driven by humaneness and rightness, decency and altruism. Confucius conceived these qualities as the foundation needed to restore socio-political harmony. Like many contemporaries, Confucius saw ritual practices as efficacious ways to access Tian, but he thought that the crucial knot was the state of meditation that participants enter prior to engage in the ritual acts. Confucius amended and recodified the classical books inherited from the Xia-Shang-Zhou dynasties, and composed the \"Spring and Autumn Annals\".\nPhilosophers in the Warring States period, both \"inside the square\" (focused on state-endorsed ritual) and \"outside the square\" (non-aligned to state ritual) built upon Confucius's legacy, compiled in the \"Analects\", and formulated the classical metaphysics that became the lash of Confucianism. In accordance with the Master, they identified mental tranquility as the state of Tian, or the One (\u4e00 \"Y\u012b\"), which in each individual is the Heaven-bestowed divine power to rule one's own life and the world. Going beyond the Master, they theorised the oneness of production and reabsorption into the cosmic source, and the possibility to understand and therefore reattain it through meditation. This line of thought would have influenced all Chinese individual and collective-political mystical theories and practices thereafter.\nOrganisation and liturgy.\nSince the 2000s, there has been a growing identification of the Chinese intellectual class with Confucianism. In 2003, the Confucian intellectual Kang Xiaoguang published a manifesto in which he made four suggestions: Confucian education should enter official education at any level, from elementary to high school; the state should establish Confucianism as the state religion by law; Confucian religion should enter the daily life of ordinary people through standardisation and development of doctrines, rituals, organisations, churches and activity sites; the Confucian religion should be spread through non-governmental organisations. Another modern proponent of the institutionalisation of Confucianism in a state church is Jiang Qing.\nIn 2005, the Center for the Study of Confucian Religion was established, and \"guoxue\" started to be implemented in public schools on all levels. Being well received by the population, even Confucian preachers have appeared on television since 2006. The most enthusiastic New Confucians proclaim the uniqueness and superiority of Confucian Chinese culture, and have generated some popular sentiment against Western cultural influences in China.\nThe idea of a \"Confucian Church\" as the state religion of China has roots in the thought of Kang Youwei, an exponent of the early New Confucian search for a regeneration of the social relevance of Confucianism, at a time when it was de-institutionalised with the collapse of the Qing dynasty and the Chinese empire. Kang modeled his ideal \"Confucian Church\" after European national Christian churches, as a hierarchic and centralised institution, closely bound to the state, with local church branches, devoted to the worship and the spread of the teachings of Confucius.\nIn contemporary China, the Confucian revival has developed into various interwoven directions: the proliferation of Confucian schools or academies (\"shuyuan\" ), the resurgence of Confucian rites (\"chu\u00e1nt\u01d2ng l\u01d0y\u00ed\" ), and the birth of new forms of Confucian activity on the popular level, such as the Confucian communities (\"sh\u00e8q\u016b r\u00faxu\u00e9\" ). Some scholars also consider the reconstruction of lineage churches and their ancestral temples, as well as cults and temples of natural and national gods within broader Chinese traditional religion, as part of the renewal of Confucianism.\nOther forms of revival are salvationist folk religious movements groups with a specifically Confucian focus, or Confucian churches, for example the \"Yidan xuetang\" () of Beijing, the \"Mengmutang\" () of Shanghai, Confucian Shenism ( \"R\u00faz\u014dng Sh\u00e9nji\u00e0o\") or the phoenix churches, the Confucian Fellowship ( \"R\u00faji\u00e0o D\u00e0ot\u00e1n\") in northern Fujian which has spread rapidly over the years after its foundation, and ancestral temples of the Kong kin (the lineage of the descendants of Confucius himself) operating as Confucian-teaching churches.\nAlso, the Hong Kong Confucian Academy, one of the direct heirs of Kang Youwei's Confucian Church, has expanded its activities to the mainland, with the construction of statues of Confucius, Confucian hospitals, restoration of temples and other activities. In 2009, Zhou Beichen founded another institution which inherits the idea of Kang Youwei's Confucian Church, the Holy Hall of Confucius ( \"K\u01d2ngsh\u00e8ngt\u00e1ng\") in Shenzhen, affiliated with the Federation of Confucian Culture of Qufu City. It was the first of a nationwide movement of congregations and civil organisations that was unified in 2015 in the Holy Confucian Church ( \"K\u01d2ngsh\u00e8nghu\u00ec\"). The first spiritual leader of the Holy Church is the renowned scholar Jiang Qing, the founder and manager of the Yangming Confucian Abode ( \"Y\u00e1ngm\u00edng j\u012bngsh\u011b\"), a Confucian academy in Guiyang, Guizhou.\nChinese folk religious temples and kinship ancestral shrines may, on peculiar occasions, choose Confucian liturgy (called \"r\u00fa\" or \"zh\u00e8ngt\u01d2ng\", \"orthopraxy\") led by Confucian ritual masters ( \"l\u01d0sh\u0113ng\") to worship the gods, instead of Taoist or popular ritual. \"Confucian businessmen\" ( \"r\u00fash\u0101ngr\u00e9n\", also \"refined businessman\") is a recently rediscovered concept defining people of the economic-entrepreneurial elite who recognise their social responsibility and therefore apply Confucian culture to their business.\nGovernance.\nA key Confucian concept is that in order to govern others one must first govern oneself according to the universal order. When actual, the king's personal virtue (\"de\") spreads beneficent influence throughout the kingdom. This idea is developed further in the Great Learning, and is tightly linked with the Taoist concept of wu wei (): the less the king does, the more gets done. By being the \"calm center\" around which the kingdom turns, the king allows everything to function smoothly and avoids having to tamper with the individual parts of the whole.\nThis idea may be traced back to the ancient shamanic beliefs of the king being the axle between the sky, human beings, and the Earth. The emperors of China were considered agents of Heaven, endowed with the Mandate of Heaven. They hold the power to define the hierarchy of divinities, by bestowing titles upon mountains, rivers and dead people, acknowledging them as powerful and therefore establishing their cults.\nConfucianism, despite supporting the importance of obeying national authority, places this obedience under absolute moral principles that curbed the willful exercise of power, rather than being unconditional. Submission to authority (\"tsun wang\") was only taken within the context of the moral obligations that rulers had toward their subjects, in particular benevolence (\"jen\"). From the earliest periods of Confucianism, the Right of revolution against tyranny was always recognised by Confucianism, including the most pro-authoritarian scholars such as Xunzi.\nMeritocracy.\nAlthough Confucius claimed that he never invented anything but was only transmitting ancient knowledge (\"Analects\" 7.1), he did produce a number of new ideas. Many European and American admirers such as Voltaire and Herrlee G. Creel point to the revolutionary idea of replacing nobility of blood with nobility of virtue. \"J\u016bnz\u01d0\" (, lit. \"lord's child\"), which originally signified the younger, non-inheriting, offspring of a noble, became, in Confucius's work, an epithet having much the same meaning and evolution as the English \"gentleman.\"\nA virtuous commoner who cultivates his qualities may be a \"gentleman\", while a shameless son of the king is only a \"small man.\" That he admitted students of different classes as disciples is a clear demonstration that he fought against the feudal structures that defined pre-imperial Chinese society.\nAnother new idea, that of meritocracy, led to the introduction of the imperial examination system in China. This system allowed anyone who passed an examination to become a government officer, a position which would bring wealth and honour to the whole family. The Chinese imperial examination system started in the Sui dynasty. Over the following centuries the system grew until finally almost anyone who wished to become an official had to prove his worth by passing a set of written government examinations. The practice of meritocracy still exists across China and East Asia today.\nInfluence.\nIn 17th-century Europe.\nThe works of Confucius were translated into European languages through the agency of Jesuit missionaries stationed in China. Matteo Ricci was among the very earliest to report on the thoughts of Confucius, and father Prospero Intorcetta wrote about the life and works of Confucius in Latin in 1687.\nTranslations of Confucian texts influenced European thinkers of the period, particularly among the Deists and other philosophical groups of the Enlightenment who were interested by the integration of the system of morality of Confucius into Western civilization.\nConfucianism influenced the German philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, who was attracted to the philosophy because of its perceived similarity to his own. It is postulated that certain elements of Leibniz's philosophy, such as \"simple substance\" and \"preestablished harmony,\" were borrowed from his interactions with Confucianism. The French philosopher Voltaire was also influenced by Confucius, seeing the concept of Confucian rationalism as an alternative to Christian dogma. He praised Confucian ethics and politics, portraying the sociopolitical hierarchy of China as a model for Europe.\nOn Islamic thought.\nFrom the late 17th century onwards a whole body of literature known as the Han Kitab developed amongst the Hui Muslims of China who infused Islamic thought with Confucianism. Especially the works of Liu Zhi such as \"Ti\u0101nf\u0101ng Di\u01cenl\u01d0\"() sought to harmonise Islam with not only Confucianism but also with Taoism and is considered to be one of the crowning achievements of the Chinese Islamic culture.\nIn modern times.\nImportant military and political figures in modern Chinese history continued to be influenced by Confucianism, like the Muslim warlord Ma Fuxiang. The New Life Movement in the early 20th century was also influenced by Confucianism.\nReferred to variously as the Confucian hypothesis and as a debated component of the more all-encompassing Asian Development Model, there exists among political scientists and economists a theory that Confucianism plays a large latent role in the ostensibly non-Confucian cultures of modern-day East Asia, in the form of the rigorous work ethic it endowed those cultures with. These scholars have held that, if not for Confucianism's influence on these cultures, many of the people of the East Asia region would not have been able to modernise and industrialise as quickly as Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, South Korea and even China have done.\nFor example, the impact of the Vietnam War on Vietnam was devastating, but over the last few decades Vietnam has been re-developing in a very fast pace. Most scholars attribute the origins of this idea to futurologist Herman Kahn's \"World Economic Development: 1979 and Beyond\".\nOther studies, for example Cristobal Kay's \"Why East Asia Overtook Latin America: Agrarian Reform, Industrialization, and Development\", have attributed the Asian growth to other factors, for example the character of agrarian reforms, \"state-craft\" (state capacity), and interaction between agriculture and industry.\nOn Chinese martial arts.\nAfter Confucianism had become the official 'state religion' in China, its influence penetrated all walks of life and all streams of thought in Chinese society for the generations to come. This did not exclude martial arts culture. Though in his own day, Confucius had rejected the practice of Martial Arts (with the exception of Archery), he did serve under rulers who used military power extensively to achieve their goals. In later centuries, Confucianism heavily influenced many educated martial artists of great influence, such as Sun Lutang, especially from the 19th century onwards, when bare-handed martial arts in China became more widespread and had begun to more readily absorb philosophical influences from Confucianism, Buddhism and Daoism. Some argue therefore that despite Confucius's disdain with martial culture, his teachings became of much relevance to it.\nCriticism.\nConfucius and Confucianism were opposed or criticised from the start, including Laozi's philosophy and Mozi's critique, and Legalists such as Han Fei ridiculed the idea that virtue would lead people to be orderly. In modern times, waves of opposition and vilification showed that Confucianism, instead of taking credit for the glories of Chinese civilisation, now had to take blame for its failures. The Taiping Rebellion described Confucianism sages as well as gods in Taoism and Buddhism as devils. In the New Culture Movement, Lu Xun criticised Confucianism for shaping Chinese people into the condition they had reached by the late Qing Dynasty: his criticisms are dramatically portrayed in \"A Madman's Diary,\" which implies that Confucian society was cannibalistic. Leftists during the Cultural Revolution described Confucius as the representative of the class of slave owners.\nIn South Korea, there has long been criticism. Some South Koreans believe Confucianism has not contributed to the modernisation of South Korea. For example, South Korean writer Kim Kyong-il wrote an essay entitled \"Confucius Must Die For the Nation to Live\" (, \"gongjaga jug-eoya naraga sanda\"). Kim said that filial piety is one-sided and blind, and if it continues, social problems will continue as government keeps forcing Confucian filial obligations onto families.\nWomen in Confucian thought.\nConfucianism \"largely defined the mainstream discourse on gender in China from the Han dynasty onward.\" The gender roles prescribed in the Three Obediences and Four Virtues became a cornerstone of the family, and thus, societal stability. Starting from the Han period, Confucians began to teach that a virtuous woman was supposed to follow the males in her family: the father before her marriage, the husband after she marries, and her sons in widowhood. In the later dynasties, more emphasis was placed on the virtue of chastity. The Song dynasty Confucian Cheng Yi stated that: \"To starve to death is a small matter, but to lose one's chastity is a great matter.\" Chaste widows were revered and memorialised during the Ming and Qing periods. This \"cult of chastity\" accordingly condemned many widows to poverty and loneliness by placing a social stigma on remarriage.\nFor years, many modern scholars have regarded Confucianism as a sexist, patriarchal ideology that was historically damaging to Chinese women. It has also been argued by some Chinese and Western writers that the rise of neo-Confucianism during the Song dynasty had led to a decline of status of women. Some critics have also accused the prominent Song neo-Confucian scholar Zhu Xi for believing in the inferiority of women and that men and women need to be kept strictly separate, while Sima Guang also believed that women should remain indoors and not deal with the matters of men in the outside world. Finally, scholars have discussed the attitudes toward women in Confucian texts such as Analects. In a much-discussed passage, women are grouped together with \"xiaoren\" (, literally \"small people\", meaning people of low status or low moral) and described as being difficult to cultivate or deal with. Many traditional commentators and modern scholars have debated over the precise meaning of the passage, and whether Confucius referred to all women or just certain groups of women.\nFurther analysis suggests, however, that women's place in Confucian society may be more complex. During the Han dynasty period, the influential Confucian text \"Lessons for Women\" (\"N\u00fcjie\"), was written by Ban Zhao (45\u2013114 CE) to instruct her daughters how to be proper Confucian wives and mothers, that is, to be silent, hard-working, and compliant. She stresses the complementarity and equal importance of the male and female roles according to yin-yang theory, but she clearly accepts the dominance of the male. However, she does present education and literary power as important for women. In later dynasties, a number of women took advantage of the Confucian acknowledgment of education to become independent in thought.\nJoseph A. Adler points out that \"Neo-Confucian writings do not necessarily reflect either the prevailing social practices or the scholars' own attitudes and practices in regard to actual women.\" Matthew Sommers has also indicated that the Qing dynasty government began to realise the utopian nature of enforcing the \"cult of chastity\" and began to allow practices such as widow remarrying to stand. Moreover, some Confucian texts like the \"Chunqiu Fanlu\" have passages that suggest a more equal relationship between a husband and his wife. More recently, some scholars have also begun to discuss the viability of constructing a \"Confucian feminism\".\nCatholic controversy over Chinese rites.\nEver since Europeans first encountered Confucianism, the issue of how Confucianism should be classified has been subject to debate. In the 16th and the 17th centuries, the earliest European arrivals in China, the Christian Jesuits, considered Confucianism to be an ethical system, not a religion, and one that was compatible with Christianity. The Jesuits, including Matteo Ricci, saw Chinese rituals as \"civil rituals\" that could co-exist alongside the spiritual rituals of Catholicism.\nBy the early 18th century, this initial portrayal was rejected by the Dominicans and Franciscans, creating a dispute among Catholics in East Asia that was known as the \"Rites Controversy.\" The Dominicans and Franciscans argued that Chinese ancestral worship was a form of idolatry that was contradictory to the tenets of Christianity. This view was reinforced by Pope Benedict XIV, who ordered a ban on Chinese rituals, though this ban was re-assessed and repealed in 1939 by Pope Pius XII, provided that such traditions harmonize with the true and authentic spirit of the liturgy.\nSome critics view Confucianism as definitely pantheistic and nontheistic, in that it is not based on the belief in the supernatural or in a personal god existing separate from the temporal plane. Confucius views about Ti\u0101n \u5929 and about the divine providence ruling the world, can be found above (in this page) and in Analects 6:26, 7:22, and 9:12, for example. On spirituality, Confucius said to Chi Lu, one of his students: \"You are not yet able to serve men, how can you serve spirits?\" Attributes such as ancestor worship, ritual, and sacrifice were advocated by Confucius as necessary for social harmony; these attributes may be traced to the traditional Chinese folk religion.\nScholars recognise that classification ultimately depends on how one defines religion. Using stricter definitions of religion, Confucianism has been described as a moral science or philosophy. But using a broader definition, such as Frederick Streng's characterisation of religion as \"a means of ultimate transformation,\" Confucianism could be described as a \"sociopolitical doctrine having religious qualities.\" With the latter definition, Confucianism is religious, even if non-theistic, in the sense that it \"performs some of the basic psycho-social functions of full-fledged religions.\""}
{"id": "5822", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5822", "title": "Chinese philosophy", "text": "Chinese philosophy originates in the Spring and Autumn period () and Warring States period (), during a period known as the \"Hundred Schools of Thought\", which was characterized by significant intellectual and cultural developments. Although much of Chinese philosophy begun in the Warring States period, elements of Chinese philosophy have existed for several thousand years. Some can be found in the \"I Ching\" (the \"Book of Changes\"), an ancient compendium of divination, which dates back to at least 672 BCE. It was during the Warring States era that what Sima Tan termed the major philosophical schools of China\u2014Confucianism, Legalism, and Taoism\u2014arose, along with philosophies that later fell into obscurity, like Agriculturalism, Mohism, Chinese Naturalism, and the Logicians. Even in modern society, Confucianism is still the creed of etiquette for Chinese society.\nChinese philosophy as a philosophy.\nThe debate over whether the \"thought\" of ancient Chinese masters should be called philosophy has been discussed since the introduction of this academic discipline into China. See Legitimacy of Chinese philosophy for details.\nEarly beliefs.\nEarly Shang dynasty thought was based upon cycles. This notion stems from what the people of the Shang Dynasty could observe around them: day and night cycled, the seasons progressed again and again, and even the moon waxed and waned until it waxed again. Thus, this notion, which remained relevant throughout Chinese history, reflects the order of nature. In juxtaposition, it also marks a fundamental distinction from western philosophy, in which the dominant view of time is a linear progression. During the Shang, fate could be manipulated by great deities, commonly translated as gods. Ancestor worship was present and universally recognized. There was also human and animal sacrifice.\nWhen the Shang were overthrown by the Zhou, a new political, religious and philosophical concept was introduced called the \"Mandate of Heaven\". This mandate was said to be taken when rulers became unworthy of their position and provided a shrewd justification for Zhou rule. During this period, archaeological evidence points to an increase in literacy and a partial shift away from the faith placed in Shangdi (the Supreme Being in traditional Chinese religion), with ancestor worship becoming commonplace and a more worldly orientation coming to the fore.\nOverview.\nConfucianism developed during the Spring and Autumn period from the teachings of the Chinese philosopher Confucius (551\u2013479 BCE), who considered himself a retransmitter of Zhou values. His philosophy concerns the fields of ethics and politics, emphasizing personal and governmental morality, correctness of social relationships, justice, traditionalism, and sincerity. The Analects stress the importance of ritual, but also the importance of 'ren', which loosely translates as 'human-heartedness', Confucianism, along with Legalism, is responsible for creating the world's first meritocracy, which holds that one's status should be determined by education and character rather than ancestry, wealth, or friendship. Confucianism was and continues to be a major influence in Chinese culture, the state of China and the surrounding areas of East Asia.\nBefore the Han dynasty the largest rivals to Confucianism were Chinese Legalism, and Mohism. Confucianism largely became the dominant philosophical school of China during the early Han dynasty following the replacement of its contemporary, the more Taoistic Huang-Lao. Legalism as a coherent philosophy disappeared largely due to its relationship with the unpopular authoritarian rule of Qin Shi Huang, however, many of its ideas and institutions would continue to influence Chinese philosophy until the end of Imperial rule during the Xinhai Revolution.\nMohism, though initially popular due to its emphasis on brotherly love versus harsh Qin Legalism, fell out of favour during the Han Dynasty due to the efforts of Confucians in establishing their views as political orthodoxy. The Six Dynasties era saw the rise of the Xuanxue philosophical school and the maturation of Chinese Buddhism, which had entered China from India during the Late Han Dynasties. By the time of the Tang dynasty five-hundred years after Buddhism's arrival into China, it had transformed into a thoroughly Chinese religious philosophy dominated by the school of Zen Buddhism. Neo-Confucianism became highly popular during the Song dynasty and Ming Dynasty due in large part to the eventual combination of Confucian and Zen Philosophy.\nDuring the 19th and 20th centuries, Chinese philosophy integrated concepts from Western philosophy. Anti-Qing dynasty revolutionaries, involved in the Xinhai Revolution, saw Western philosophy as an alternative to traditional philosophical schools; students in the May Fourth Movement called for completely abolishing the old imperial institutions and practices of China. During this era, Chinese scholars attempted to incorporate Western philosophical ideologies such as democracy, Marxism, socialism, liberalism, republicanism, anarchism and nationalism into Chinese philosophy. The most notable examples are Sun Yat-Sen's Three Principles of the People ideology and Mao Zedong's Maoism, a variant of Marxism\u2013Leninism. In the modern People's Republic of China, the official ideology is Deng Xiaoping's \"market economy socialism\".\nAlthough the People's Republic of China has been historically hostile to the philosophy of ancient China, the influences of past are still deeply ingrained in the Chinese culture. In the post-Chinese economic reform era, modern Chinese philosophy has reappeared in forms such as the \"New Confucianism\". As in Japan, philosophy in China has become a melting pot of ideas. It accepts new concepts, while attempting also to accord old beliefs their due. Chinese philosophy still carries profound influence amongst the people of East Asia, and even Southeast Asia.\nAncient philosophy.\nSpring and Autumn period.\nAround 500 BCE, after the Zhou state weakened and China moved into the Spring and Autumn period, the classic period of Chinese philosophy began. This is known as the Hundred Schools of Thought (; \"zh\u016bz\u01d0 b\u01ceiji\u0101\"; \"various scholars, hundred schools\"). This period is considered the golden age of Chinese philosophy. Of the many schools founded at this time and during the subsequent Warring States period, the four most influential ones were Confucianism, Daoism (often spelled \"Taoism\"), Mohism and Legalism.\nConfucianism.\nConfucianism is a philosophical school developed from the teachings of Confucius collected and written by his disciples after his death in \"The Analects\", and in the Warring States period, Mencius in \"The Mencius\" and Xunzi in \"The Xunzi\". It is a system of moral, social, political, and religious thought that has had tremendous influence on Chinese history, thought, and culture down to the 20th century. Some Westerners have considered it to have been the \"state religion\" of imperial China because of its lasting influence on Asian culture. Its influence also spread to Korea, Japan, Vietnam and many other Asian countries.\nConfucianism reached its peak of influence during the Tang and Song Dynasties under a rebranded Confucianism called Neo-Confucianism. Confucius expanded on the already present ideas of Chinese religion and culture to reflect the time period and environment of political chaos during the Warring States period. Because Confucius embedded the Chinese culture so heavily into his philosophy it was able to resonate with the people of China. This high approval of Confucianism can be seen through the reverence of Confucius in modern-day China.\nThe major Confucian concepts include \"r\u00e9n\" (humanity or humaneness), \"zh\u00e8ngm\u00edng\" (rectification of names; e.g. a ruler who rules unjustly is no longer a ruler and may be dethroned), \"zh\u014dng\" (loyalty), \"xi\u00e0o\" (filial piety), and \"li\" (ritual). Confucius taught both positive and negative versions of the Golden Rule. The concepts Yin and Yang represent two opposing forces that are permanently in conflict with each other, leading to perpetual contradiction and change. The Confucian idea of \"Rid of the two ends, take the middle\" is a Chinese equivalent of Hegel's idea of \"thesis, antithesis, and synthesis\", which is a way of reconciling opposites, arriving at some middle ground combining the best of both. Confucius heavily emphasized the idea of microcosms in society (subunits of family and community) success's were the foundations for a successful state or country. Confucius believed in the use of education to further knowledge the people in ethics, societal behavior, and reverence in other humans. With the combination of education, successful family, and his ethical teachings he believed he could govern a well established society in China.\nTaoism.\nTaoism arose as a philosophy and later also developed into a religion based on the texts the \"Tao Te Ching\" (; \"D\u00e0o D\u00e9 J\u012bng;\" ascribed to Lao Tzu) and the \"Zhuangzi\" (; partly ascribed to Chuang Tzu). The character \"Dao\" literally means 'path' or 'way'. However, in Taoism it refers more often to a meta-physical force that encompasses the entire universe but which cannot be described nor felt. All major Chinese philosophical schools have investigated the correct \"Way\" to go about a moral life, but in Taoism it takes on the most abstract meanings, leading this school to be named after it. It advocated nonaction (\"wu wei\"), the strength of softness, spontaneity, and relativism. Although it serves as a rival to Confucianism, a school of active morality, this rivalry is compromised and given perspective by the idiom \"practice Confucianism on the outside, Taoism on the inside.\"\nMost of Taoism's focus is on the notion that human attempts to make the world better actually make the world worse. Therefore, it is better to strive for harmony, minimising potentially harmful interference with nature or in human affairs.\nWarring States period.\nLegalism.\nPhilosopher Han Fei synthesized together earlier the methods of his predecessors, which famous historian Sima Tan posthumously termed Legalism. With an essential principle like \"when the epoch changed, the ways changed\", late pre-Han Dynasty reformers emphasized rule by law.\nIn Han Fei's philosophy, a ruler should govern his subjects by the following trinity:\nWhat has been termed by some as the intrastate Realpolitik of the Warring States period was highly progressive, and extremely critical of the Confucian and Mohist schools. But that of the Qin dynasty would be blamed for creating a totalitarian society, thereby experiencing decline. Its main motto is: \"Set clear strict laws, or deliver harsh punishment\". In Han Fei's philosophy the ruler possessed authority regarding reward and penalty, enacted through law. Shang Yang and Han Fei promoted absolute adherence to the law, regardless of the circumstances or the person. Ministers were only to be rewarded if their words were accurate to the results of their proposals. Legalism, in accordance with Shang Yang's interpretation, could encourage the state to be a militaristic autarky.\nNaturalists.\nThe School of Naturalists or the School of Yin-yang () was a Warring States era philosophy that synthesized the concepts of yin-yang and the Wu Xing; Zou Yan is considered the founder of this school. His theory attempted to explain the universe in terms of basic forces in nature: the complementary agents of yin (dark, cold, female, negative) and yang (light, hot, male, positive) and the Five Elements or Five Phases (water, fire, wood, metal, and earth). In its early days, this theory was most strongly associated with the states of Yan and Qi. In later periods, these epistemological theories came to hold significance in both philosophy and popular belief. This school was absorbed into Taoism's alchemic and magical dimensions as well as into the Chinese medical framework. The earliest surviving recordings of this are in the Ma Wang Dui texts and Huang Di Nei Jing.\nMohism.\nMohism (Moism), founded by Mozi (), promotes universal love with the aim of mutual benefit. Everyone must love each other equally and impartially to avoid conflict and war. Mozi was strongly against Confucian ritual, instead emphasizing pragmatic survival through farming, fortification, and statecraft. Tradition is inconsistent, and human beings need an extra-traditional guide to identify which traditions are acceptable. The moral guide must then promote and encourage social behaviors that maximize general benefit. As motivation for his theory, Mozi brought in the \"Will of Heaven\", but rather than being religious his philosophy parallels utilitarianism.\nLogicians.\nThe logicians (School of Names) were concerned with logic, paradoxes, names and actuality (similar to Confucian rectification of names). The logician Hui Shi was a friendly rival to Zhuangzi, arguing against Taoism in a light-hearted and humorous manner. Another logician, Gongsun Long, originated the famous When a White Horse is Not a Horse dialogue. This school did not thrive because the Chinese regarded sophistry and dialectic as impractical.\nAgriculturalists.\nAgriculturalism was an early agrarian social and political philosophy that advocated peasant utopian communalism and egalitarianism. The philosophy is founded on the notion that human society originates with the development of agriculture, and societies are based upon \"people's natural prospensity to farm.\"\nThe Agriculturalists believed that the ideal government, modeled after the semi-mythical governance of Shennong, is led by a benevolent king, one who works alongside the people in tilling the fields. The Agriculturalist king is not paid by the government through its treasuries; his livelihood is derived from the profits he earns working in the fields, not his leadership. Unlike the Confucians, the Agriculturalists did not believe in the division of labour, arguing instead that the economic policies of a country need to be based upon an egalitarian self sufficiency. The Agriculturalists supported the fixing of prices, in which all similar goods, regardless of differences in quality and demand, are set at exactly the same, unchanging price.\nEarly Imperial era philosophy.\nHistory.\nQin and Han Dynasties.\nThe short founder Qin dynasty, where Legalism was the official philosophy, quashed Mohist and Confucianist schools. Legalism remained influential during the early Han Dynasty under the Taoist-Realist ideology Huang-Lao until Emperor Wu of Han adopted Confucianism as official doctrine. Confucianism and Taoism became the determining forces of Chinese thought until the introduction of Buddhism.\nConfucianism was particularly strong during the Han dynasty, whose greatest thinker was Dong Zhongshu, who integrated Confucianism with the thoughts of the Zhongshu School and the theory of the Five Elements. He also was a promoter of the New Text school, which considered Confucius as a divine figure and a spiritual ruler of China, who foresaw and started the evolution of the world towards the Universal Peace. In contrast, there was an Old Text school that advocated the use of Confucian works written in ancient language (from this comes the denomination \"Old Text\") that were so much more reliable. In particular, they refuted the assumption of Confucius as a godlike figure and considered him as the greatest sage, but simply a human and mortal\nSix Dynasties.\nThe 3rd and 4th centuries saw the rise of the \"Xuanxue\" (mysterious learning), also called \"Neo-Taoism\". The most important philosophers of this movement were Wang Bi, Xiang Xiu and Guo Xiang. The main question of this school was whether Being came before Not-Being (in Chinese, \"ming\" and \"wuming\"). A peculiar feature of these Taoist thinkers, like the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove, was the concept of \"feng liu\" (; lit. wind and flow), a sort of romantic spirit which encouraged following the natural and instinctive impulse.\nBuddhism arrived in China around the 1st century AD, but it was not until the Northern and Southern, Sui and Tang dynasties that it gained considerable influence and acknowledgement. At the beginning, it was considered a sort of Taoist sect. Mahayana Buddhism was far more successful in China than its rival Hinayana, and both Indian schools and local Chinese sects arose from the 5th century. Two chiefly important monk philosophers were Sengzhao and Daosheng. But probably the most influential and original of these schools was the Chan sect, which had an even stronger impact in Japan as the Zen sect.\nIn the mid-Tang Buddhism reached its peak, and reportedly there were 4,600 monasteries, 40,000 hermitages and 260,500 monks and nuns. The power of the Buddhist clergy was so great and the wealth of the monasteries so impressive, that it instigated criticism from Confucian scholars, who considered Buddhism as a foreign religion. In 845 Emperor Wuzong ordered the Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution, confiscating the riches and returning monks and nuns to lay life. From then on, Buddhism lost much of its influence.\nSchools of thought.\nXuanxue.\nXuanxue was a philosophical school that combined elements of Confucianism and Taoism to reinterpret the I Ching\",\" Tao Te Ching\",\" and \"Zhuangzi.\" The most important philosophers of this movement were Wang Bi, Xiang Xiu and Guo Xiang. The main question of this school was whether Being came before Not-Being (in Chinese, \"ming\" and \"wuming\"). A peculiar feature of these Taoist thinkers, like the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove, was the concept of \"feng liu\" (lit. wind and flow), a sort of romantic spirit which encouraged following the natural and instinctive impulse.\nBuddhism.\nBuddhism is a religion, a practical philosophy, and arguably a psychology, focusing on the teachings of Gautama Buddha, who lived on the Indian subcontinent most likely from the mid-6th to the early 5th century BCE. When used in a generic sense, a Buddha is generally considered to be someone who discovers the true nature of reality.\nBuddhism until the 4th century AD had little impact on China but in the 4th century its teachings hybridized with those of Taoism. Buddhism brought to China the idea of many hells, where sinners went, but the deceased sinners souls could be saved by pious acts. Since Chinese traditional thought focused more on ethics rather than metaphysics, the merging of Buddhist and Taoist concepts developed several schools distinct from the originating Indian schools. The most prominent examples with philosophical merit are Sanlun, Tiantai, Huayan, and Ch\u00e1n (a.k.a. Zen). They investigate consciousness, levels of truth, whether reality is ultimately empty, and how enlightenment is to be achieved. Buddhism has a spiritual aspect that complements the action of Neo-Confucianism, with prominent Neo-Confucians advocating certain forms of meditation.\nMid to Late Imperial era philosophy.\nHistory.\nNeo-Confucianism was a revived version of old Confucian principles that appeared around the Song dynasty, with Buddhist, Taoist, and Legalist features. The first philosophers, such as Shao Yong, Zhou Dunyi and Chang Zai, were cosmologists and worked on the Yi Jing. The Cheng brothers, Cheng Yi and Cheng Hao, are considered the founders of the two main schools of thought of Neo-Confucianism: the School of Principle the first, the School of Mind the latter. The School of Principle gained supremacy during the Song dynasty with the philosophical system elaborated by Zhu Xi, which became mainstream and officially adopted by the government for the Imperial examinations under the Yuan dynasty. The School of Mind was developed by Lu Jiuyuan, Zhu Xi's main rival, but was soon forgotten. Only during the Ming dynasty was the School of Mind revived by Wang Shouren, whose influence is equal to that of Zhu Xi. This school was particularly important in Japan.\nDuring the Qing dynasty many philosophers objected against Neo-Confucianism and there was a return to the Han Dynasty Confucianism, and also the reprise of the controversy between Old Text and New Text. In this period also started the penetration of Western culture, but most Chinese thought that the Westerners were maybe more advanced in technology and warfare, but that China had primacy in moral and intellectual fields.\nSchools of thought.\nNeo-Confucianism.\nDespite Confucianism losing popularity to Taoism and Buddhism, Neo-Confucianism combined those ideas into a more metaphysical framework. Its concepts include \"li\" (principle, akin to Plato's forms), \"qi\" (vital or material force), \"tai-chi\" (the Great Ultimate), and \"xin\" (mind). Song dynasty philosopher Zhou Dunyi (1017\u20131073) is seen commonly seen as the first true \"pioneer\" of Neo-Confucianism, using Daoist metaphysics as a framework for his ethical philosophy. Neo-Confucianism developed both as a renaissance of traditional Confucian ideas, and as a reaction to the ideas of Buddhism and religious Daoism. Although the Neo-Confucianists denounced Buddhist metaphysics, Neo-Confucianism did borrow Daoist and Buddhist terminology and concepts.\nNeo-Confucianist philosophers like Zhu Xi and Wang Yangming are seen as the most important figures of Neo-Confucianism.\nModern era.\nDuring the Industrial and Modern Ages, Chinese philosophy had also begun to integrate concepts of Western philosophy, as steps toward modernization. Chinese philosophy never developed the concept of human rights, so that classical Chinese lacked words for them. In 1864, W.A.P. Martin had to invent the word \"quanli\" () to translate the Western concept of \"rights\" in the process of translating Henry Wheaton's \"Elements of International Law\" into classical Chinese.\nBy the time of the Xinhai Revolution in 1911, there were many calls such as the May Fourth Movement to completely abolish the old imperial institutions and practices of China. There have been attempts to incorporate democracy, republicanism, and industrialism into Chinese philosophy, notably by Sun Yat-Sen at the beginning of the 20th century. Mao Zedong added Marxism, Stalinism, Chinese Marxist Philosophy and other communist thought.\nWhen the Chinese Communist Party took over the reign, previous schools of thought, excepting notably Legalism, were denounced as backward, and later even purged during the Cultural Revolution, whereas their influences on Chinese thoughts remain until today. The current government of the People's Republic of China is trying to encourage a form of market socialism.\nSince the radical movement of the Cultural Revolution, the Chinese government has become much more tolerant with the practice of traditional beliefs. The 1978 Constitution of the People's Republic of China guarantees \"freedom of religion\" with a number of restrictions. Spiritual and philosophical institutions have been allowed to be established or re-established, as long they are not perceived to be a threat to the power of the CPC. Moreover, those organizations are heavily monitored. The influences of the past are still deeply ingrained in the Chinese culture.\nNew Confucianism.\nNew Confucianism is an intellectual movement of Confucianism that began in the early 20th century in Republican China, and revived in post-Mao era contemporary communist China. It is deeply influenced by, but not identical with, the Neo-Confucianism of the Song and Ming dynasties.\nConcepts.\nAlthough the individual philosophical schools differ considerably, they nevertheless share a common vocabulary and set of concerns.\nAmong the terms commonly found in Chinese philosophy are:\nAmong the commonalities of Chinese philosophies are:"}
{"id": "5823", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5823", "title": "Confucius", "text": "Confucius ( ; , \"Master K\u01d2ng\"; ) was a Chinese philosopher and politician of the Spring and Autumn period who was traditionally considered the paragon of Chinese sages. Widely considered one of the most important and influential individuals in human history, Confucius's teachings and philosophy formed the basis of East Asian culture and society, and remain influential today.\nThe philosophy of Confucius\u2014Confucianism\u2014emphasized personal and governmental morality, correctness of social relationships, justice, kindness, and sincerity. Confucianism was part of the Chinese social fabric and way of life; to Confucians, everyday life was the arena of religion. His followers competed successfully with many other schools during the Hundred Schools of Thought era only to be suppressed in favor of the Legalists during the Qin dynasty. Following the victory of Han over Chu after the collapse of Qin, Confucius's thoughts received official sanction in the new government. During the Tang and Song dynasties, Confucianism developed into a system known in the West as Neo-Confucianism, and later New Confucianism.\nConfucius is traditionally credited with having authored or edited many of the Chinese classic texts, including all of the Five Classics, but modern scholars are cautious of attributing specific assertions to Confucius himself. Aphorisms concerning his teachings were compiled in the \"Analects\", but only many years after his death.\nConfucius's principles have commonality with Chinese tradition and belief. With filial piety, he championed strong family loyalty, ancestor veneration, and respect of elders by their children and of husbands by their wives, recommending family as a basis for ideal government. He espoused the well-known principle \"Do not do unto others what you do not want done to yourself\", the Golden Rule. He is also a traditional deity in Daoism.\nName.\nThe name \"Confucius\" is a Latinization of the Mandarin Chinese title \"K\u01d2ng F\u016bz\u01d0\" (), meaning \"Master Kong\", and was coined in the late 16th century by the early Jesuit missionaries to China. Confucius's family name (\"x\u00ecng\": \u59d3) was and his given name (\"m\u00edng\":\u540d) was . His \"courtesy name\", a capping (\"guan\": \u51a0) given at his coming of age ceremony, and by which he would have been known to all but his older family members, was , the \"Zh\u00f2ng\" indicating that he was the second son in his family.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nIt is thought that Confucius was born on September 28, , in Zou (, in modern Shandong province). The area was notionally controlled by the kings of Zhou but effectively independent under the local lords of Lu, who ruled from the nearby city of Qufu. His father Kong He (or Shuliang He) was an elderly commandant of the local Lu garrison. His ancestry traced back through the dukes of Song to the Shang dynasty which had preceded the Zhou. Traditional accounts of Confucius's life relate that Kong He's grandfather had migrated the family from Song to Lu.\nKong He died when Confucius was three years old, and Confucius was raised by his mother Yan Zhengzai () in poverty. His mother would later die at less than 40 years of age. At age 19 he married Qiguan (), and a year later the couple had their first child, their son Kong Li (). Qiguan and Confucius would later have two daughters together, one of whom is thought to have died as a child.\nConfucius was educated at schools for commoners, where he studied and learned the Six Arts.\nConfucius was born into the class of \"shi\" (), between the aristocracy and the common people. He is said to have worked in various government jobs during his early 20s, and as a bookkeeper and a caretaker of sheep and horses, using the proceeds to give his mother a proper burial. When his mother died, Confucius (aged 23) is said to have mourned for three years, as was the tradition.\nPolitical career.\nIn Confucius's time, the state of Lu was headed by a ruling ducal house. Under the duke were three aristocratic families, whose heads bore the title of viscount and held hereditary positions in the Lu bureaucracy. The Ji family held the position \"Minister over the Masses\", who was also the \"Prime Minister\"; the Meng family held the position \"Minister of Works\"; and the Shu family held the position \"Minister of War\". In the winter of , Yang Hu\u2014a retainer of the Ji family\u2014rose up in rebellion and seized power from the Ji family. However, by the summer of , the three hereditary families had succeeded in expelling Yang Hu from Lu. By then, Confucius had built up a considerable reputation through his teachings, while the families came to see the value of proper conduct and righteousness, so they could achieve loyalty to a legitimate government. Thus, that year (), Confucius came to be appointed to the minor position of governor of a town. Eventually, he rose to the position of Minister of Crime.\nConfucius desired to return the authority of the state to the duke by dismantling the fortifications of the city\u2014strongholds belonging to the three families. This way, he could establish a centralized government. However, Confucius relied solely on diplomacy as he had no military authority himself. In , Hou Fan\u2014the governor of Hou\u2014revolted against his lord of the Shu family. Although the Meng and Shu families unsuccessfully besieged Hou, a loyalist official rose up with the people of Hou and forced Hou Fan to flee to the Qi state. The situation may have been in favor for Confucius as this likely made it possible for Confucius and his disciples to convince the aristocratic families to dismantle the fortifications of their cities. Eventually, after a year and a half, Confucius and his disciples succeeded in convincing the Shu family to raze the walls of Hou, the Ji family in razing the walls of Bi, and the Meng family in razing the walls of Cheng. First, the Shu family led an army towards their city Hou and tore down its walls in .\nSoon thereafter, Gongshan Furao (also known as Gongshan Buniu), a retainer of the Ji family, revolted and took control of the forces at Bi. He immediately launched an attack and entered the capital Lu. Earlier, Gongshan had approached Confucius to join him, which Confucius considered as he wanted the opportunity to put his principles into practice but he gave up on the idea in the end. Confucius disapproved the use of a violent revolution by principle, even though the Ji family dominated the Lu state by force for generations and had exiled the previous duke. Creel (1949) states that, unlike the rebel Yang Hu before him, Gongshan may have sought to destroy the three hereditary families and restore the power of the duke. However, Dubs (1946) is of the view that Gongshan was encouraged by Viscount Ji Huan to invade the Lu capital in an attempt to avoid dismantling the Bi fortified walls. Whatever the situation may have been, Gongshan was considered an upright man who continued to defend the state of Lu, even after he was forced to flee.\nDuring the revolt by Gongshan, Zhong You had managed to keep the duke and the three viscounts together at the court. Zhong You was one of the disciples of Confucius and Confucius had arranged for him to be given the position of governor by the Ji family. When Confucius heard of the raid, he requested that Viscount Ji Huan allow the duke and his court to retreat to a stronghold on his palace grounds. Thereafter, the heads of the three families and the duke retreated to the Ji's palace complex and ascended the Wuzi Terrace. Confucius ordered two officers to lead an assault against the rebels. At least one of the two officers was a retainer of the Ji family, but they were unable to refuse the orders while in the presence of the duke, viscounts, and court. The rebels were pursued and defeated at Gu. Immediately after the revolt was defeated, the Ji family razed the Bi city walls to the ground.\nThe attackers retreated after realizing that they would have to become rebels against the state and their lord. Through Confucius' actions, the Bi officials had inadvertently revolted against their own lord, thus forcing Viscount Ji Huan's hand in having to dismantle the walls of Bi (as it could have harbored such rebels) or confess to instigating the event by going against proper conduct and righteousness as an official. Dubs (1949) suggests that the incident brought to light Confucius' foresight, practical political ability, and insight into human character.\nWhen it was time to dismantle the city walls of the Meng family, the governor was reluctant to have his city walls torn down and convinced the head of the Meng family not to do so. The \"Zuozhuan\" recalls that the governor advised against razing the walls to the ground as he said that it made Cheng vulnerable to the Qi state and cause the destruction of the Meng family. Even though Viscount Meng Yi gave his word not to interfere with an attempt, he went back on his earlier promise to dismantle the walls.\nLater in , Duke Ding personally went with an army to lay siege to Cheng in an attempt to raze its walls to the ground, but he did not succeed. Thus, Confucius could not achieve the idealistic reforms that he wanted including restoration of the legitimate rule of the duke. He had made powerful enemies within the state, especially with Viscount Ji Huan, due to his successes so far. According to accounts in the \"Zuozhuan\" and \"Shiji\", Confucius departed his homeland in after his support for the failed attempt of dismantling the fortified city walls of the powerful Ji, Meng, and Shu families. He left the state of Lu without resigning, remaining in self-exile and unable to return as long as Viscount Ji Huan was alive.\nExile.\nThe \"Shiji\" stated that the neighboring Qi state was worried that Lu was becoming too powerful while Confucius was involved in the government of the Lu state. According to this account, Qi decided to sabotage Lu's reforms by sending 100 good horses and 80 beautiful dancing girls to the duke of Lu. The duke indulged himself in pleasure and did not attend to official duties for three days. Confucius was disappointed and resolved to leave Lu and seek better opportunities, yet to leave at once would expose the misbehavior of the duke and therefore bring public humiliation to the ruler Confucius was serving. Confucius therefore waited for the duke to make a lesser mistake. Soon after, the duke neglected to send to Confucius a portion of the sacrificial meat that was his due according to custom, and Confucius seized upon this pretext to leave both his post and the Lu state.\nAfter Confucius's resignation, he began a long journey or set of journeys around the principality states of north-east and central China including Wey, Song, Zheng, Cao, Chu, Qi, Chen, and Cai (and a failed attempt to go to Jin). At the courts of these states, he expounded his political beliefs but did not see them implemented.\nReturn home.\nAccording to the \"Zuozhuan\", Confucius returned home to his native Lu when he was 68, after he was invited to do so by Ji Kangzi, the chief minister of Lu. The \"Analects\" depict him spending his last years teaching 72 or 77 disciples and transmitting the old wisdom via a set of texts called the Five Classics.\nDuring his return, Confucius sometimes acted as an advisor to several government officials in Lu, including Ji Kangzi, on matters including governance and crime.\nBurdened by the loss of both his son and his favorite disciples, he died at the age of 71 or 72. He died from natural causes. Confucius was buried in Kong Lin cemetery which lies in the historical part of Qufu in the Shandong Province. The original tomb erected there in memory of Confucius on the bank of the Sishui River had the shape of an axe. In addition, it has a raised brick platform at the front of the memorial for offerings such as sandalwood incense and fruit.\nPhilosophy.\nAlthough Confucianism is often followed in a religious manner by the Chinese, many argue that its values are secular and that it is, therefore, less a religion than a secular morality. Proponents argue, however, that despite the secular nature of Confucianism's teachings, it is based on a worldview that is religious. Confucianism discusses elements of the afterlife and views concerning Heaven, but it is relatively unconcerned with some spiritual matters often considered essential to religious thought, such as the nature of souls.\nIn the \"Analects\", Confucius presents himself as a \"transmitter who invented nothing\". He puts the greatest emphasis on the importance of study, and it is the Chinese character for study () that opens the text. Far from trying to build a systematic or formalist theory, he wanted his disciples to master and internalize older classics, so that their deep thought and thorough study would allow them to relate the moral problems of the present to past political events (as recorded in the \"Annals\") or the past expressions of commoners' feelings and noblemen's reflections (as in the poems of the \"Book of Odes\").\nEthics.\nOne of the deepest teachings of Confucius may have been the superiority of personal exemplification over explicit rules of behavior. His moral teachings emphasized self-cultivation, emulation of moral exemplars, and the attainment of skilled judgment rather than knowledge of rules. Confucian ethics may, therefore, be considered a type of virtue ethics. His teachings rarely rely on reasoned argument, and ethical ideals and methods are conveyed indirectly, through allusion, innuendo, and even tautology. His teachings require examination and context to be understood. A good example is found in this famous anecdote:\nBy not asking about the horses, Confucius demonstrates that the sage values human beings over property; readers are led to reflect on whether their response would follow Confucius's and to pursue self-improvement if it would not have. Confucius serves not as an all-powerful deity or a universally true set of abstract principles, but rather the ultimate model for others. For these reasons, according to many commentators, Confucius's teachings may be considered a Chinese example of humanism.\nOne of his teachings was a variant of the Golden Rule, sometimes called the \"Silver Rule\" owing to its negative form:\nOften overlooked in Confucian ethics are the virtues to the self: sincerity and the cultivation of knowledge. Virtuous action towards others begins with virtuous and sincere thought, which begins with knowledge. A virtuous disposition without knowledge is susceptible to corruption, and virtuous action without sincerity is not true righteousness. Cultivating knowledge and sincerity is also important for one's own sake; the superior person loves learning for the sake of learning and righteousness for the sake of righteousness.\nThe Confucian theory of ethics as exemplified in \"l\u01d0\" () is based on three important conceptual aspects of life: (a) ceremonies associated with sacrifice to ancestors and deities of various types, (b) social and political institutions, and (c) the etiquette of daily behavior. It was believed by some that \"l\u01d0\" originated from the heavens, but Confucius stressed the development of \"l\u01d0\" through the actions of sage leaders in human history. His discussions of \"l\u01d0\" seem to redefine the term to refer to all actions committed by a person to build the ideal society, rather than those simply conforming with canonical standards of ceremony.\nIn the early Confucian tradition, \"l\u01d0\" was doing the proper thing at the proper time, balancing between maintaining existing norms to perpetuate an ethical social fabric, and violating them in order to accomplish ethical good. Training in the \"l\u01d0\" of past sages cultivates in people virtues that include ethical judgment about when \"l\u01d0\" must be adapted in light of situational contexts.\nIn Confucianism, the concept of \"li\" is closely related to \"y\u00ec\" (), which is based upon the idea of reciprocity. \"Y\u00ec\" can be translated as righteousness, though it may simply mean what is ethically best to do in a certain context. The term contrasts with action done out of self-interest. While pursuing one's own self-interest is not necessarily bad, one would be a better, more righteous person if one's life was based upon following a path designed to enhance the greater good. Thus an outcome of \"y\u00ec\" is doing the right thing for the right reason.\nJust as action according to \"l\u01d0\" should be adapted to conform to the aspiration of adhering to \"y\u00ec\", so \"y\u00ec\" is linked to the core value of \"r\u00e9n\" ().\"R\u00e9n\" consists of five basic virtues: seriousness, generosity, sincerity, diligence and kindness. \"R\u00e9n\" is the virtue of perfectly fulfilling one's responsibilities toward others, most often translated as \"benevolence\" or \"humaneness\"; translator Arthur Waley calls it \"Goodness\" (with a capital \"G\"), and other translations that have been put forth include \"authoritativeness\" and \"selflessness.\" Confucius's moral system was based upon empathy and understanding others, rather than divinely ordained rules. To develop one's spontaneous responses of \"r\u00e9n\" so that these could guide action intuitively was even better than living by the rules of \"y\u00ec\". Confucius asserts that virtue is a mean between extremes. For example, the properly generous person gives the right amount\u2014not too much and not too little.\nPolitics.\nConfucius's political thought is based upon his ethical thought. He argued that the best government is one that rules through \"rites\" (\"l\u01d0\") and people's natural morality, and \"not\" by using bribery and coercion. He explained that this is one of the most important analects: \"If the people be led by laws, and uniformity sought to be given them by punishments, they will try to avoid the punishment, but have no sense of shame. If they be led by virtue, and uniformity sought to be given them by the rules of propriety, they will have the sense of the shame, and moreover will become good.\" (Translated by James Legge) in the Great Learning (). This \"sense of shame\" is an internalisation of duty, where the punishment precedes the evil action, instead of following it in the form of laws as in Legalism.\nConfucius looked nostalgically upon earlier days, and urged the Chinese, particularly those with political power, to model themselves on earlier examples. In times of division, chaos, and endless wars between feudal states, he wanted to restore the Mandate of Heaven () that could unify the \"world\" (, \"all under Heaven\") and bestow peace and prosperity on the people. Because his vision of personal and social perfections was framed as a revival of the ordered society of earlier times, Confucius is often considered a great proponent of conservatism, but a closer look at what he proposes often shows that he used (and perhaps twisted) past institutions and rites to push a new political agenda of his own: a revival of a unified royal state, whose rulers would succeed to power on the basis of their moral merits instead of lineage. These would be rulers devoted to their people, striving for personal and social perfection, and such a ruler would spread his own virtues to the people instead of imposing proper behavior with laws and rules.\nConfucius did not believe in the concept of \"democracy\", which is itself an Athenian concept unknown in ancient China, but could be interpreted by Confucius's principles recommending against individuals electing their own political leaders to govern them, or that anyone is capable of self-government. He expressed fears that the masses lacked the intellect to make decisions for themselves, and that, in his view, since not everyone is created equal, not everyone has a right of self-government.\nWhile he supported the idea of government ruling by a virtuous king, his ideas contained a number of elements to limit the power of rulers. He argued for representing truth in language, and honesty was of paramount importance. Even in facial expression, truth must always be represented. Confucius believed that if a ruler is to lead correctly, by action, that orders would be unnecessary in that others will follow the proper actions of their ruler. In discussing the relationship between a king and his subject (or a father and his son), he underlined the need to give due respect to superiors. This demanded that the subordinates must advise their superiors if the superiors are considered to be taking a course of action that is wrong. Confucius believed in ruling by example, if you lead correctly, orders by force or punishment are not necessary.\nMusic and Poetry.\nConfucius heavily promoted the use of music with rituals or the rites order. The scholar Li Zehou argued that Confucianism is based on the idea of rites. Rites serve as the starting point for each individual and that these sacred social functions allow each person's human nature to be harmonious with reality. Given this, Confucius believed that \"music is the harmonization of heaven and earth; the rites is the order of heaven and earth.\" Thus the application of music in rites creates the order that makes it possible for society to prosper.\nThe Confucian approach to music was heavily inspired by the Shijing and the Classic of Music, which was said to be the sixth Confucian classic until it was lost during the Han Dynasty. The Shijing serves as one of the current Confucian classics and is a book on poetry that contains a diversified variety of poems as well as folk songs. Confucius is traditionally ascribed with compiling these classics within his school. In the Analects, Confucius described the importance of the art in the development of society: \"The Master said, \u2018My children, why do you not study the Book of Poetry?\n \u2018The Odes serve to stimulate the mind.\n \u2018They may be used for purposes of self-contemplation.\n \u2018They teach the art of sociability.\n \u2018They show how to regulate feelings of resentment.\n \u2018From them you learn the more immediate duty of serving one\u2019s father, and the remoter one of serving one\u2019s prince.\n \u2018From them we become largely acquainted with the names of birds, beasts, and plants.\u2019\"\nLegacy.\nConfucius's teachings were later turned into an elaborate set of rules and practices by his numerous disciples and followers, who organized his teachings into the Analects. Confucius's disciples and his only grandson, Zisi, continued his philosophical school after his death. These efforts spread Confucian ideals to students who then became officials in many of the royal courts in China, thereby giving Confucianism the first wide-scale test of its dogma.\nTwo of Confucius's most famous later followers emphasized radically different aspects of his teachings. In the centuries after his death, Mencius () and Xun Zi () both composed important teachings elaborating in different ways on the fundamental ideas associated with Confucius. Mencius () articulated the innate goodness in human beings as a source of the ethical intuitions that guide people towards \"r\u00e9n\", \"y\u00ec\", and \"l\u01d0\", while Xun Zi () underscored the realistic and materialistic aspects of Confucian thought, stressing that morality was inculcated in society through tradition and in individuals through training. In time, their writings, together with the \"Analects\" and other core texts came to constitute the philosophical corpus of Confucianism.\nThis realignment in Confucian thought was parallel to the development of Legalism, which saw filial piety as self-interest and not a useful tool for a ruler to create an effective state. A disagreement between these two political philosophies came to a head in when the Qin state conquered all of China. Li Si, Prime Minister of the Qin dynasty, convinced Qin Shi Huang to abandon the Confucians' recommendation of awarding fiefs akin to the Zhou Dynasty before them which he saw as being against to the Legalist idea of centralizing the state around the ruler. When the Confucian advisers pressed their point, Li Si had many Confucian scholars killed and their books burned\u2014considered a huge blow to the philosophy and Chinese scholarship.\nUnder the succeeding Han and Tang dynasties, Confucian ideas gained even more widespread prominence. Under Wudi, the works of Confucius were made the official imperial philosophy and required reading for civil service examinations in which was continued nearly unbroken until the end of the 19th century. As Mohism lost support by the time of the Han, the main philosophical contenders were Legalism, which Confucian thought somewhat absorbed, the teachings of Laozi, whose focus on more spiritual ideas kept it from direct conflict with Confucianism, and the new Buddhist religion, which gained acceptance during the Southern and Northern Dynasties era. Both Confucian ideas and Confucian-trained officials were relied upon in the Ming Dynasty and even the Yuan Dynasty, although Kublai Khan distrusted handing over provincial control to them.\nDuring the Song dynasty, the scholar Zhu Xi () added ideas from Daoism and Buddhism into Confucianism. In his life, Zhu Xi was largely ignored, but not long after his death, his ideas became the new orthodox view of what Confucian texts actually meant. Modern historians view Zhu Xi as having created something rather different and call his way of thinking \"Neo-Confucianism\". Neo-Confucianism held sway in China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam until the 19th century.\nThe works of Confucius were first translated into European languages by Jesuit missionaries in the 16th century during the late Ming dynasty. The first known effort was by Michele Ruggieri, who returned to Italy in 1588 and carried on his translations while residing in Salerno. Matteo Ricci started to report on the thoughts of Confucius, and a team of Jesuits\u2014Prospero Intorcetta, Philippe Couplet, and two others\u2014published a translation of several Confucian works and an overview of Chinese history in Paris in 1687. Fran\u00e7ois No\u00ebl, after failing to persuade ClementXI that Chinese veneration of ancestors and Confucius did not constitute idolatry, completed the Confucian canon at Prague in 1711, with more scholarly treatments of the other works and the first translation of the collected works of Mencius. It is thought that such works had considerable importance on European thinkers of the period, particularly among the Deists and other philosophical groups of the Enlightenment who were interested by the integration of the system of morality of Confucius into Western civilization.\nIn the modern era Confucian movements, such as New Confucianism, still exist, but during the Cultural Revolution, Confucianism was frequently attacked by leading figures in the Chinese Communist Party. This was partially a continuation of the condemnations of Confucianism by intellectuals and activists in the early 20th century as a cause of the ethnocentric close-mindedness and refusal of the Qing Dynasty to modernize that led to the tragedies that befell China in the 19th century.\nConfucius's works are studied by scholars in many other Asian countries, particularly those in the Chinese cultural sphere, such as Korea, Japan, and Vietnam. Many of those countries still hold the traditional memorial ceremony every year.\nAmong Tibetans, Confucius is often worshipped as a holy king and master of magic, divination and astrology. Tibetan Buddhists see him as learning divination from the Buddha Manjushri (and that knowledge subsequently reaching Tibet through Princess Wencheng), while Bon practitioners see him as being a reincarnation of Tonpa Shenrab Miwoche, the legendary founder of Bon.\nThe Ahmadiyya Muslim Community believes Confucius was a Divine Prophet of God, as were Lao-Tzu and other eminent Chinese personages.\nIn modern times, Asteroid 7853, \"Confucius\", was named after the Chinese thinker.\nDisciples.\nConfucius began teaching after he turned 30, and taught more than 3,000 students in his life, about 70 of whom were considered outstanding. His disciples and the early Confucian community they formed became the most influential intellectual force in the Warring States period. The Han dynasty historian Sima Qian dedicated a chapter in his \"Records of the Grand Historian\" to the biographies of Confucius's disciples, accounting for the influence they exerted in their time and afterward. Sima Qian recorded the names of 77 disciples in his collective biography, while \"Kongzi Jiayu\", another early source, records 76, not completely overlapping. The two sources together yield the names of 96 disciples. 22 of them are mentioned in the \"Analects\", while the \"Mencius\" records 24.\nConfucius did not charge any tuition, and only requested a symbolic gift of a bundle of dried meat from any prospective student. According to his disciple Zigong, his master treated students like doctors treated patients and did not turn anybody away. Most of them came from Lu, Confucius's home state, with 43 recorded, but he accepted students from all over China, with six from the state of Wey (such as Zigong), three from Qin, two each from Chen and Qi, and one each from Cai, Chu, and Song. Confucius considered his students' personal background irrelevant, and accepted noblemen, commoners, and even former criminals such as Yan Zhuoju and Gongye Chang. His disciples from richer families would pay a sum commensurate with their wealth which was considered a ritual donation.\nConfucius's favorite disciple was Yan Hui, most probably one of the most impoverished of them all. Sima Niu, in contrast to Yan Hui, was from a hereditary noble family hailing from the Song state. Under Confucius's teachings, the disciples became well-learned in the principles and methods of government. He often engaged in discussion and debate with his students and gave high importance to their studies in history, poetry, and ritual. Confucius advocated loyalty to principle rather than to individual acumen, in which reform was to be achieved by persuasion rather than violence. Even though Confucius denounced them for their practices, the aristocracy was likely attracted to the idea of having trustworthy officials who were studied in morals as the circumstances of the time made it desirable. In fact, the disciple Zilu even died defending his ruler in Wey.\nYang Hu, who was a subordinate of the Ji family, had dominated the Lu government from 505 to 502 and even attempted a coup, which narrowly failed. As a likely consequence, it was after this that the first disciples of Confucius were appointed to government positions. A few of Confucius's disciples went on to attain official positions of some importance, some of which were arranged by Confucius. By the time Confucius was 50 years old, the Ji family had consolidated their power in the Lu state over the ruling ducal house. Even though the Ji family had practices with which Confucius disagreed and disapproved, they nonetheless gave Confucius's disciples many opportunities for employment. Confucius continued to remind his disciples to stay true to their principles and renounced those who did not, all the while being openly critical of the Ji family.\nVisual portraits.\nNo contemporary painting or sculpture of Confucius survives, and it was only during the Han Dynasty that he was portrayed visually. Carvings often depict his legendary meeting with Laozi. Since that time there have been many portraits of Confucius as the ideal philosopher. The oldest known portrait of Confucius has been unearthed in the tomb of the Han dynasty ruler Marquis of Haihun (died ). The picture was painted on the wooden frame to a polished bronze mirror.\nIn former times, it was customary to have a portrait in Confucius Temples; however, during the reign of Hongwu Emperor (Taizu) of the Ming dynasty, it was decided that the only proper portrait of Confucius should be in the temple in his home town, Qufu in Shandong. In other temples, Confucius is represented by a memorial tablet. In 2006, the China Confucius Foundation commissioned a standard portrait of Confucius based on the Tang dynasty portrait by Wu Daozi.\nThe South Wall Frieze in the courtroom of the Supreme Court of the United States depicts Confucius as a teacher of harmony, learning, and virtue.\nFictional portrayals.\nThere have been two film adaptations of Confucius' life: \"Confucius\" (1940) starring Tang Huaiqiu, and \"Confucius\" (2010) starring Chow Yun-fat.\nIn music, Tori Amos imagines Confucius as working on a crossword puzzle in her 1992 song \"Happy Phantom.\"\nMemorials.\nSoon after Confucius's death, Qufu, his home town, became a place of devotion and remembrance. The Han dynasty \"Records of the Grand Historian\" records that it had already become a place of pilgrimage for ministers. It is still a major destination for cultural tourism, and many people visit his grave and the surrounding temples. In Sinic cultures, there are many temples where representations of the Buddha, Laozi, and Confucius are found together. There are also many temples dedicated to him, which have been used for Confucian ceremonies.\nFollowers of Confucianism have a tradition of holding spectacular memorial ceremonies of Confucius () every year, using ceremonies that supposedly derived from Zhou Li () as recorded by Confucius, on the date of Confucius's birth. In the 20th century, this tradition was interrupted for several decades in mainland China, where the official stance of the Communist Party and the State was that Confucius and Confucianism represented reactionary feudalist beliefs which held that the subservience of the people to the aristocracy is a part of the natural order. All such ceremonies and rites were therefore banned. Only after the 1990s did the ceremony resume. As it is now considered a veneration of Chinese history and tradition, even Communist Party members may be found in attendance.\nIn Taiwan, where the Nationalist Party (Kuomintang) strongly promoted Confucian beliefs in ethics and behavior, the tradition of the memorial ceremony of Confucius () is supported by the government and has continued without interruption. While not a national holiday, it does appear on all printed calendars, much as Father's Day or Christmas Day do in the Western world.\nIn South Korea, a grand-scale memorial ceremony called Seokjeon Daeje is held twice a year on Confucius's birthday and the anniversary of his death, at Confucian academies across the country and Sungkyunkwan in Seoul.\nDescendants.\nConfucius's descendants were repeatedly identified and honored by successive imperial governments with titles of nobility and official posts. They were honored with the rank of a marquis 35 times since Gaozu of the Han dynasty, and they were promoted to the rank of duke 42 times from the Tang dynasty to the Qing dynasty. Emperor Xuanzong of Tang first bestowed the title of \"Duke Wenxuan\" on Kong Suizhi of the 35th generation. In 1055, Emperor Renzong of Song first bestowed the title of \"Duke Yansheng\" on Kong Zongyuan of the 46th generation.\nDuring the Southern Song dynasty, the Duke Yansheng Kong Duanyou fled south with the Song Emperor to Quzhou in Zhejiang, while the newly established Jin dynasty (1115\u20131234) in the north appointed Kong Duanyou's brother Kong Duancao who remained in Qufu as Duke Yansheng. From that time up until the Yuan dynasty, there were two Duke Yanshengs, one in the north in Qufu and the other in the south at Quzhou. An invitation to come back to Qufu was extended to the southern Duke Yansheng Kong Zhu by the Yuan-dynasty Emperor Kublai Khan. The title was taken away from the southern branch after Kong Zhu rejected the invitation, so the northern branch of the family kept the title of Duke Yansheng. The southern branch remained in Quzhou where they live to this day. Confucius's descendants in Quzhou alone number 30,000. The Hanlin Academy rank of Wujing boshi \u4e94\u7d93\u535a\u58eb was awarded to the southern branch at Quzhou by a Ming Emperor while the northern branch at Qufu held the title Duke Yansheng. The leader of the southern branch is \u5b54\u7965\u6977 Kong Xiangkai.\nIn 1351, during the reign of Emperor Toghon Tem\u00fcr of the Yuan dynasty, 53rd-generation descendant Kong Huan ()'s 2nd son Kong Shao () moved from China to Korea during the Goryeo Dynasty, and was received courteously by Princess Noguk (the Mongolian-born wife of the future king Gongmin). After being naturalized as a Korean citizen, he changed the hanja of his name from \"\u662d\" to \"\u7d39\" (both pronounced \"so\" in Korean), married a Korean woman and bore a son (Gong Yeo (), 1329\u20131397), therefore establishing the Changwon Gong clan (), whose ancestral seat was located in Changwon, South Gyeongsang Province.\nThe clan then received an aristocratic rank during the succeeding Joseon Dynasty. In 1794, during the reign of King Jeongjo, the clan then changed its name to Gokbu Gong clan () in honor of Confucius's birthplace Qufu ().Famous descendants include actors such as Gong Yoo (real name Gong Ji-cheol (\uacf5\uc9c0\ucca0)) &amp; Gong Hyo-jin (\uacf5\ud6a8\uc9c4); and artists such as male idol group B1A4 member Gongchan (real name Gong Chan-sik (\uacf5\ucc2c\uc2dd)), singer-songwriter Minzy (real name Gong Min-ji (\uacf5\ubbfc\uc9c0)), as well as her great-aunt traditional folk dancer (\uacf5\uc625\uc9c4).\nDespite repeated dynastic change in China, the title of Duke Yansheng was bestowed upon successive generations of descendants until it was abolished by the Nationalist Government in 1935. The last holder of the title, Kung Te-cheng of the 77th generation, was appointed Sacrificial Official to Confucius. Kung Te-cheng died in October 2008, and his son, Kung Wei-yi, the 78th lineal descendant, had died in 1989. Kung Te-cheng's grandson, Kung Tsui-chang, the 79th lineal descendant, was born in 1975; his great-grandson, Kung Yu-jen, the 80th lineal descendant, was born in Taipei on January 1, 2006. Te-cheng's sister, Kong Demao, lives in mainland China and has written a book about her experiences growing up at the family estate in Qufu. Another sister, Kong Deqi, died as a young woman. Many descendants of Confucius still live in Qufu today.\nA descendant of Confucius, H. H. Kung was the Premier of the Republic of China. One of his sons, Kong Lingjie \u5b54\u4ee4\u5091 married Debra Paget who gave birth to Gregory Kung ().\nConfucius's family, the Kongs, have the longest recorded extant pedigree in the world today. The father-to-son family tree, now in its 83rd generation, has been recorded since the death of Confucius. According to the Confucius Genealogy Compilation Committee (CGCC), he has two million known and registered descendants, and there are an estimated three million in all. Of these, several tens of thousands live outside of China. In the 14th century, a Kong descendant went to Korea, where an estimated 34,000 descendants of Confucius live today. One of the main lineages fled from the Kong ancestral home in Qufu during the Chinese Civil War in the 1940s and eventually settled in Taiwan. There are also branches of the Kong family who have converted to Islam after marrying Muslim women, in Dachuan in Gansu province in the 1800s, and in 1715 in Xuanwei in Yunnan province. Many of the Muslim Confucius descendants are descended from the marriage of Ma Jiaga (), a Muslim woman, and Kong Yanrong (), 59th generation descendant of Confucius in the year 1480 and are found among the Hui and Dongxiang peoples. The new genealogy includes the Muslims. Kong Dejun () is a prominent Islamic scholar and Arabist from Qinghai province and a 77th generation descendant of Confucius.\nBecause of the huge interest in the Confucius family tree, there was a project in China to test the DNA of known family members of the collateral branches in mainland China. Among other things, this would allow scientists to identify a common Y chromosome in male descendants of Confucius. If the descent were truly unbroken, father-to-son, since Confucius's lifetime, the males in the family would all have the same Y chromosome as their direct male ancestor, with slight mutations due to the passage of time. The aim of the genetic test was the help members of collateral branches in China who lost their genealogical records to prove their descent. However, in 2009, many of the collateral branches decided not to agree to DNA testing. Bryan Sykes, professor of genetics at Oxford University, understands this decision: \"The Confucius family tree has an enormous cultural significance,\" he said. \"It's not just a scientific question.\" The DNA testing was originally proposed to add new members, many of whose family record books were lost during 20th-century upheavals, to the Confucian family tree. The main branch of the family which fled to Taiwan was never involved in the proposed DNA test at all.\nIn 2013 a DNA test performed on multiple different families who claimed descent from Confucius found that they shared the same Y chromosome as reported by Fudan University.\nThe fifth and most recent edition of the Confucius genealogy was printed by the CGCC. It was unveiled in a ceremony at Qufu on September 24, 2009. Women are now included for the first time."}
{"id": "5826", "revid": "7226930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5826", "title": "Complex number", "text": "In mathematics, a complex number is a number that can be expressed in the form , where and are real numbers, and is a symbol called the imaginary unit, and satisfying the equation . Because no \"real\" number satisfies this equation, was called an imaginary number by Ren\u00e9 Descartes. For the complex number , is called the ' and is called the '. The set of complex numbers is denoted by either of the symbols formula_1 or . Despite the historical nomenclature \"imaginary\", complex numbers are regarded in the mathematical sciences as just as \"real\" as the real numbers and are fundamental in many aspects of the scientific description of the natural world.\nComplex numbers allow solutions to all polynomial equations, even those that have no solutions in real numbers. More precisely, the fundamental theorem of algebra asserts that every polynomial equation with real or complex coefficients has a solution which is a complex number. For example, the equation\nformula_2\nhas no real solution, since the square of a real number cannot be negative, but has the two nonreal complex solutions and .\nAddition, subtraction and multiplication of complex numbers can be naturally defined by using the rule combined with the associative, commutative and distributive laws. Every nonzero complex number has a multiplicative inverse. This makes the complex numbers a field that has the real numbers as a subfield. The complex numbers form also a real vector space of dimension two, with as a standard basis.\nThis standard basis makes the complex numbers a Cartesian plane, called the complex plane. This allows a geometric interpretation of the complex numbers and their operations, and conversely expressing in terms of complex numbers some geometric properties and constructions. For example, the real numbers form the real line which is identified to the horizontal axis of the complex plane. The complex numbers of absolute value one form the unit circle. The addition of a complex number is a translation in the complex plane, and the multiplication by a complex number is a similarity centered at the origin. The complex conjugation is the reflection symmetry with respect to the real axis. The complex absolute value is a Euclidean norm. \nIn summary, the complex numbers form a rich structure that is simultaneously an algebraically closed field, a commutative algebra over the reals, and a Euclidean vector space of dimension two.\nDefinition.\nA complex number is a number of the form , where and are real numbers, and is an indeterminate satisfying . For example, is a complex number.\nThis way, a complex number is defined as a polynomial with real coefficients in the single indeterminate , for which the relation is imposed. Based on this definition, complex numbers can be added and multiplied, using the addition and multiplication for polynomials. The relation induces the equalities and which hold for all integers ; these allow the reduction of any polynomial that results from the addition and multiplication of complex numbers to a linear polynomial in , again of the form with real coefficients \nThe real number is called the \"real part\" of the complex number ; the real number is called its \"imaginary part\". To emphasize, the imaginary part does not include a factor ; that is, the imaginary part is , not .\nFormally, the complex numbers are defined as the quotient ring of the polynomial ring in the indeterminate , by the ideal generated by the polynomial (see below).\nNotation.\nA real number can be regarded as a complex number , whose imaginary part is 0. A purely imaginary number is a complex number , whose real part is zero. As with polynomials, it is common to write for and for . Moreover, when the imaginary part is negative, that is, , it is common to write instead of ; for example, for , can be written instead of .\nSince the multiplication of the indeterminate and a real is commutative in polynomials with real coefficients, the polynomial may be written as This is often expedient for imaginary parts denoted by expressions, for example, when is a radical.\nThe real part of a complex number is denoted by , formula_3, or formula_4; the imaginary part of a complex number is denoted by , formula_5, or formula_6 For example,\nThe set of all complex numbers is denoted by formula_8 (blackboard bold) or (upright bold).\nIn some disciplines, particularly in electromagnetism and electrical engineering, is used instead of as is frequently used to represent electric current. In these cases, complex numbers are written as , or .\nVisualization.\nA complex number can thus be identified with an ordered pair formula_9 of real numbers, which in turn may be interpreted as coordinates of a point in a two-dimensional space. The most immediate space is the Euclidean plane with suitable coordinates, which is then called complex plane or Argand diagram, named after Jean-Robert Argand. Another prominent space on which the coordinates may be projected is the two-dimensional surface of a sphere, which is then called Riemann sphere.\nCartesian complex plane.\nThe definition of the complex numbers involving two arbitrary real values immediately suggests the use of Cartesian coordinates in the complex plane. The horizontal (\"real\") axis is generally used to display the real part, with increasing values to the right, and the imaginary part marks the vertical (\"imaginary\") axis, with increasing values upwards.\nA charted number may be viewed either as the point or as a position vector from the origin to this point. The coordinate values of a complex number can hence be expressed in its \"Cartesian\", \"rectangular\", or \"algebraic\" form.\nNotably, the operations of addition and multiplication take on a very natural geometric character, when complex numbers are viewed as position vectors: addition corresponds to vector addition, while multiplication (see below) corresponds to multiplying their magnitudes and adding the angles they make with the real axis. Viewed in this way, the multiplication of a complex number by corresponds to rotating the position vector counterclockwise by a quarter turn (90\u00b0) about the origin\u2014a fact which can be expressed algebraically as follows:\nPolar complex plane.\nModulus and argument.\nAn alternative option for coordinates in the complex plane is the polar coordinate system that uses the distance of the point from the origin (), and the angle subtended between the positive real axis and the line segment in a counterclockwise sense. This leads to the polar form of complex numbers.\nThe \"absolute value\" (or \"modulus\" or \"magnitude\") of a complex number is\nIf is a real number (that is, if ), then . That is, the absolute value of a real number equals its absolute value as a complex number.\nBy Pythagoras' theorem, the absolute value of a complex number is the distance to the origin of the point representing the complex number in the complex plane.\nThe \"argument\" of (in many applications referred to as the \"phase\" ) is the angle of the radius with the positive real axis, and is written as . As with the modulus, the argument can be found from the rectangular form \u2014by applying the inverse tangent to the quotient of imaginary-by-real parts. By using a half-angle identity, a single branch of the arctan suffices to cover the range of the -function, , and avoids a more subtle case-by-case analysis\nNormally, as given above, the principal value in the interval is chosen. Values in the range are obtained by adding \u2014 if the value is negative. The value of is expressed in radians in this article. It can increase by any integer multiple of and still give the same angle, viewed as subtended by the rays of the positive real axis and from the origin through . Hence, the arg function is sometimes considered as multivalued. The polar angle for the complex number 0 is indeterminate, but arbitrary choice of the polar angle\u00a00 is common.\nThe value of equals the result of atan2:\nTogether, and give another way of representing complex numbers, the \"polar form\", as the combination of modulus and argument fully specify the position of a point on the plane. Recovering the original rectangular co-ordinates from the polar form is done by the formula called \"trigonometric form\"\nUsing Euler's formula this can be written as\nUsing the function, this is sometimes abbreviated to\nIn angle notation, often used in electronics to represent a phasor with amplitude and phase , it is written as\nComplex graphs.\nWhen visualizing complex functions, both a complex input and output are needed. Because each complex number is represented in two dimensions, visually graphing a complex function would require the perception of a four dimensional space, which is possible only in projections. Because of this, other ways of visualizing complex functions have been designed.\nIn domain coloring the output dimensions are represented by color and brightness, respectively. Each point in the complex plane as domain is \"ornated\", typically with \"color\" representing the argument of the complex number, and \"brightness\" representing the magnitude. Dark spots mark moduli near zero, brighter spots are farther away from the origin, the gradation may be discontinuous, but is assumed as monotonous. The colors often vary in steps of for to from red, yellow, green, cyan, blue, to magenta. These plots are called color wheel graphs. This provides a simple way to visualize the functions without losing information. The picture shows zeros for and poles at \nRiemann surfaces are another way to visualize complex functions. Riemann surfaces can be thought of as deformations of the complex plane; while the horizontal axes represent the real and imaginary inputs, the single vertical axis only represents either the real or imaginary output. However, Riemann surfaces are built in such a way that rotating them 180 degrees shows the imaginary output, and vice versa. Unlike domain coloring, Riemann surfaces can represent multivalued functions like .\nHistory.\nThe solution in radicals (without trigonometric functions) of a general cubic equation contains the square roots of negative numbers when all three roots are real numbers, a situation that cannot be rectified by factoring aided by the rational root test if the cubic is irreducible (the so-called \"casus irreducibilis\"). This conundrum led Italian mathematician Gerolamo Cardano to conceive of complex numbers in around 1545, though his understanding was rudimentary.\nWork on the problem of general polynomials ultimately led to the fundamental theorem of algebra, which shows that with complex numbers, a solution exists to every polynomial equation of degree one or higher. Complex numbers thus form an algebraically closed field, where any polynomial equation has a root.\nMany mathematicians contributed to the development of complex numbers. The rules for addition, subtraction, multiplication, and root extraction of complex numbers were developed by the Italian mathematician Rafael Bombelli. A more abstract formalism for the complex numbers was further developed by the Irish mathematician William Rowan Hamilton, who extended this abstraction to the theory of quaternions.\nThe earliest fleeting reference to square roots of negative numbers can perhaps be said to occur in the work of the Greek mathematician Hero of Alexandria in the 1st century AD, where in his \"Stereometrica\" he considers, apparently in error, the volume of an impossible frustum of a pyramid to arrive at the term in his calculations, although negative quantities were not conceived of in Hellenistic mathematics and Hero merely replaced it by its positive .\nThe impetus to study complex numbers as a topic in itself first arose in the 16th century when algebraic solutions for the roots of cubic and quartic polynomials were discovered by Italian mathematicians (see Niccol\u00f2 Fontana Tartaglia, Gerolamo Cardano). It was soon realized (but proved much later) that these formulas, even if one was interested only in real solutions, sometimes required the manipulation of square roots of negative numbers. As an example, Tartaglia's formula for a cubic equation of the form + \\sqrt[3]{q/2 - \\sqrt{(q/2)^2-(p/3)^3}}&lt;/math&gt;. When formula_18 is negative (casus irreducibilis), the second cube root should be regarded as the complex conjugate of the first one.}} gives the solution to the equation as\nAt first glance this looks like nonsense. However, formal calculations with complex numbers show that the equation has solutions , and . Substituting these in turn for in Tartaglia's cubic formula and simplifying, one gets 0, 1 and \u22121 as the solutions of . Of course this particular equation can be solved at sight but it does illustrate that when general formulas are used to solve cubic equations with real roots then, as later mathematicians showed rigorously, the use of complex numbers is unavoidable. Rafael Bombelli was the first to address explicitly these seemingly paradoxical solutions of cubic equations and developed the rules for complex arithmetic trying to resolve these issues.\nThe term \"imaginary\" for these quantities was coined by Ren\u00e9 Descartes in 1637, who was at pains to stress their unreal nature\nA further source of confusion was that the equation seemed to be capriciously inconsistent with the algebraic identity , which is valid for non-negative real numbers and , and which was also used in complex number calculations with one of , positive and the other negative. The incorrect use of this identity (and the related identity ) in the case when both and are negative even bedeviled Euler. This difficulty eventually led to the convention of using the special symbol in place of to guard against this mistake. Even so, Euler considered it natural to introduce students to complex numbers much earlier than we do today. In his elementary algebra text book, Elements of Algebra, he introduces these numbers almost at once and then uses them in a natural way throughout.\nIn the 18th\u00a0century complex numbers gained wider use, as it was noticed that formal manipulation of complex expressions could be used to simplify calculations involving trigonometric functions. For instance, in 1730 Abraham de Moivre noted that the complicated identities relating trigonometric functions of an integer multiple of an angle to powers of trigonometric functions of that angle could be simply re-expressed by the following well-known formula which bears his name, de Moivre's formula:\nIn 1748 Leonhard Euler went further and obtained Euler's formula of complex analysis:\nby formally manipulating complex power series and observed that this formula could be used to reduce any trigonometric identity to much simpler exponential identities.\nThe idea of a complex number as a point in the complex plane (above) was first described by Danish\u2013Norwegian mathematician Caspar Wessel in 1799, although it had been anticipated as early as 1685 in Wallis's \"A Treatise of Algebra\".\nWessel's memoir appeared in the Proceedings of the Copenhagen Academy but went largely unnoticed. In 1806 Jean-Robert Argand independently issued a pamphlet on complex numbers and provided a rigorous proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra. Carl Friedrich Gauss had earlier published an essentially topological proof of the theorem in 1797 but expressed his doubts at the time about \"the true metaphysics of the square root of \u22121\". It was not until 1831 that he overcame these doubts and published his treatise on complex numbers as points in the plane, largely establishing modern notation and terminology.\nIf one formerly contemplated this subject from a false point of view and therefore found a mysterious darkness, this is in large part attributable to clumsy terminology. Had one not called +1, \u22121, positive, negative, or imaginary (or even impossible) units, but instead, say, direct, inverse, or lateral units, then there could scarcely have been talk of such darkness. \u2014 Gauss (1831)\nIn the beginning of the 19th century, other mathematicians discovered independently the geometrical representation of the complex numbers: Bu\u00e9e, Mourey, Warren, Fran\u00e7ais and his brother, Bellavitis.\nThe English mathematician G.H. Hardy remarked that Gauss was the first mathematician to use complex numbers in 'a really confident and scientific way' although mathematicians such as Norwegian Niels Henrik Abel and Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi were necessarily using them routinely before Gauss published his 1831 treatise.\nAugustin Louis Cauchy and Bernhard Riemann together brought the fundamental ideas of complex analysis to a high state of completion, commencing around 1825 in Cauchy's case.\nThe common terms used in the theory are chiefly due to the founders. Argand called the \"direction factor\", and the \"modulus\"; + \\tfrac{b}{\\sqrt{a^2 + b^2}} \\sqrt{-1} &lt;/math&gt;], whose module is unity [1], would represent its direction.]}} Cauchy (1821) called the \"reduced form\" (l'expression r\u00e9duite) and apparently introduced the term \"argument\"; Gauss used for , introduced the term \"complex number\" for , and called the \"norm\". The expression \"direction coefficient\", often used for , is due to Hankel (1867), and \"absolute value,\" for \"modulus,\" is due to Weierstrass.\nLater classical writers on the general theory include Richard Dedekind, Otto H\u00f6lder, Felix Klein, Henri Poincar\u00e9, Hermann Schwarz, Karl Weierstrass and many others. Important work (including a systematization) in complex multivariate calculus has been started at beginning of the 20th century. Important results have been achieved by Wilhelm Wirtinger in 1927.\nRelations and operations.\nEquality.\nComplex numbers have a similar definition of equality to real numbers; two complex numbers and are equal if and only if both their real and imaginary parts are equal, that is, if and . Nonzero complex numbers written in polar form are equal if and only if they have the same magnitude and their arguments differ by an integer multiple of .\nOrdering.\nUnlike the real numbers, there is no natural ordering of the complex numbers. In particular, there is no linear ordering on the complex numbers that is compatible with addition and multiplication \u2013 the complex numbers cannot have the structure of an ordered field. This is e.g. because every non-trivial sum of squares in an ordered field is , and is a non-trivial sum of squares.\nThus, complex numbers are naturally thought of as existing on a two-dimensional plane.\nConjugate.\nThe \"complex conjugate\" of the complex number is given by . It is denoted by either or . This unary operation on complex numbers cannot be expressed by applying only their basic operations addition, subtraction, multiplication and division.\nGeometrically, is the \"reflection\" of about the real axis. Conjugating twice gives the original complex number\nwhich makes this operation an involution. The reflection leaves both the real part and the magnitude of unchanged, that is\nThe imaginary part and the argument of a complex number change their sign under conjugation\nFor details on argument and magnitude, see the section on Polar form.\nThe product of a complex number and its conjugate is known as the \"absolute square\". It is always a non-negative real number and equals the square of the magnitude of each:\nThis property can be used to convert a fraction with a complex denominator to an equivalent fraction with a real denominator by expanding both numerator and denominator of the fraction by the conjugate of the given denominator. This process is sometimes called \"rationalization\" of the denominator (although the denominator in the final expression might be an irrational real number), because it resembles the method to remove roots from simple expressions in a denominator.\nThe real and imaginary parts of a complex number can be extracted using the conjugation:\nMoreover, a complex number is real if and only if it equals its own conjugate.\nConjugation distributes over the basic complex arithmetic operations:\nConjugation is also employed in inversive geometry, a branch of geometry studying reflections more general than ones about a line. In the network analysis of electrical circuits, the complex conjugate is used in finding the equivalent impedance when the maximum power transfer theorem is looked for.\nAddition and subtraction.\nTwo complex numbers and are most easily added by separately adding their real and imaginary parts of the summands. That is to say:\nSimilarly, subtraction can be performed as\nUsing the visualization of complex numbers in the complex plane, the addition has the following geometric interpretation: the sum of two complex numbers and , interpreted as points in the complex plane, is the point obtained by building a parallelogram from the three vertices , and the points of the arrows labeled and (provided that they are not on a line). Equivalently, calling these points , , respectively and the fourth point of the parallelogram the triangles and are congruent. A visualization of the subtraction can be achieved by considering addition of the negative subtrahend.\nMultiplication.\nSince the real part, the imaginary part, and the indeterminate in a complex number are all considered as numbers in themselves, two complex numbers, given as and are multiplied under the rules of the distributive property, the commutative properties and the defining property in the following way\nReciprocal and division.\nUsing the conjugation, the reciprocal of a nonzero complex number can always be broken down to\nsince \"non-zero\" implies that is greater than zero.\nThis can be used to express a division of an arbitrary complex number by a non-zero complex number as\nMultiplication and division in polar form.\nFormulas for multiplication, division and exponentiation are simpler in polar form than the corresponding formulas in Cartesian coordinates. Given two complex numbers and , because of the trigonometric identities\nwe may derive\nIn other words, the absolute values are multiplied and the arguments are added to yield the polar form of the product. For example, multiplying by corresponds to a quarter-turn counter-clockwise, which gives back . The picture at the right illustrates the multiplication of\nSince the real and imaginary part of are equal, the argument of that number is 45 degrees, or (in radian). On the other hand, it is also the sum of the angles at the origin of the red and blue triangles are arctan(1/3) and arctan(1/2), respectively. Thus, the formula\nholds. As the arctan function can be approximated highly efficiently, formulas like this \u2013 known as Machin-like formulas \u2013 are used for high-precision approximations of .\nSimilarly, division is given by\nSquare root.\nThe square roots of (with ) are formula_41, where\nand\nwhere is the signum function. This can be seen by squaring formula_41 to obtain . Here formula_45 is called the modulus of , and the square root sign indicates the square root with non-negative real part, called the principal square root; also formula_46 where .\nExponential function.\nThe exponential function formula_47 can be defined for every complex number by the power series\nwhich has an infinite radius of convergence.\nThe value at of the exponential function is Euler's number\nIf is real, one has \nformula_50\nAnalytic continuation allows extending this equality for every complex value of , and thus to define the complex exponentiation with base as\nFunctional equation.\nThe exponential function satisfies the functional equation\nformula_52\nThis can be proved either by comparing the power series expansion of both members or by applying analytic continuation from the restriction of the equation to real arguments.\nEuler's formula.\nEuler's formula states that, for any real number ,\nThe functional equation implies thus that, if and are real, one has\nwhich is the decomposition of the exponential function into its real and imaginary parts.\nComplex logarithm.\nIn the real case, the natural logarithm can be defined as the inverse \nformula_55 of the exponential function. For extending this to the complex domain, one can start from Euler's formula. It implies that, if a complex number formula_56 is written in polar form\nwith formula_58 then with\nas complex logarithm one has a proper inverse:\nHowever, because cosine and sine are periodic functions, the addition of an integer multiple of to does not change . For example, , so both and are possible values for the natural logarithm of .\nTherefore, if the complex logarithm is not to be defined as a multivalued function\none has to use a branch cut and to restrict the codomain, resulting in the bijective function\nIf formula_63 is not a non-positive real number (a positive or a non-real number), the resulting principal value of the complex logarithm is obtained with . It is an analytic function outside the negative real numbers, but it cannot be prolongated to a function that is continuous at any negative real number formula_64, where the principal value is .\nExponentiation.\nIf is real and complex, the exponentiation is defined as \nwhere denotes the natural logarithm.\nIt seems natural to extend this formula to complex values of , but there are some difficulties resulting from the fact that the complex logarithm is not really a function, but a multivalued function.\nIt follows that if is as above, and if is another complex number, then the \"exponentiation\" is the multivalued function\nInteger and fractional exponents.\nIf, in the preceding formula, is an integer, then the sine and the cosine are independent of . Thus, if the exponent is an integer, then is well defined, and the exponentiation formula simplifies to de Moivre's formula:\nThe th roots of a complex number are given by\nfor . (Here formula_69 is the usual (positive) th root of the positive real number .) Because sine and cosine are periodic, other integer values of do not give other values.\nWhile the th root of a positive real number is chosen to be the \"positive\" real number satisfying , there is no natural way of distinguishing one particular complex th root of a complex number. Therefore, the th root is a -valued function of . This implies that, contrary to the case of positive real numbers, one has \nsince the left-hand side consists of values, and the right-hand side is a single value.\nProperties.\nField structure.\nThe set formula_8 of complex numbers is a field. Briefly, this means that the following facts hold: first, any two complex numbers can be added and multiplied to yield another complex number. Second, for any complex number , its additive inverse is also a complex number; and third, every nonzero complex number has a reciprocal complex number. Moreover, these operations satisfy a number of laws, for example the law of commutativity of addition and multiplication for any two complex numbers and :\nThese two laws and the other requirements on a field can be proven by the formulas given above, using the fact that the real numbers themselves form a field.\nUnlike the reals, formula_8 is not an ordered field, that is to say, it is not possible to define a relation that is compatible with the addition and multiplication. In fact, in any ordered field, the square of any element is necessarily positive, so precludes the existence of an ordering on formula_75\nWhen the underlying field for a mathematical topic or construct is the field of complex numbers, the topic's name is usually modified to reflect that fact. For example: complex analysis, complex matrix, complex polynomial, and complex Lie algebra.\nSolutions of polynomial equations.\nGiven any complex numbers (called coefficients) , the equation\nhas at least one complex solution \"z\", provided that at least one of the higher coefficients is nonzero. This is the statement of the \"fundamental theorem of algebra\", of Carl Friedrich Gauss and Jean le Rond d'Alembert. Because of this fact, formula_8 is called an algebraically closed field. This property does not hold for the field of rational numbers formula_78 (the polynomial does not have a rational root, since is not a rational number) nor the real numbers formula_79 (the polynomial does not have a real root for , since the square of is positive for any real number ).\nThere are various proofs of this theorem, by either analytic methods such as Liouville's theorem, or topological ones such as the winding number, or a proof combining Galois theory and the fact that any real polynomial of \"odd\" degree has at least one real root.\nBecause of this fact, theorems that hold \"for any algebraically closed field\" apply to formula_75 For example, any non-empty complex square matrix has at least one (complex) eigenvalue.\nAlgebraic characterization.\nThe field formula_8 has the following three properties:\nIt can be shown that any field having these properties is isomorphic (as a field) to formula_75 For example, the algebraic closure of the field formula_85 of the -adic number also satisfies these three properties, so these two fields are isomorphic (as fields, but not as topological fields). Also, formula_8 is isomorphic to the field of complex Puiseux series. However, specifying an isomorphism requires the axiom of choice. Another consequence of this algebraic characterization is that formula_8 contains many proper subfields that are isomorphic to formula_8.\nCharacterization as a topological field.\nThe preceding characterization of formula_8 describes only the algebraic aspects of formula_75 That is to say, the properties of nearness and continuity, which matter in areas such as analysis and topology, are not dealt with. The following description of formula_8 as a topological field (that is, a field that is equipped with a topology, which allows the notion of convergence) does take into account the topological properties. formula_8 contains a subset (namely the set of positive real numbers) of nonzero elements satisfying the following three conditions:\nMoreover, formula_8 has a nontrivial involutive automorphism (namely the complex conjugation), such that is in for any nonzero in formula_75\nAny field with these properties can be endowed with a topology by taking the sets as a base, where ranges over the field and ranges over . With this topology is isomorphic as a \"topological\" field to formula_75\nThe only connected locally compact topological fields are formula_79 and formula_75 This gives another characterization of formula_8 as a topological field, since formula_8 can be distinguished from formula_79 because the nonzero complex numbers are connected, while the nonzero real numbers are not.\nFormal construction.\nConstruction as ordered pairs.\nWilliam Rowan Hamilton introduced the approach to define the set formula_8 of complex numbers as the set of of real numbers, in which the following rules for addition and multiplication are imposed:\nIt is then just a matter of notation to express as .\nConstruction as a quotient field.\nThough this low-level construction does accurately describe the structure of the complex numbers, the following equivalent definition reveals the algebraic nature of formula_8 more immediately. This characterization relies on the notion of fields and polynomials. A field is a set endowed with addition, subtraction, multiplication and division operations that behave as is familiar from, say, rational numbers. For example, the distributive law\nmust hold for any three elements , and of a field. The set formula_79 of real numbers does form a field. A polynomial with real coefficients is an expression of the form\nwhere the are real numbers. The usual addition and multiplication of polynomials endows the set formula_108 of all such polynomials with a ring structure. This ring is called the polynomial ring over the real numbers.\nThe set of complex numbers is defined as the quotient ring formula_109 This extension field contains two square roots of , namely (the cosets of) and , respectively. (The cosets of) and form a basis of as a real vector space, which means that each element of the extension field can be uniquely written as a linear combination in these two elements. Equivalently, elements of the extension field can be written as ordered pairs of real numbers. The quotient ring is a field, because is irreducible over formula_110 so the ideal it generates is maximal.\nThe formulas for addition and multiplication in the ring formula_111 modulo the relation , correspond to the formulas for addition and multiplication of complex numbers defined as ordered pairs. So the two definitions of the field formula_8 are isomorphic (as fields).\nAccepting that formula_8 is algebraically closed, since it is an algebraic extension of in this approach, formula_8 is therefore the algebraic closure of formula_115\nMatrix representation of complex numbers.\nComplex numbers can also be represented by matrices that have the form\nHere the entries and are real numbers. As the sum and product of two such matrices is again of this form, these matrices form a subring of the ring matrices. \nA simple computation shows that the map\nis a ring isomorphism from the field of complex numbers to the ring of these matrices.\nThis isomorphism associates the square of the absolute value of a complex number with the determinant of the corresponding matrix, and the conjugate of a complex number with the transpose of the matrix. \nThe action of the matrix on a vector correspond to the multiplication of by . In particular, if the determinant is , there is a real number such that the matrix has the form \nIn this case, the action of the matrix on vectors and the multiplication by the complex number formula_119 are both the rotation of the angle .\nComplex analysis.\nThe study of functions of a complex variable is known as complex analysis and has enormous practical use in applied mathematics as well as in other branches of mathematics. Often, the most natural proofs for statements in real analysis or even number theory employ techniques from complex analysis (see prime number theorem for an example). Unlike real functions, which are commonly represented as two-dimensional graphs, complex functions have four-dimensional graphs and may usefully be illustrated by color-coding a three-dimensional graph to suggest four dimensions, or by animating the complex function's dynamic transformation of the complex plane.\nComplex exponential and related functions.\nThe notions of convergent series and continuous functions in (real) analysis have natural analogs in complex analysis. A sequence of complex numbers is said to converge if and only if its real and imaginary parts do. This is equivalent to the (\u03b5, \u03b4)-definition of limits, where the absolute value of real numbers is replaced by the one of complex numbers. From a more abstract point of view, , endowed with the metric\nis a complete metric space, which notably includes the triangle inequality\nfor any two complex numbers and .\nLike in real analysis, this notion of convergence is used to construct a number of elementary functions: the \"exponential function\" , also written , is defined as the infinite series\nThe series defining the real trigonometric functions sine and cosine, as well as the hyperbolic functions sinh and cosh, also carry over to complex arguments without change. For the other trigonometric and hyperbolic functions, such as tangent, things are slightly more complicated, as the defining series do not converge for all complex values. Therefore, one must define them either in terms of sine, cosine and exponential, or, equivalently, by using the method of analytic continuation.\n\"Euler's formula\" states:\nfor any real number , in particular\nUnlike in the situation of real numbers, there is an infinitude of complex solutions of the equation\nfor any complex number . It can be shown that any such solution \u2013 called complex logarithm of \u2013 satisfies\nwhere arg is the argument defined above, and ln the (real) natural logarithm. As arg is a multivalued function, unique only up to a multiple of , log is also multivalued. The principal value of log is often taken by restricting the imaginary part to the interval .\nComplex exponentiation is defined as\nand is multi-valued, except when is an integer. For , for some natural number , this recovers the non-uniqueness of th roots mentioned above.\nComplex numbers, unlike real numbers, do not in general satisfy the unmodified power and logarithm identities, particularly when na\u00efvely treated as single-valued functions; see failure of power and logarithm identities. For example, they do not satisfy\nBoth sides of the equation are multivalued by the definition of complex exponentiation given here, and the values on the left are a subset of those on the right.\nHolomorphic functions.\nA function \"f\"\u2009: \u2192 is called holomorphic if it satisfies the Cauchy\u2013Riemann equations. For example, any \u211d-linear map \u2192 can be written in the form\nwith complex coefficients and . This map is holomorphic if and only if . The second summand formula_130 is real-differentiable, but does not satisfy the Cauchy\u2013Riemann equations.\nComplex analysis shows some features not apparent in real analysis. For example, any two holomorphic functions and that agree on an arbitrarily small open subset of necessarily agree everywhere. Meromorphic functions, functions that can locally be written as with a holomorphic function , still share some of the features of holomorphic functions. Other functions have essential singularities, such as at .\nApplications.\nComplex numbers have applications in many scientific areas, including signal processing, control theory, electromagnetism, fluid dynamics, quantum mechanics, cartography, and vibration analysis. Some of these applications are described below.\nGeometry.\nShapes.\nThree non-collinear points formula_131 in the plane determine the shape of the triangle formula_132. Locating the points in the complex plane, this shape of a triangle may be expressed by complex arithmetic as\nThe shape formula_134 of a triangle will remain the same, when the complex plane is transformed by translation or dilation (by an affine transformation), corresponding to the intuitive notion of shape, and describing similarity. Thus each triangle formula_132 is in a similarity class of triangles with the same shape.\nFractal geometry.\nThe Mandelbrot set is a popular example of a fractal formed on the complex plane. It is defined by plotting every location formula_136 where iterating the sequence formula_137 does not diverge when iterated infinitely. Similarly, Julia sets have the same rules, except where formula_136 remains constant.\nTriangles.\nEvery triangle has a unique Steiner inellipse \u2013 an ellipse inside the triangle and tangent to the midpoints of the three sides of the triangle. The foci of a triangle's Steiner inellipse can be found as follows, according to Marden's theorem: Denote the triangle's vertices in the complex plane as , , and . Write the cubic equation formula_139, take its derivative, and equate the (quadratic) derivative to zero. Marden's Theorem says that the solutions of this equation are the complex numbers denoting the locations of the two foci of the Steiner inellipse.\nAlgebraic number theory.\nAs mentioned above, any nonconstant polynomial equation (in complex coefficients) has a solution in . A fortiori, the same is true if the equation has rational coefficients. The roots of such equations are called algebraic numbers \u2013 they are a principal object of study in algebraic number theory. Compared to , the algebraic closure of , which also contains all algebraic numbers, has the advantage of being easily understandable in geometric terms. In this way, algebraic methods can be used to study geometric questions and vice versa. With algebraic methods, more specifically applying the machinery of field theory to the number field containing roots of unity, it can be shown that it is not possible to construct a regular nonagon using only compass and straightedge \u2013 a purely geometric problem.\nAnother example are Gaussian integers, that is, numbers of the form , where and are integers, which can be used to classify sums of squares.\nAnalytic number theory.\nAnalytic number theory studies numbers, often integers or rationals, by taking advantage of the fact that they can be regarded as complex numbers, in which analytic methods can be used. This is done by encoding number-theoretic information in complex-valued functions. For example, the Riemann zeta function is related to the distribution of prime numbers.\nImproper integrals.\nIn applied fields, complex numbers are often used to compute certain real-valued improper integrals, by means of complex-valued functions. Several methods exist to do this; see methods of contour integration.\nDynamic equations.\nIn differential equations, it is common to first find all complex roots of the characteristic equation of a linear differential equation or equation system and then attempt to solve the system in terms of base functions of the form . Likewise, in difference equations, the complex roots of the characteristic equation of the difference equation system are used, to attempt to solve the system in terms of base functions of the form .\nIn applied mathematics.\nControl theory.\nIn control theory, systems are often transformed from the time domain to the frequency domain using the Laplace transform. The system's zeros and poles are then analyzed in the \"complex plane\". The root locus, Nyquist plot, and Nichols plot techniques all make use of the complex plane.\nIn the root locus method, it is important whether zeros and poles are in the left or right half planes, that is, have real part greater than or less than zero. If a linear, time-invariant (LTI) system has poles that are\nIf a system has zeros in the right half plane, it is a nonminimum phase system.\nSignal analysis.\nComplex numbers are used in signal analysis and other fields for a convenient description for periodically varying signals. For given real functions representing actual physical quantities, often in terms of sines and cosines, corresponding complex functions are considered of which the real parts are the original quantities. For a sine wave of a given frequency, the absolute value of the corresponding is the amplitude and the argument is the phase.\nIf Fourier analysis is employed to write a given real-valued signal as a sum of periodic functions, these periodic functions are often written as complex valued functions of the form\nand\nwhere \u03c9 represents the angular frequency and the complex number \"A\" encodes the phase and amplitude as explained above.\nThis use is also extended into digital signal processing and digital image processing, which utilize digital versions of Fourier analysis (and wavelet analysis) to transmit, compress, restore, and otherwise process digital audio signals, still images, and video signals.\nAnother example, relevant to the two side bands of amplitude modulation of AM radio, is:\nIn physics.\nElectromagnetism and electrical engineering.\nIn electrical engineering, the Fourier transform is used to analyze varying voltages and currents. The treatment of resistors, capacitors, and inductors can then be unified by introducing imaginary, frequency-dependent resistances for the latter two and combining all three in a single complex number called the impedance. This approach is called phasor calculus.\nIn electrical engineering, the imaginary unit is denoted by , to avoid confusion with , which is generally in use to denote electric current, or, more particularly, , which is generally in use to denote instantaneous electric current.\nSince the voltage in an AC circuit is oscillating, it can be represented as\nTo obtain the measurable quantity, the real part is taken:\nThe complex-valued signal is called the analytic representation of the real-valued, measurable signal .\nFluid dynamics.\nIn fluid dynamics, complex functions are used to describe potential flow in two dimensions.\nQuantum mechanics.\nThe complex number field is intrinsic to the mathematical formulations of quantum mechanics, where complex Hilbert spaces provide the context for one such formulation that is convenient and perhaps most standard. The original foundation formulas of quantum mechanics \u2013 the Schr\u00f6dinger equation and Heisenberg's matrix mechanics \u2013 make use of complex numbers.\nRelativity.\nIn special and general relativity, some formulas for the metric on spacetime become simpler if one takes the time component of the spacetime continuum to be imaginary. (This approach is no longer standard in classical relativity, but is used in an essential way in quantum field theory.) Complex numbers are essential to spinors, which are a generalization of the tensors used in relativity.\nGeneralizations and related notions.\nThe process of extending the field formula_145 of reals to formula_1 is known as the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction. It can be carried further to higher dimensions, yielding the quaternions formula_147 and octonions formula_148 which (as a real vector space) are of dimension\u00a04 and 8, respectively.\nIn this context the complex numbers have been called the binarions.\nJust as by applying the construction to reals the property of ordering is lost, properties familiar from real and complex numbers vanish with each extension. The quaternions lose commutativity, that is, for some quaternions , and the multiplication of octonions, additionally to not being commutative, fails to be associative: for some octonions .\nReals, complex numbers, quaternions and octonions are all normed division algebras over formula_145 By Hurwitz's theorem they are the only ones; the sedenions, the next step in the Cayley\u2013Dickson construction, fail to have this structure.\nThe Cayley\u2013Dickson construction is closely related to the regular representation of formula_150 thought of as an formula_145-algebra (an -vector space with a multiplication), with respect to the basis . This means the following: the formula_145-linear map\nfor some fixed complex number can be represented by a matrix (once a basis has been chosen). With respect to the basis , this matrix is\nthat is, the one mentioned in the section on matrix representation of complex numbers above. While this is a linear representation of formula_1 in the 2 \u00d7 2 real matrices, it is not the only one. Any matrix\nhas the property that its square is the negative of the identity matrix: . Then\nis also isomorphic to the field formula_150 and gives an alternative complex structure on formula_159 This is generalized by the notion of a linear complex structure.\nHypercomplex numbers also generalize formula_160 formula_150 formula_162 and formula_163 For example, this notion contains the split-complex numbers, which are elements of the ring formula_164 (as opposed to formula_165 for complex numbers). In this ring, the equation has four solutions.\nThe field formula_145 is the completion of formula_167 the field of rational numbers, with respect to the usual absolute value metric. Other choices of metrics on formula_168 lead to the fields formula_169 of -adic numbers (for any prime number ), which are thereby analogous to . There are no other nontrivial ways of completing formula_168 than formula_145 and formula_172 by Ostrowski's theorem. The algebraic closures formula_173 of formula_169 still carry a norm, but (unlike formula_1) are not complete with respect to it. The completion formula_176 of formula_173 turns out to be algebraically closed. By analogy, the field is called -adic complex numbers.\nThe fields formula_160 formula_172 and their finite field extensions, including formula_150 are called local fields."}
{"id": "5828", "revid": "12120664", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5828", "title": "Cryptozoology", "text": "Cryptozoology is a pseudoscience and subculture that aims to prove the existence of entities from the folklore record, such as Bigfoot, the Loch Ness Monster, the chupacabra, or the Mokele-mbembe. Cryptozoologists refer to these entities as \"cryptids\", a term coined by the subculture. Because it does not follow the scientific method, cryptozoology is considered a pseudoscience by mainstream science: it is neither a branch of zoology nor folklore studies. It was originally founded in the 1950s by zoologists Bernard Heuvelmans and Ivan T. Sanderson.\nScholars have noted that the subculture rejected mainstream approaches from an early date, and that adherents often express hostility to mainstream science. Scholars have studied cryptozoologists and their influence (including the pseudoscience's association with Young Earth creationism), noted parallels in cryptozoology and other pseudosciences such as ghost hunting and ufology, and highlighted uncritical media propagation of cryptoozologist claims.\nTerminology, history, and approach.\nAs a field, cryptozoology originates from the works of Bernard Heuvelmans, a Belgian zoologist, and Ivan T. Sanderson, a Scottish zoologist. Notably, Heuvelmans published \"On the Track of Unknown Animals\" (French \"Sur la Piste des B\u00eates Ignor\u00e9es\") in 1955, a landmark work among cryptozoologists that was followed by numerous other like works. Similarly, Sanderson published a series of books that assisted in developing hallmarks of cryptozoology, including \"Abominable Snowmen: Legend Come to Life\" (1961).\nThe term \"cryptozoology\" dates from 1959 or before\u00a0\u2013 Heuvelmans attributes the coinage of the term \"cryptozoology\" 'the study of hidden animals' (from Ancient Greek: \u03ba\u03c1\u03c5\u03c0\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2, \"krypt\u00f3s\" \"hidden, secret\"; Ancient Greek \u03b6\u1ff7\u03bf\u03bd, \"z\u014dion\" \"animal\", and \u03bb\u03cc\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2, \"logos\", i.e. \"knowledge, study\") to Sanderson. Patterned after \"cryptozoology\", the term \"cryptid\" was coined in 1983 by cryptozoologist J. E. Wall in the summer issue of the International Society of Cryptozoology newsletter. According to Wall \"[It has been] suggested that new terms be coined to replace sensational and often misleading terms like 'monster'. My suggestion is 'cryptid', meaning a living thing having the quality of being hidden or unknown ... describing those creatures which are (or may be) subjects of cryptozoological investigation.\" The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" defines the noun \"cryptid\" as \"an animal whose existence or survival to the present day is disputed or unsubstantiated; any animal of interest to a cryptozoologist\". While used by most cryptozoologists, the term \"cryptid\" is not used by academic zoologists. In a textbook aimed at undergraduates, academics Caleb W. Lack and Jacques Rousseau note that the subculture's focus on what it deems to be \"cryptids\" is a pseudoscientic extension of older belief in monsters and other similar entities from the folklore record, yet with a \"new, more scientific-sounding name: cryptids\".\nWhile biologists regularly identify new species, cryptozoologists often focus on creatures from the folklore record. Most famously, these include the Loch Ness Monster, Bigfoot, the chupacabra, as well as other \"imposing beasts that could be labeled as monsters\". In their search for these entities, cryptozoologists may employ devices such as motion-sensitive cameras, night-vision equipment, and audio-recording equipment. While there have been attempts to codify cryptozoological approaches, unlike biologists, zoologists, botanists, and other academic disciplines, however, \"there are no accepted, uniform, or successful methods for pursuing cryptids\". Some scholars have identified precursors to modern cryptozoology in certain medieval approaches to the folklore record, and the psychology behind the cryptozoology approach has been the subject of academic study.\nFew cryptozoologists have a formal science education, and fewer still have a science background directly relevant to cryptozoology. Adherents often misrepresent the academic backgrounds of cryptozoologists. According to writer Daniel Loxton and paleontologist Donald Prothero, \"Cryptozoologists have often promoted 'Professor Roy Mackal, PhD.' as one of their leading figures and one of the few with a legitimate doctorate in biology. What is rarely mentioned, however, is that he had no training that would qualify him to undertake competent research on exotic animals. This raises the specter of 'credential mongering', by which an individual or organization feints a person's graduate degree as proof of expertise, even though his or her training is not specifically relevant to the field under consideration.\" Besides Heuvalmans, Sanderson, and Mackal, other notable cryptozoologists with academic backgrounds include Grover Krantz, Karl Shuker, and Richard Greenwell.\nHistorically, notable cryptozoologists have often identified instances featuring \"irrefutable evidence\" (such as Sanderson and Krantz), only for the evidence to be revealed as the product of a hoax. This may occur during a closer examination by experts or upon confession of the hoaxer.\nYoung Earth creationism.\nA subset of cryptozoology promotes the pseudoscience of Young Earth creationism, rejecting conventional science in favor of a Biblical interpretation and promoting concepts such as \"living dinosaurs\". Science writer Sharon A. Hill observes that the Young Earth creationist segment of cryptozoology is \"well-funded and able to conduct expeditions with a goal of finding a living dinosaur that they think would invalidate evolution.\" Anthropologist Jeb J. Card says that \"Creationists have embraced cryptozoology and some cryptozoological expeditions are funded by and conducted by creationists hoping to disprove evolution.\" In a 2013 interview, paleontologist Donald Prothero notes an uptick in creationist cryptozoologists. He observes that \"[p]eople who actively search for Loch Ness monsters or Mokele Mbembe do it entirely as creationist ministers. They think that if they found a dinosaur in the Congo it would overturn all of evolution. It wouldn't. It would just be a late-occurring dinosaur, but that's their mistaken notion of evolution.\"\nCiting a 2013 exhibit at the Petersburg, Kentucky-based Creation Museum, which claimed that dragons were once biological creatures who walked the earth alongside humanity and is broadly dedicated to Young Earth creationism, religious studies academic Justin Mullis notes that \"Cryptozoology has a long and curious history with Young Earth Creationism, with this new exhibit being just one of the most recent examples\". Academic Paul Thomas analyzes the influence and connections between cryptoozology in his 2020 study of the Creation Museum and the creationist theme park Ark Encounter. Thomas comments that, \"while the Creation Museum and the Ark Encounter are flirting with pseudoarchaeology, coquettishly whispering pseudoarchaeological rhetoric, they are each fully in bed with cryptozoology\" and observes that \"Young-earth creationists and cryptozoologists make natural bed fellows. As with pseudoarchaeology, both young-earth creationists and cryptozoologists bristle at the rejection of mainstream secular science and lament a seeming conspiracy to prevent serious consideration of their claims.\"\nLack of critical media coverage.\nMedia outlets have often uncritically disseminated information from cryptozoologist sources, including newspapers that repeat false claims made by cryptozoologists or television shows that feature cryptozoologists as monster hunters (such as the popular and purportedly nonfiction American television show \"MonsterQuest\", which aired from 2007 to 2010). Media coverage of purported \"cryptids\" often fails to provide more likely explanations, further propagating claims made by cryptozoologists.\nReception and pseudoscience.\nThere is a broad consensus among academics that cryptozoology is a pseudoscience. The subculture is regularly criticized for reliance on anecdotal information and because in the course of investigating animals that most scientists believe are unlikely to have existed, cryptozoologists do not follow the scientific method. No academic course of study nor university degree program grants the status of \"cryptozoologist\" and the subculture is primarily the domain of individuals without training in the natural sciences.\nAnthropologist Jeb J. Card summarizes cryptozoology in a survey of pseudoscience and pseudoarchaeology:\nCard notes that \"cryptozoologists often show their disdain and even hatred for professional scientists, including those who enthusiastically participated in cryptozoology\", which he traces back to Heuvelmans's early \"rage against critics of cryptozoology\". He finds parallels with cryptozoology and other pseudosciences, such as ghost hunting and ufology, and compares the approach of cryptozoologists to colonial big-game hunters, and to aspects of European imperialism. According to Card, \"Most cryptids are framed as the subject of indigenous legends typically collected in the heyday of comparative folklore, though such legends may be heavily modified or worse. Cryptozoology's complicated mix of sympathy, interest, and appropriation of indigenous culture (or non-indigenous construction of it) is also found in New Age circles and dubious \"Indian burial grounds\" and other legends...invoked in hauntings such as the \"Amityville\" hoax ...\".\nIn a 2011 foreword for \"The American Biology Teacher\", then National Association of Biology Teachers president Dan Ward uses cryptozoology as an example of \"technological pseudoscience\" that may confuse students about the scientific method. Ward says that \"Cryptozoology ... is not valid science or even science at all. It is monster hunting.\" Historian of science Brian Regal includes an entry for cryptozoology in his \"Pseudoscience: A Critical Encyclopedia\" (2009). Regal says that \"as an intellectual endeavor, cryptozoology has been studied as much as cryptozoologists have sought hidden animals\".\nIn a 1992 issue of \"Folklore\", folklorist V\u00e9ronique Campion-Vincent says:\nCampion-Vincent says that \"four currents can be distinguished in the study of mysterious animal appearances\": \"Forteans\" (\"compiler[s] of anomalies\" such as via publications like the \"Fortean Times\"), \"occultists\" (which she describes as related to \"Forteans\"), \"folklorists\", and \"cryptozoologists\". Regarding cryptozoologists, Campion-Vincent says that \"this movement seems to deserve the appellation of parascience, like parapsychology: the same corpus is reviewed; many scientists participate, but for those who have an official status of university professor or researcher, the participation is a private hobby\".\nIn her \"Encyclopedia of American Folklore\", academic Linda Watts says that \"folklore concerning unreal animals or beings, sometimes called monsters, is a popular field of inquiry\" and describes cryptozoology as an example of \"American narrative traditions\" that \"feature many monsters\".\nIn his analysis of cryptozoology, folklorist Peter Dendle says that \"cryptozoology devotees consciously position themselves in defiance of mainstream science\" and that:\nIn a paper published in 2013, Dendle refers to cryptozoologists as \"contemporary monster hunters\" that \"keep alive a sense of wonder in a world that has been very thoroughly charted, mapped, and tracked, and that is largely available for close scrutiny on Google Earth and satellite imaging\" and that \"on the whole the devotion of substantial resources for this pursuit betrays a lack of awareness of the basis for scholarly consensus (largely ignoring, for instance, evidence of evolutionary biology and the fossil record).\"\nAccording to historian Mike Dash, few scientists doubt there are thousands of unknown animals, particularly invertebrates, awaiting discovery; however, cryptozoologists are largely uninterested in researching and cataloging newly discovered species of ants or beetles, instead focusing their efforts towards \"more elusive\" creatures that have often defied decades of work aimed at confirming their existence.\nPaleontologist George Gaylord Simpson (1984) lists cryptozoology among examples of human gullibility, along with creationism:\nPaleontologist Donald Prothero (2007) cites cryptozoology as an example of pseudoscience and categorizes it, along with Holocaust denial and UFO abductions claims, as aspects of American culture that are \"clearly baloney\".\nIn \"Scientifical Americans: The Culture of Amateur Paranormal Researchers\" (2017), Hill surveys the field and discusses aspects of the subculture, noting internal attempts at creating more scientific approaches and the involvement of Young Earth creationists and a prevalence of hoaxes. She concludes that many cryptozoologists are \"passionate and sincere in their belief that mystery animals exist. As such, they give deference to every report of a sighting, often without critical questioning. As with the ghost seekers, cryptozoologists are convinced that they will be the ones to solve the mystery and make history. With the lure of mystery and money undermining diligent and ethical research, the field of cryptozoology has serious credibility problems.\"\nOrganizations.\nThere have been several organizations, of varying types, dedicated or related to cryptozoology. These include:\nMuseums and exhibitions.\nThe zoological and cryptozoological collection and archive of Bernard Heuvelmans is held at the Mus\u00e9e Cantonal de Zoologie in Lausanne and consists of around \"1,000 books, 25,000 files, 25,000 photographs, correspondence, and artifacts\".\nIn 2006, the Bates College Museum of Art held the \"Cryptozoology: Out of Time Place Scale\" exhibition, which compared cryptozoological creatures with recently extinct animals like the thylacine and extant taxa like the coelacanth, once thought long extinct (living fossils). The following year, the American Museum of Natural History put on a mixed exhibition of imaginary and extinct animals, including the elephant bird \"Aepyornis maximus\" and the great ape \"Gigantopithecus blacki\", under the name \"Mythic Creatures: Dragons, Unicorns and Mermaids\"."}
{"id": "5829", "revid": "1022148232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5829", "title": "Craig Charles", "text": "Craig Joseph Charles (born 11 July 1964) is an English actor, presenter, comedian, author, poet and DJ. He is best known for his roles as Dave Lister in the science fiction sitcom \"Red Dwarf\" and Lloyd Mullaney in the soap opera \"Coronation Street\". He presented the gladiator-style game show \"Robot Wars\" from 1998 to 2004, and narrated the comedy endurance show \"Takeshi's Castle\". As a DJ, he appears on BBC Radio 6 Music and BBC Radio 2.\nCharles first appeared on television as a performance poet, which led to minor presenting roles. After finding fame in \"Red Dwarf\", he regularly featured on national television with celebrity appearances on many popular shows while he continued to host a wide variety of programmes. From 2017, Charles has hosted \"The Gadget Show\" for Channel 5. His acting credits include playing inmate Eugene Buffy in the ITV drama \"The Governor\", and leading roles in the British films \"Fated\" and \"Clubbing to Death\". He has toured the UK extensively as a stand-up comedian.\nCharles has hosted \"The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show\" on BBC radio since 2002, and performs DJ sets at numerous clubs and festivals, nationally and internationally. In September 2015, he left \"Coronation Street\" after ten years of acting, to film new episodes of \"Red Dwarf\" and to continue his BBC Radio 6 Music and BBC Radio 2 broadcasting.\nEarly life.\nCraig Joseph Charles was born in Liverpool on 11 July 1964, the son of a Guyanese father and Irish mother. He grew up on the Cantril Farm housing estate with his older brother, Dean (died 2014), and two other brothers, Jimmy and Emile. He attended West Derby Comprehensive School followed by Childwall Hall College of Further Education, studying A-levels in History, Government &amp; Politics, English Literature, and General Studies. He won a national competition run by \"The Guardian\" newspaper for a poem he wrote when he was 12 years old. Upon leaving school, Charles spent time working in a studio at Central Hall on Renshaw Street in Liverpool.\nEarly career.\nCharles began his career as a contemporary and urban performance poet on the British cabaret circuit. His performances were considered original, with Charles described as having a natural ironic wit which appealed to talent scouts. In 1981, Charles climbed on stage at a Teardrop Explodes concert and recited a humorous, but derogatory, poem about the band's singer, Julian Cope. He was invited to open subsequent gigs for the group and went on to perform as a support act in pubs and clubs for the following three years, and at events such as the \"Larks in the Park\" music festival at Sefton Park (1982). He performed poetry at Liverpool's Everyman Theatre (1983) with such poets as Roger McGough and Adrian Henri.\nCharles was involved in the Liverpool music scene, writing and singing lyrics for a number of local rock bands. In 1980, he played keyboards, bass and provided voice in the rock band \"Watt 4\". He performed his political rap lyrics as a 'Wordsmith'. In 1983, Charles was invited to record a session on the John Peel BBC Radio show, performing his poems backed by a band. This was his first professional engagement. He recorded a further Peel Session in 1984.\nCharles realised he was using poetry as a vehicle for his sense of humour and progressed into stand-up comedy. He was part of the \"Red Wedge\" comedy tour in 1986, which aimed to raise awareness of the social problems of the time, in support of the Labour Party. He also performed his first one-man show in 1986, which premiered in Edinburgh, and then toured internationally. Charles was a guest on programmes including Janice Long's Radio 1 show, and was a regular panellist on Ned Sherrin's chat show \"Loose Ends\" (1987\u201388) on BBC Radio 4.\nTelevision career.\nPerformance poetry.\nCharles first appeared on television as the resident poet on the arts programme \"Riverside\" on BBC2 and on the day-time BBC1 chat show \"Pebble Mill at One\". Charles was the resident poet on the Channel 4 programme \"Black on Black\" (1985) and its entertainment-based successor \"Club Mix\" (1986), and he appeared, weekly, as a John Cooper Clarke-style 'punk poet' on the BBC2 pop music programme \"Oxford Road Show\" (ORS). Charles performed his political poems as stand-up comedy on the late-night show \"Saturday Live\" (1985\u201387) and on the prime-time BBC1 chat show \"Wogan\" (1986\u201387), where he performed a topical poem in a weekly feature. He also appeared as a guest on shows including \"Open Air\" (1988). Charles included significant acting in his performance style, enabling him to put the emotion across.\nIn September 2015, Charles performed his \"epic\" poem \"Scary Fairy and the Tales of the Dark Wood\" live with the BBC Philharmonic orchestra, in a concert to be broadcast on BBC Radio 2's \"Friday Night is Music Night\" at Halloween.\n\"Red Dwarf\".\nCharles' first television acting role was the Liverpudlian slob Dave Lister in science fiction comedy series \"Red Dwarf\". He was introduced to the show by \"Saturday Live\" and \"Red Dwarf\" producer Paul Jackson, who wanted his opinion on whether the black character Cat was a racist stereotype. Charles, who like all of the eventual main cast had no acting experience, was eventually offered an audition after begging Jackson.\nCharles has appeared in all twelve series. Charles' younger brother, Emile Charles, guest-starred in the Series III episode \"Timeslides\", and the songs \"Bad News\" and \"Cash\" in this episode were written by Charles and performed by his band. The role has involved Charles playing a variety of alternative characters, including a gangster, a cowboy and angelic and evil versions of Lister, and in him carrying out a wide range of stunts, and acting involving special effects. All series, except VII and IX, were recorded in front of a studio audience. Along with Danny John-Jules (Cat), Charles is one of only two cast members to appear in every episode of \"Red Dwarf\" to date.\nCharles reads the audiobook editions of both the \"Red Dwarf\" novel \"Last Human\" and his book \"The Log: A Dwarfer's Guide to Everything\", and he regularly attends sci-fi, comedy and memorabilia conventions in connection with the \"Red Dwarf\" franchise. During \"\", Lister visits the set of \"Coronation Street\", where he meets the actor Craig Charles.\n\"Robot Wars\".\nCharles presented \"Robot Wars\" on BBC2 (1998\u20132003) and Channel 5 (2003\u201304), from series 2 until series 7, which included two \"Extreme\" series and numerous 'specials'. Charles was the main host and presided over the arena in which teams of amateur engineers battled their home-made radio-controlled robots against each other, and against the house robots. Charles introduced the show, enthusiastically announced the results of the battles and spoke to the contestants after the main events. He ended each episode with a short \"Robot Wars\"-themed poem. Charles' son, Jack, appeared on the show on several occasions, and was a contestant on \"Team Nemesis\" during series 4. Charles also hosted the \"Robot Wars Live\" UK tour, in 2001 and shows performed at the Wembley Arena.\n\"Robot Wars\" returned to the BBC in 2016. Charles stated his interest in hosting it again, but the job went to Dara \u00d3 Briain and Angela Scanlon.\n\"Takeshi's Castle\".\nCharles provided the English voice-over commentary for the Challenge (2002\u201304) rebroadcast of the popular game show \"Takeshi's Castle\", originally by Tokyo Broadcasting System in Japan. In each episode, between 100 and 142 contestants attempted to pass a series of wacky and near-impossible physical challenges to reach the Show Down at the castle against Japanese actor Takeshi Kitano for a chance to win large cash prizes. Charles co-wrote the programme and commentated throughout all 122 episodes of the four series, and also some special and \"best of\" episodes. He provided comedy insights into the contestants' abilities, which were designed to appeal to adult audiences, as well as younger viewers - and also coined the term \"Keshi Heads\" to describe fans of the show. A 2013 reboot narrated by Dick and Dom was not as well received.\n\"Coronation Street\".\nIn 2005, Charles joined the main cast of \"Coronation Street\", playing philandering taxicab driver, Lloyd Mullaney. Charles introduced aspects of the character himself, making Lloyd a Northern Soul DJ and record collector, and funk music enthusiast. Charles has chosen funk and soul songs playing as backing tracks during scenes, and posters for The Craig Charles Funk &amp; Soul Club and Red Dwarf have appeared in the background.\nCharles portrayed Lloyd as tough, but kind hearted and romantic, and the character was popular with viewers. Charles added a comedy element to the role, but was also involved in traumatic and emotional scenes with intricate storylines. In 2010, his character was involved in the show's dramatic 50th anniversary tram crash storyline, which was broadcast live. Charles presented documentaries for the show, including \"50 Years of Corrie Stunts\" (2010), which is included on the \"Tram Crash\" DVD. In November 2011, Charles took time off from \"Coronation Street\" to film a new series of \"Red Dwarf\", returning in April 2012. In February 2014 an online mini-series, \"Steve &amp; Lloyd's Streetcar Stories\", ran alongside the television show's storyline.\nIn May 2015, Craig announced he would be leaving \"Coronation Street\" for \"Red Dwarf.\" Lloyd left in a red Cadillac during the live episode on 23 September, although his final pre-recorded farewell scenes with Steve were shown during the following episode.\nOther acting roles.\nCharles has acted in episodes of popular dramas such as \"The Bill\" (1995), \"EastEnders\" (2002) and \"Holby City\" (2003) and in the comedy \"The 10 Percenters\" (1996). Charles played the emotionally disturbed and violent prisoner, Eugene Buffy, in the highly successful Lynda La Plante drama series \"The Governor\" (1996); the title role in the Channel 4 pirate sitcom \"Captain Butler\" (1997); the warden of a women's prison in the Canadian sci-fi fantasy \"Lexx\" (2001); Detective Chief Inspector Mercer in seven episodes of the BBC soap opera \"Doctors\" (2003); and soccer agent, Joel Brooks, in the Sky TV football soap \"Dream Team\" (2004).\nOther presenting roles.\nCharles has presented children's television programmes, including \"What's That Noise?\" (1989) and \"Parallel 9\" (1992) on BBC1 and \"Go Getters\" (1994) on ITV. He was the travelling reporter for the highly acclaimed, but controversial, BBC 'mockumentary' \"Ghostwatch\", which tricked viewers into believing it was a live investigation into ghost sightings in a suburban home on Halloween night (1992). Charles presented the virtual reality game show \"Cyberzone\" (1993) on BBC2; the late-night entertainment show \"Funky Bunker\" (1997) on ITV; the reality show \"Jailbreak\" (2000) on Channel 5; the discussion show \"Amazing Space: The Pub Guide to the Universe\" (2001) on National Geographic; and the late-night current affairs chat show \"Weapons of Mass Distraction\" (2004) on ITV.\nOther appearances.\nCharles has appeared on celebrity editions of \"University Challenge\" (1998), \"Can't Cook, Won't Cook\" (1998), \"The Weakest Link\" (2004), \"The Chase\" (2012) and \"Pointless\" (2013), and comedy panel shows such as \"Have I Got News for You\" (1995), \"Just a Minute\" (1995) and \"They Think It's All Over\" (1996) and Keith Lemon's Through the Keyhole (2014). He was a team captain on the sci-fi quiz series \"Space Cadets\" (1997) on Channel 4, which guest starred William Shatner. Charles has opened the National Lottery draw (1997) and his home has featured on \"Through the Keyhole\". Charles was a contestant in the \"Celebrity Poker Club\" tournament (2004) on Challenge, where he reached the semi-finals, and in the Channel 4 reality game show, \"The Games\" (2005), which documented the contestants' intensive training regime and each live Olympic Games-style sporting event.\nFrom 16 November 2014, Charles took part in the fourteenth series of \"I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!\". However, on 20 November, Charles left the series soon after learning of his brother Dean's death from a heart attack.\nRadio.\nAs well as his early appearances on shows such as Radio 4's \"Loose Ends\" (1987\u201388), and \"Kaleidoscope\", in the early 1990s, Charles could be heard on the London Radio Station Kiss 100 (Kiss FM) as the Breakfast show presenter. In 1995, Charles played the Porter in Steven Berkoff's adaptation of Shakespeare's \"Macbeth\", on Radio 4.\nSince 2002, Charles has been a DJ on BBC Radio 6 Music presenting \"The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show\", on air on Saturday evenings 6pm to 9pm, where he plays a diverse range of funk and soul music, from classic tracks to the latest releases, and provides publicity for less familiar bands. Charles explains the context for the music and carries out interviews with guest musicians. He was with the station at its launch, and while it was being tested during the previous year, under the name Network Y. Charles has also hosted the station's Breakfast Show (2004), and sits in for other presenters including Andrew Collins, Phil Wilding and Phill Jupitus and Radcliffe &amp; Maconie.\nFrom January until November 2014, Charles also broadcast the Funk and Soul Show live on BBC Radio 2, immediately after his 6 Music show. He regularly sits in for Janice Long, Steve Wright and Jo Whiley, and has presented numerous programmes on the station, including \"The Craig Charles Soul All-Nighter\" (2011), which he hosted continuously for 12 hours, and the \"Beatleland\" (2012) documentary on \"The Beatles\". Charles has also chosen music as a guest of other broadcasters such as Ken Bruce on Radio 2 and Liz Kershaw on 6 Music. Charles covered for Graham Norton on Radio 2's Saturday mid-morning show during Norton's 10-week 2015 summer break.\nFrom 16 April 2016, Charles presents the House Party on Saturday nights on BBC Radio 2, with the show airing between 10pm and midnight. For eight weeks from April\u2013June 2020, he also presented \"Craig Charles At Teatime\" between 4pm and 7pm on weekdays on Radio 6 Music. The show was sometimes billed as \"Craig Charles Weekend Workout\" on Fridays.\nMusic.\nCharles has been involved in the music industry through much of his career. His bands have included \"Watt 4\" (1980), in which he played keyboards and sang, \"Craig Charles and the Beat Burglars\" (1989), \"The Sons of Gordon Gekko\" (1989), where he wrote lyrics and also composed tunes and \"The Eye\" (2000\u201302), with whom he recorded the rock album \"Giving You The Eye, Live at the Edinburgh Festival\". Charles plays guitar and piano.\nIn 1987, Charles provided the poem track used for the opening credits of the BBC series \"The Marksman\" (in which he also acted), which is included on the album \"The Marksman: Music from the BBC TV series\". Charles wrote lyrics for Suzanne Rhatigan's album \"To Hell With Love\" (1992). In 1993, Charles was signed to the Acid Jazz record label.\nIn 2009, Charles formed the Fantasy Funk Band from the leading British musicians in the genre, and has presented the band at festivals, including Glastonbury and the BBC's Proms in the Park. As a continuation of his 6 Music show, Charles regularly takes the Craig Charles Funk &amp; Soul Club to varied venues across the UK and abroad, and to the major UK music festivals. He performs live DJ sets, occasionally comperes and curates events, including his own Craig Charles Fantasy Weekender, and has broadcast the radio show live from festival locations.\nIn 2012, Charles released the compilation album \"The Craig Charles Funk &amp; Soul Club\", on CD and as a digital download, as part of a three-album deal with Freestyle Records. The second volume was released in the same format in 2013, and the third in 2014. He followed these with a \"Craig Charles Funk and Soul Classics\" album of 3 CDs in 2015.\nStand-up comedy and theatre.\nCharles returned to stand-up comedy between 1995 and 2001, regularly touring his one-man adult-rated shows nationally and releasing the videos \"Craig Charles: Live on Earth!\" (1995), \"Live Official Bootleg\" (1996) and \"Sickbag\" (2000). International performances included the Great Norwegian Comedy Festival and the Melbourne International Comedy Festival.\nCharles appeared in the John Godber comedy play \"Teechers\", in which he swapped in and out of various roles, at the Arts Theatre, London, and at the Edinburgh Festival (1989), and he played Idle Jack in the pantomime \"Dick Whittington\", at the Hull New Theatre (1997). In 2000, he performed the show \"Craig Charles and His Band\" at the Edinburgh Festival.\nCharles has a regular slot at Butlins Minehead House Of Fun Weekend every November for three nights, of DJing, Comedy and singing.\nFilm roles.\nCharles played Eddie in the 1987 political drama \"Business as Usual\". In 2006, Charles starred in two British feature films: the fantasy film \"Fated\" and the gangster film \"Clubbing to Death\". Charles voiced Zipper the Cat in the animation \"Prince Cinders\" (1993) and Asterix in \"Asterix Conquers America\" (1994). Roles in short films include playing Keith Dennis in the comedy \"The Colour of Funny\" (1999) and Mark in the drama \"Ten Minutes\" (2004).\nWriting.\nIn 1993, Charles worked with Russell Bell on the \"Craig Charles Almanac of Total Knowledge\", writing about his 'streetwise' sense of humour on a range of topics, from the world's most embarrassing stories to how to explain the mysteries of the universe. In 1997, Charles and Bell wrote Charles' \"Red Dwarf\" character's book \"The Log\", in which Lister decides to leave a log detailing mankind's greatest achievements. In 1998, Charles published \"No Other Blue\", a collection of his poetry, with illustrations by Philippa Drakeford, on diverse personal subjects including prison, his mother's final illness, love and politics at home and abroad. More recently he has written a series of nursery rhymes titled \"Scary Fairy and the Tales of the Dark Wood\".\nIn 2000, Charles wrote his first autobiography about his experiences growing up in Liverpool, titled \"No Irish, No Niggers\". In 2007, he announced he would release his autobiography, planned for March 2008, published by Hodder Headline and titled \"On the Rocks\", which would cover the recent incidents in his life and be based on much of his journal, which Charles said he kept while in rehab.\nCharles has been involved in journalism and has had a column in \"Time Out\" magazine. In 1994, he launched a single issue of \"Comedy\" magazine with articles dedicated to the comedy circuit. In 2005 and 2006, Charles was a monthly columnist for the \"Liverpool Echo\" newspaper. His television writing credits include The Easter Stories (1994), Funky Bunker (1997) and Takeshi's Castle (2002). He is also involved in music journalism as he wrote liner notes for the funk and soul music producer Mr. Confuse for his albums \"Feel The Fire\" (2008), \"Do You Realize\" (2012) and 'On'ly A Man\" (2018) regarding his work as a music presenter for \"The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show\" on BBC Radio 6 Music.\nPersonal life.\nCharles resides in Altrincham, Greater Manchester. He has three children: a son named Jack from his first marriage to actress Cathy Tyson, and two daughters named Anna-Jo and Nellie from his second marriage to Jackie Fleming.\nCharles was the victim of a false accusation of sexual assault. In July 1994, he and another man were charged with rape and four counts of indecent assault, following claims by an associate and ex-girlfriend of Charles. Charles was remanded in custody for three-and-a-half months before being granted bail: during this time he was assaulted by a man wielding a makeshift knife. In March 1995, Charles and his co-accused were acquitted of all charges at trial. After being cleared, Charles spoke of the need to restore anonymity for those accused of rape. He stated, \"The fact that my name and address along with my picture can appear on the front of the papers before the so-called 'victim' has even signed a statement proves that anonymity for rape defendants is a must and that the law must be changed.\"\nCharles has battled drug addiction\u2014he described himself in 2015 as quite an addictive person, trying to find healthier addictions, of which work was one. In June 2006, newspaper allegations of crack cocaine use resulted in Charles being suspended from both \"Coronation Street\" and BBC Radio 6 Music. In August, Charles was arrested and released on bail pending further enquiries, and in September he accepted a caution for possession of a Class A drug. Charles returned to hosting his 6 Music show from November 2006 and filming \"Coronation Street\" from January 2007. In a 2015 interview, Charles spoke of his need to remain \"vigilant\" in abstaining from drugs. In 2020 he said that the newspaper reports were the best thing that could have happened to him, leading him to join Narcotics Anonymous and straighten out his personal life."}
{"id": "5830", "revid": "14770366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5830", "title": "County Mayo", "text": "County Mayo (, meaning \"Plain of the yew trees\") is a county in Ireland. In the West of Ireland, in the province of Connacht, it is named after the village of Mayo, now generally known as Mayo Abbey. Mayo County Council is the local authority. The population was 130,507 at the 2016 census. The boundaries of the county, which was formed in 1585, reflect the Mac William \u00cdochtar lordship at that time.\nGeography.\nIt is bounded on the north and west by the Atlantic Ocean; to the south by County Galway; the east by County Roscommon; and the northeast by County Sligo. Mayo is the third-largest of Ireland's 32 counties in area and 15th largest in terms of population. It is the second-largest of Connacht's five counties in both size and population. Mayo has the longest coastline of any county in Ireland, at or approximately 21% of the total coastline of the State. There is a distinct geological difference between the west and the east of the county. The west consists largely of poor subsoils and is covered with large areas of extensive Atlantic blanket bog, whereas the east is largely a limestone landscape. Agricultural land is therefore more productive in the east than in the west.\nThere are nine historic baronies, four in the northern area and five in the south of the county:\nNorth Mayo\nSouth Mayo\nFlora and fauna.\nA survey of the terrestrial and freshwater algae of Clare Island was made between 1990 and 2005 and published in 2007. A record of \"Gunnera tinctoria\" is also noted.\nConsultants working for the Corrib gas project have carried out extensive surveys of wildlife flora and fauna in Kilcommon Parish, Erris between 2002 and 2009. This information is published in the Corrib Gas Proposal Environmental impact statements 2009 and 2010.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThere is evidence of human occupation of what is now County Mayo going far back into prehistory. At Belderrig on the north Mayo coast, there is evidence for Mesolithic (Middle Stone Age) communities around 4500 BC. while throughout the county there is a wealth of archaeological remains from the Neolithic (New Stone Age) period (ca. 4,000 BC to 2,500 BC), particularly in terms of megalithic tombs and ritual stone circles.\nThe first people who came to Ireland \u2013 mainly to coastal areas as the interior was heavily forested \u2013 arrived during the Middle Stone Age, as far back as eleven thousand years ago. Artefacts of hunter/gatherers are sometimes found in middens, rubbish pits around hearths where people would have rested and cooked over large open fires. Once cliffs erode, midden-remains become exposed as blackened areas containing charred stones, bones, and shells. They are usually found a metre below the surface. Mesolithic people did not have major rituals associated with burial, unlike those of the Neolithic (New Stone Age) period.\nThe Neolithic period followed the Mesolithic around 6,000 years ago. People began to farm the land, domesticate animals for food and milk, and settle in one place for longer periods. These people had skills such as making pottery, building houses from wood, weaving, and knapping (stone tool working). The first farmers cleared forestry to graze livestock and grow crops. In North Mayo, where the ground cover was fragile, thin soils washed away and blanket bog covered the land farmed by the Neolithic people.\nExtensive pre-bog field systems have been discovered under the blanket bog, particularly along the North Mayo coastline in Erris and north Tyrawley at sites such as the C\u00e9ide Fields, centred on the northeast coast.\nThe Neolithic people developed rituals associated with burying their dead; this is why they built huge, elaborate, galleried stone tombs for their dead leaders, known nowadays as megalithic tombs. There are over 160 recorded megaliths in County Mayo, such as Faulagh.\nMegalithic tombs.\nThere are four distinct types of Irish megalithic tombs\u2014court tombs, portal tombs, passage tombs and wedge tombs\u2014examples of all of which can be found in County Mayo. Areas particularly rich in megalithic tombs include Achill, Kilcommon, Ballyhaunis, Moygownagh, Killala and the Behy/Glenurla area around the C\u00e9ide Fields.\nBronze Age (ca. 2,500 BC to 500 BC).\nMegalithic tomb building continued into the Bronze Age when metal began to be used for tools alongside the stone tools. The Bronze Age lasted approximately from 4,500 years ago to 2,500 years ago (2,500 BC to 500 BC). Archaeological remains from this period include stone alignments, stone circles and fulachta fiadh (early cooking sites). They continued to bury their chieftains in megalithic tombs which changed design during this period, more being of the wedge tomb type and cist burials.\nIron Age (ca. 500 BC to AD 325).\nAround 2,500 years ago the Iron Age took over from the Bronze Age as more and more metalworking took place. This is thought to have coincided with the arrival of Celtic speaking peoples and the introduction of the ancestor of the Irish language. Towards the end of this period, the Roman Empire was at its height in Britain but it is not thought that the Roman Empire extended into Ireland. Remains from this period, which lasted until the Early Christian period began about AD 325 (with the arrival of Saint Patrick into Ireland, as a slave) include crann\u00f3gs (Lake dwellings), promontory forts, ringforts and souterrains of which there are numerous examples across the county. The Iron Age was a time of tribal warfare and kingships, each fighting neighbouring kings, vying for control of territories and taking slaves. Territories were marked by tall stone markers, Ogham stones, using the first written down words using the Ogham alphabet. The Iron Age is the time period in which the mythological tales of the Ulster Cycle and sagas took place, as well as that of the T\u00e1in B\u00f3 Flidhais, whose narrative is set in mainly in Erris.\nEarly Christian period (ca. AD 325 to AD 800).\nChristianity came to Ireland around the start of the 5th century. It brought many changes including the introduction of the Latin alphabet. The tribal 'tuatha' and new Christian religious settlements existed side by side. Sometimes it suited the chieftains to become part of the early Churches, other times they remained as separate entities. St. Patrick (4th century) may have spent time in County Mayo and it is believed that he spent forty days and forty nights on Croagh Patrick praying for the people of Ireland. From the middle of the 6th-century hundreds of small monastic settlements were established around the county. Some examples of well-known early monastic sites in Mayo include Mayo Abbey, Aughagower, Ballintubber, Errew Abbey, Cong Abbey, Killala, Turlough on the outskirts of Castlebar, and island settlements off the Mullet Peninsula like the Inishkea Islands, Inishglora and Duvillaun.\nIn 795 the first of the Viking raids took place. The Vikings came from Scandinavia to raid the monasteries as they were places of wealth with precious metal working taking place in them. Some of the larger ecclesiastical settlements erected round towers to prevent their precious items being plundered and also to show their status and strength against these pagan raiders from the north. There are round towers at Aughagower, Balla, Killala, Turlough and Meelick. The Vikings established settlements which later developed into towns (Dublin, Cork, Wexford, Waterford etc.) but none were in County Mayo. Between the reigns of Kings of Connacht Cathal mac Conchobar mac Taidg (973\u20131010) and Tairrdelbach Ua Conchobair (1106\u20131156), various tribal territories were incorporated into the kingdom of Connacht and ruled by the Siol Muirdaig dynasty, based initially at Rathcroghan in County Roscommon, and from 1050 at Tuam. The families of O'Malley and O'Dowd of Mayo served as admirals of the fleet of Connacht, while families such as O'Lachtnan, Mac Fhirbhisigh, and O'Cleary were ecclesiastical and bardic clans.\nAnglo-Normans (12th to 16th centuries).\nIn AD 1169 when one of the warring kings in the east of Ireland, Dermot MacMurrough, appealed to the King of England for help in his fight with a neighbouring king, the response resulted in the Anglo-Norman colonisation of Ireland.\nCounty Mayo came under Norman control in AD 1235. Norman control meant the eclipse of many Gaelic lords and chieftains, chiefly the O'Connors of Connacht. During the 1230s, the Anglo-Normans and Welsh under Richard M\u00f3r de Burgh (c. 1194 \u2013 1242) invaded and settled in the county, introducing new families such as Burke, Gibbons, Staunton, Prendergast, Morris, Joyce, Walsh, Barrett, Lynott, Costello, Padden and Price, Norman names are still common in County Mayo. Following the collapse of the lordship in the 1330s, all these families became estranged from the Anglo-Irish administration based in Dublin and assimilated with the Gaelic-Irish, adopting their language, religion, dress, laws, customs and culture and marrying into Irish families. They became \"more Irish than the Irish themselves\".\nThe most powerful clan to emerge during this era were the Mac William Burkes, also known as the Mac William Iochtar (see Burke Civil War 1333\u20131338), descended from Sir William Liath de Burgh, who defeated the Gaelic-Irish at the Second Battle of Athenry in August 1316. They were frequently at war with their cousins, Clanricarde of Galway, and in alliance with or against various factions of the O'Conor's of Siol Muiredaig and O'Kelly's of U\u00ed Maine. The O'Donnell's of Tyrconnell regularly invaded in an attempt to secure their right to rule.\nThe Anglo-Normans encouraged and established many religious orders from continental Europe to settle in Ireland. Mendicant orders\u2014Augustinians, Carmelites, Dominicans and Franciscans began new settlements across Ireland and built large churches, many under the patronage of prominent Gaelic families. Some of these sites include Cong, Strade, Ballintubber, Errew Abbey, Burrishoole Abbey and Mayo Abbey. During the 15th and 16th centuries, despite regular conflicts between them as England chopped and changed between religious beliefs, the Irish usually regarded the King of England as their King. When Elizabeth I came to the throne in the mid-16th century, the English people, as was customary at that time, followed the religious practices of the reigning monarch and became Protestant. Many Irish people such as Grace O'Malley, the famous pirate queen, had close relationships with the English monarchy, and the English kings and queens were welcome visitors to Irish shores. The Irish however, generally held onto their Catholic religious practices and beliefs. The early plantations of settlers in Ireland began during the reign of Queen Mary in the mid-16th century and continued throughout the long reign of Queen Elizabeth I until 1603. By then the term \"County Mayo\" had come into use. In the summer of 1588, the galleons of the Spanish Armada were wrecked by storms along the west coast of Ireland. Some of the hapless Spaniards came ashore in Mayo, only to be robbed and imprisoned, and in many cases slaughtered. \nAlmost all the religious foundations set up by the Anglo-Normans were suppressed in the wake of the Reformation in the 16th century.\nProtestant settlers from Scotland, England, and elsewhere in Ireland, settled in the County in the early 17th century. Many would be killed or forced to flee because of the 1641 Rebellion, during which a number of massacres were committed by the Catholic Gaelic Irish, most notably at Shrule in 1642. A third of the overall population was reported to have perished due to warfare, famine and plague between 1641 and 1653, with several areas remaining disturbed and frequented by Reparees into the 1670s.\n17th and 18th centuries.\nPirate Queen Grace O'Malley is probably the best-known person from County Mayo between the mid-16th century and the turn of the 17th century. In the 1640s, when Oliver Cromwell overthrew the English monarchy and set up a parliamentarian government, Ireland suffered severely. With a stern regime in absolute control needing to pay its armies and allies, the need to pay them with grants of land in Ireland led to the 'to hell or to Connaught' policies. Displaced native Irish families from other (eastern and southern mostly) parts of the country were either forced to leave the country or were awarded grants of land 'west of the Shannon' and put off their own lands in the east. The land in the west was divided and sub-divided between more and more people as huge estates were granted on the best land in the east to those who best pleased the English. Mayo does not seem to have been affected much during the Williamite War in Ireland, though many natives were outlawed and exiled.\nFor the vast majority of people in County Mayo the 18th century was a period of unrelieved misery. Because of the penal laws, Catholics had no hope of social advancement while they remained in their native land. Some, like William Brown (1777\u20131857), left Foxford with his family at the age of nine and thirty years later was an admiral in the fledgeling Argentine Navy. Today he is a national hero in that country.\nThe general unrest in Ireland was felt just as keenly across Mayo, and as the 19th century approached and news reached Ireland about the American War of Independence and the French Revolution, the downtrodden Irish, constantly suppressed by Government policies and decisions from Dublin and London, began to rally themselves for their own stand against British rule in their country. 1798 saw Mayo become a central part of the United Irishmen Rebellion when General Humbert from France landed in Killala with over 1,000 soldiers playing to support the main uprising. They marched across the county towards the administrative centre of Castlebar, leading to the Battle of Castlebar. Taking the garrison by surprise Humbert's army was victorious. He established a 'Republic of Connacht' with John Moore of the Moore family from Moore Hall near Partry as its head. Humbert's army marched on towards Sligo, Leitrim and Longford where they were suddenly faced with a massive British army and were forced to surrender in less than half an hour. The French soldiers were treated honourably, but for the Irish the surrender meant slaughter. Many died on the scaffold in towns like Castlebar and Claremorris, where the high sheriff for County Mayo, the Honourable Denis Browne, M.P., brother of Lord Altamont, wreaked a terrible vengeance \u2013 thus earning for himself the nickname which has survived in folk memory to the present day, 'Donnchadh an R\u00f3pa' (Denis of the Rope).\nIn the 18th century and early 19th century, sectarian tensions arose as evangelical Protestant missionaries sought to 'redeem the Irish poor from the errors of Popery'. One of the best known was the Rev. Edward Nangle's mission at Dugort in Achill. These too were the years of the campaign for Catholic Emancipation and, later, for the abolition of the tithes, which a predominately Catholic population was forced to pay for the upkeep of the clergy of the Established (Protestant) Church.\n19th and 20th centuries.\nDuring the early years of the 19th century, famine was a common occurrence, particularly where population pressure was a problem. The population of Ireland grew to over eight million people prior to the Irish Famine (or Great Famine) of 1845\u201347. The Irish people depended on the potato crop for their sustenance. Disaster struck in August 1845, when a killer fungus (later diagnosed as Phytophthora infestans) started to destroy the potato crop. When widespread famine struck, about a million people died and a further million left the country. People died in the fields of starvation and disease. The catastrophe was particularly bad in County Mayo, where nearly ninety per cent of the population depended on the potato as their staple food. By 1848, Mayo was a county of total misery and despair, with any attempts at alleviating measures in complete disarray.\nThere are numerous reminders of the Great Famine to be seen on the Mayo landscape: workhouse sites, famine graves, sites of soup kitchens, deserted homes and villages and even traces of undug 'lazy-beds' in fields on the sides of hills. Many roads and lanes were built as famine relief measures. There were nine workhouses in the county: Ballina, Ballinrobe, Belmullet, Castlebar, Claremorris, Killala, Newport, Swinford and Westport.\nA small poverty-stricken place called Knock, County Mayo, made headlines when it was announced that an apparition of the Blessed Virgin Mary, St. Joseph and St. John had taken place there on 21 August 1879, witnessed by fifteen local people.\nA national movement was initiated in County Mayo during 1879 by Michael Davitt, James Daly, and others, which brought about a major social change in Ireland. Michael Davitt, a labourer whose family had moved to England joined forces with Charles Stewart Parnell to win back the land for the people from the landlords and stop evictions for non-payment of rents. The organisation became known as the Irish National Land League, and its struggle to win rights for poor farmers in Ireland was known as the Land War. \nIt was in this era of agrarian unrest that a new verb was introduced to the English language by Mayo - \"to boycott\". Charles Boycott was an English landlord deeply unpopular with his tenants. When Charles Steward Parnell made a speech in Ennis, County Clare urging Nonviolent resistance against landlords, his tactics were enthusiastically taken in Mayo against Boycott. The entire Catholic community around Lough Mask in South Mayo where Boycott had his estate became a campaign of total social ostracisation against Boycott, a tactic that would one day come to bear his name. The campaign against Boycott became a in the British press after he wrote a letter to \"The Times\". The British elite rallied to his cause and Fifty Orangemen from County Cavan and County Monaghan travelled to his estate to harvest the crops, while a regiment of the 19th Royal Hussars and more than 1,000 men of the Royal Irish Constabulary were deployed to protect the harvesters. However, this cost of doing this was completely uneconomic: It cost the British government somewhere in the region of \u00a310,000 to simple harvest \u00a3500 worth of crops. Boycott sold off the estate and the British government's resolve to try and break boycotts in this completely dissolved, resulting in victory for the tenants.\nThe \"Land Question\" was gradually resolved by a scheme of state-aided land purchase schemes. The tenants became the owners of their lands under the newly set-up Land Commission.\nA Mayo nun, Mother Agnes Morrogh-Bernard, set up the Foxford Woollen Mill in 1892. She made Foxford synonymous throughout the world with high quality tweeds, rugs and blankets.\nMayo, as all parts of what became the Irish Free State, was affected by the events of the Irish revolutionary period, including the Irish War of Independence and the subsequent Irish Civil War. Major John MacBride of Westport was amongst those who took part in the 1916 Easter Rising and was subsequently executed by the British for his participation. His death served as a rallying call for Republicans in Mayo and led to Mayo men such as P. J. Ruttledge, Ernie O'Malley, Michael Kilroy and Thomas Derrig to rise up during the War of Independence. In the ensuing Civil War many of these leading figures chose the Anti-treaty side and fought in bitter battles such as those in Ballina, which changed hands between pro and anti-treaty forces a number of times. \nIn the aftermath of the Civil War, there was a consolidation of many of those with anti-treaty feelings into the new political party Fianna F\u00e1il. PJ Ruttledge and Thomas Derrig would become founding members of the party and served in Eamon de Valera's first-ever Fianna F\u00e1il government as ministers. Mayo politicians would continue to contribute to the national political scene over the decades. In 1990 Mary Robinson became the first-ever female President of Ireland, and is widely credited with revitalising the position with an importance and focus it had never possessed before. In 2011 Enda Kenny became the first politician from Mayo to serve as Taoiseach, the head of government of Ireland. Kenny went on to become the longest-serving Fine Gael Taoiseach in Irish history.\nClans and families.\nIn the early historic period, what is now County Mayo consisted of a number of large kingdoms, minor lordships and tribes of obscure origins. They included:\nPolitics.\nLocal government and political subdivisions.\nMayo County Council () is the authority responsible for local government. As a county council, it is governed by the Local Government Act 2001. The county is divided into four municipal areas Castlebar, Ballina, Claremorris and West (an area which stretches from Westport to Belmullet), each with a population of roughly 32,000 to 34,000 people. The council is responsible for housing and community, roads and transportation, urban planning and development, amenity and culture, and environment.\nFor the purpose of local elections, the county is divided into six local election areas (LEAs), each centred around a major town. Each LEA elects a number of councillors who then represent the area for a span of 5 years on the County Council. The number of councillors allotted to an LEA is based on its population.\nThe county town is at \"\u00c1ras an Contae\" in Castlebar, the main population centre located in the centre of the county. For national elections, half of the Claremorris Municipal District is in Galway West, and stretches from Ashford Castle to Ireland West Airport Knock.\nNational government.\nSince 2016, Mayo has been represented on a national political level by four Teachta D\u00e1la who represent the constituency of Mayo in D\u00e1il Eireann. Previous to 2016 the constituency had five TDs but this was reduced based on the county's current population in line with proportional representation. \nVoting patterns and political history.\nHistorically, Mayo has tended to vote Fianna F\u00e1il, as Fianna F\u00e1il managed to position themselves in the 20th century as the party best fit to represent farmers with small holdings, who were plentiful in Mayo. With so many of Mayo's electorate being small farmers, the county became a base for the emergence of Clann na Talmhan, an agrarian party in the 1940s and 1950s. Clann an Talmhan's second leader, Joseph Blowick came from South Mayo and that is where his seat was. The party was not able to last in the long run though as it was unable to hold together its voting bloc of both small farmers in the west of Ireland and large farmers in the east.\nTowards the start of the 21st century, the balance of power in Mayo began to shift towards Fine Gael, thanks in part to the emergence of Enda Kenny and Michael Ring. Kenny, who became Taoiseach in 2011, was able to lead Fine Gael to a historic victory in the 2011 Irish general election which included securing four out of five available seats for his party in Mayo. \nIn 2020, Rose Conway-Walsh came within 200 votes of topping the poll and became the first Sinn F\u00e9in TD for Mayo since 1927, riding a nationwide surge Sinn F\u00e9in experienced that year. \nDespite being historically the third-largest party in Ireland, Labour has struggled to ever make inroads into Mayo. The party has only ever had one TD for Mayo, former party leader Thomas J. O'Connell, who represented South Mayo between 1927 and 1932. While Labour has not proven itself electorally successful in Mayo, Mayo has provided important members to the Labour Party. Mary Robinson from Ballina became the first ever female President of Ireland as a Labour candidate while Pat Rabbitte, originally from Claremorris, served as leader of the Labour Party from 2002 to 2007. Serving alongside Rabbitte was Emmet Stagg, one of the longest standing Labour TDs of the modern era, himself from Hollymount not far from Claremorris.\nDemographics.\nThe county has experienced perhaps the highest emigration out of Ireland. In the 1840s\u20131880s, waves of emigrants left the rural townlands of the county. Initially triggered by the Great Famine and then in search of work in the newly industrialising United Kingdom and the United States, the population fell considerably. From 388,887 in 1841, the population fell to 199,166 in 1901. The population reached a low of 109,525 in 1971 as emigration continued. Emigration slowed down as the Irish economy began to expand in the 1990s and early 2000s. Consequently, the population of Mayo increased from 110,713 in 1991 to 130,638 in 2011.\nReligion.\nAccording to figures in the 2006 National Census the religious demographic breakdown for County Mayo was 114,215 Roman Catholics, 2,476 Church of Ireland, 733 Muslims, 409 other Christians, 280 Presbyterians, 250 Orthodox Christians, 204 Methodists, 853 other stated religions, 3,267 no religion and 1,152 no stated religion.\nIrish language.\n9% of the population of County Mayo live in the Gaeltacht. The Gaeltacht Irish-speaking region in County Mayo is the third-largest in Ireland with 10,886 inhabitants. Tourmakeady is the largest village in this area. All schools in the area use Irish as the language of instruction. Mayo has four gaelscoileanna in its four major towns, providing primary education to students through Irish.\nTransport.\nRail.\nMayo is well served by rail travel. Westport railway station is the terminus station on the Dublin to Westport Rail service. Railway stations are also located at Ballyhaunis, Claremorris, Castlebar, Manulla, Ballina and Foxford. All railway stations are located on the same railway line, with exception to Ballina and Foxford which requires passengers to change at Manulla Junction. There are currently four services each way every day on the line.\nThere are also proposals to reopen the currently disused Western Railway Corridor connecting Limerick with Sligo.\nRoad.\nThere are a number of national primary roads in the county including the N5 road connecting Westport with Dublin, the N17 road connecting the county with Galway and Sligo and the N26 road connecting Ballina with Dublin via the N5. There are a number of national secondary roads in the county also including the N58 road, N59 road, N60 road, N83 road &amp; N84 road. There are plans in place for a new road running from northwest Westport to east Castlebar. The proposal is a type two dual carriageway with junctions at the N59, N84 and N60.\nAir.\nIreland West Airport Knock is an international airport located in the county. The name is derived from the nearby village of Knock. Recent years have seen the airport's passenger numbers grow to over 650,000 yearly with a number of UK and European destinations. August 2014 saw the airport have its busiest month on record with 102,774 passengers using the airport.\nMedia.\nNewspapers in County Mayo include \"The Mayo News\", the \"Connaught Telegraph\", the \"Connacht Tribune\", \"Western People\", and \"Mayo Advertiser\", which is Mayo's only free newspaper. \n\"Mayo Now\" is a monthly entertainment and culture magazine for the towns of Ballina, Foxford, Killala, Crossmolina and surrounding areas \u2013 this is out on the first Friday of each month.\nMayo has its own online TV channel \"Mayo TV\" which was launched in 2011. It covers news and events from around the county and regularly broadcasts live to a worldwide audience. Local radio stations include Erris FM, Community Radio Castlebar, Westport Community Radio, BCR FM (Ballina Community Radio) and M.W.R. (Mid West Radio).\nThe documentary \"Pipe Down\", which won best feature documentary at the 2009 Waterford Film Festival, was made in Mayo.\nEnergy.\nEnergy controversy.\nThere is local resistance to Shell's decision to process raw gas from the Corrib gas field at an onshore terminal. In 2005, five local men were jailed for contempt of court after refusing to follow an Irish court order. Subsequent protests against the project led to the Shell to Sea and related campaigns.\nEnergy audit.\nThe Mayo Energy Audit 2009\u20132020 is an investigation into the implications of peak oil and subsequent fossil fuel depletion for a rural county in west of Ireland. The study draws together many different strands to examine current energy supply and demand within the area of study, and assesses these demands in\nthe face of the challenges posed by the declining production of fossil fuels and expected disruptions to supply chains, and by long-term economic recession.\nSport.\nThe Mayo GAA senior team last won the Sam Maguire Cup in 1951, when the team was captained by Se\u00e1n Flanagan. The team's third title, this followed victories in 1936 and the previous year, 1950. Since 1951, the team have made numerous All-Ireland Final appearances (in 1989, twice in 1996, 1997, 2004, 2006, 2012, 2013, twice again in 2016 against Dublin, with their latest appearance coming in 2017 against Dublin, again), though the team have failed on all occasions to achieve victory over their opponents. Mayo are the current Allianz national league football champions having beaten Kerry in the national league final at Croke Park in April 2019\nThe team's unofficial supporters club are Mayo Club '51, named after the last team who won the Sam Maguire. The county colours of Mayo GAA are traditionally green and red.\nThe county's most popular association football teams are Westport United and Castlebar Celtic.\nAlthough Gaelic football and association football are the most popular sport in the county, other sports are popular in the county as well such as rugby, basketball, hurling, swimming, tennis, badminton, athletics, handball and racquetball."}
{"id": "5833", "revid": "41291056", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5833", "title": "County Fermanagh", "text": "County Fermanagh ( ; ) is one of the thirty-two counties of Ireland, one of the six counties of Northern Ireland and one of the nine counties of Ulster. The county covers an area of 1,691\u00a0km2 (653 sq mi) and has a population of 61,805 as of 2011. Enniskillen is the county town and largest in both size and population.\nFermanagh is one of four counties of Northern Ireland to have a majority of its population from a Catholic background, according to the 2011 census.\nGeography.\nFermanagh is situated in the southwest corner of Northern Ireland. It spans an area of 1,851\u00a0km2 (715\u00a0sq;\u00a0mi), accounting for 13.2% of the landmass of Northern Ireland. Nearly a third of the county is covered by lakes and waterways, including Upper and Lower Lough Erne and the River Erne. Forests cover 14% of the landmass (42,000 hectares). It is the only county in Northern Ireland that does not border Lough Neagh.\nThe county has three prominent upland areas: \nThe county borders:\nFermanagh is by far the least populous of Northern Ireland's six counties, with just over one-third the population of Armagh, the next least populous county.\nIt is approximately from Belfast and from Dublin. The county town, Enniskillen, is the largest settlement in Fermanagh, situated in the middle of the county.\nThe county enjoys a temperate oceanic climate (\"Cfb\"') with cool winters, mild humid summers, and a lack of temperature extremes, according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification.\nThe National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty manages three sites of historic and natural beauty in the county: Crom Estate, Florence Court, and Castle Coole.\nGeology.\nThe oldest sediments in the county are found north of Lough Erne. These so-called red beds were formed approximately 550 million years ago. Extensive sandstone can be found in the eastern part of the county, laid down during the Devonian, 400 million years ago. Much of the rest of the county's sediments are shale and limestone dating from the Carboniferous, 354 to 298 million years ago. These softer sediments have produced extensive cave systems such as the Shannon Cave, the Marble Arch Caves and the Caves of the Tullybrack and Belmore hills. The carboniferous shale exists in several counties of northwest Ireland, an area known colloquially as the Lough Allen basin. The basin is estimated to contain 9.4 trillion cubic metres of natural gas, equivalent to 1.5 billion barrels of oil.\nThe county is situated over a sequence of prominent faults, primarily the Killadeas \u2013 Seskinore Fault, the Tempo \u2013 Sixmilecross Fault, the Belcoo Fault and the Clogher Valley Fault which cross-cuts Lough Erne.\nHistory.\nThe Menapii are the only known Celtic tribe specifically named on Ptolemy's 150 AD map of Ireland, where they located their first colony\u2014Menapia\u2014on the Leinster coast circa 216 BC. They later settled around Lough Erne, becoming known as the Fir Manach, and giving their name to Fermanagh and Monaghan. Mong\u00e1n mac Fiachnai, a 7th-century King of Ulster, is the protagonist of several legends linking him with Manann\u00e1n mac Lir. They spread across Ireland, evolving into historic Irish (also Scottish and Manx) clans.\nThe Annals of Ulster which cover medieval Ireland between AD 431 to AD 1540 were written at Belle Isle on Lough Erne near Lisbellaw.\nFermanagh was a stronghold of the Maguire clan and Donn Carrach Maguire (died 1302) was the first of the chiefs of the Maguire dynasty. However, on the confiscation of lands relating to Hugh Maguire, Fermanagh was divided in a similar manner to the other five escheated counties among Scottish and English undertakers and native Irish. The baronies of Knockninny and Magheraboy were allotted to Scottish undertakers, those of Clankelly, Magherastephana and Lurg to English undertakers and those of Clanawley, Coole, and Tyrkennedy, to servitors and natives. The chief families to benefit under the new settlement were the families of Cole, Blennerhasset, Butler, Hume, and Dunbar.\nFermanagh was made into a county by a statute of Elizabeth I, but it was not until the time of the Plantation of Ulster that it was finally brought under civil government.\nThe closure of all the lines of Great Northern Railway (Ireland) within County Fermanagh in 1957 left the county as the first non-island county in the UK without a railway service.\nAdministration.\nThe county was administered by Fermanagh County Council from 1899 until the abolition of county councils in Northern Ireland in 1973. With the creation of Northern Ireland's district councils, Fermanagh District Council became the only one of the 26 that contained all of the county from which it derived its name. After the re-organisation of local government in 2015, Fermanagh was still the only county wholly within one council area, namely Fermanagh and Omagh District Council, albeit that it constituted only a part of that entity.\nFor the purposes of elections to the UK Parliament, the territory of Fermanagh is part of the Fermanagh and South Tyrone Parliamentary Constituency. This constituency elected Provisional IRA hunger-striker Bobby Sands as a member of parliament in the April 1981 Fermanagh and South Tyrone by-election, shortly before his death.\nIndustry and tourism.\nAgriculture and tourism are two of the most important industries in Fermanagh. The main types of farming in the area are beef, dairy, sheep, pigs and some poultry. Most of the agricultural land is used as grassland for grazing and silage or hay rather than for other crops.\nThe waterways are extensively used by cabin cruisers, other small pleasure craft and anglers. The main town of Fermanagh is Enniskillen (, 'Ceithleann's island'). The island town hosts a range of attractions including the Castle Coole Estate and Enniskillen Castle, which is home to the museum of The Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers and the 5th Royal Inniskilling Dragoon Guards. Fermanagh is also home to The Boatyard Distillery, a distillery producing gin.\nAttractions outside Enniskillen include:\nSubdivisions.\nBaronies\nParishes\nTownlands\nMedia.\nNewspapers\nSport.\nFermanagh GAA has never won a Senior Provincial or an All-Ireland title in any Gaelic games.\nOnly Ballinamallard United F.C. take part in the Northern Ireland football league system. All other Fermanagh clubs play in the Fermanagh &amp; Western FA league systems. Fermanagh Mallards F.C. played in the Women's Premier League until 2013.\nEnniskillen RFC was founded in 1925 and is still going. There is also a rugby league team, the Fermanagh Redskins\nFamous football players from Fermanagh include -\nNotable people.\nFamous people born, raised in or living in Fermanagh include: \nSurnames.\nThe most common surnames in County Fermanagh at the time of the United Kingdom Census of 1901 were:\nRailways.\nThe railway lines in County Fermanagh connected Enniskillen railway station with Derry from 1854, Dundalk from 1861, Bundoran from 1868 and Sligo from 1882.\nThe railway companies that served the county, prior to the establishment by the merger of Londonderry and Enniskillen Railway, Enniskillen and Bundoran Railway the Dundalk and Enniskillen Railway which was later named the Irish North Western Railway, thus forming the Great Northern Railway (Ireland). By 1883 the Great Northern Railway (Ireland) absorbed all the lines except the Sligo, Leitrim and Northern Counties Railway, which remained independent throughout its existence.\nIn October 1957 the Government of Northern Ireland closed the GNR line, which made it impossible for the SL&amp;NCR continue and forced it also to close.\nThe nearest railway station to Enniskillen is Sligo station which is served by trains to Dublin Connolly and is operated by Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann. The Dublin-Sligo railway line has a two-hourly service run by Iarnr\u00f3d \u00c9ireann. The connecting bus from Sligo via Manorhamilton to Enniskillen is route 66 operated by Bus \u00c9ireann."}
{"id": "5835", "revid": "1022029804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5835", "title": "Christian (disambiguation)", "text": "Christian most often refers to:\nChristian or The Christian may also refer to:"}
{"id": "5836", "revid": "35786750", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5836", "title": "Geography of Colombia", "text": "The Republic of Colombia is situated largely in the northwest of South America, with some territories falling within the boundaries of Central America. It is bordered to the northwest by Panama; to the east by Venezuela and Brazil; to the south by Ecuador and Peru; and it shares maritime limits with Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Honduras, Jamaica, the Dominican Republic, and Haiti.\nColombia has a land size of and it is the 25th largest nation in the world and the fourth-largest country in South America (after Brazil, Argentina, and Peru). Colombia's population is not evenly distributed, and most of the people live in the mountainous western portion of the country as well as along the northern coastline; the highest number live in or near the capital city of Bogot\u00e1. The southern and eastern portions of the country are sparsely inhabited, consisting of tropical rainforest, and inland tropical plains that contain large estates or large livestock farms, oil and gas production facilities, small farming communities, and indigenous tribes with their territories. Colombia has the 35th largest Exclusive Economic Zone of .\nMain.\nColombia usually classifies its geography into five natural regions, from the Andes mountain range, a region shared with Ecuador, Venezuela; the Pacific Ocean coastal region, shared with Panama and Ecuador; the Caribbean Sea coastal region, shared with Venezuela and Panama; the \"Llanos\" (plains), shared with Venezuela; to the Amazon Rainforest region shared with Venezuela, Brazil, Peru and Ecuador. Colombia is the only South American country that has coastline on both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.\n\"The World Factbook\" does not differentiate between Amazon region of Colombia (predominantly jungle) and the Orinoquia region of Colombia (predominantly plains). It suggests dividing the country into four geographic regions: the Andean highlands, consisting of the three Andean ranges and intervening valley lowlands; the Caribbean lowlands coastal region; the Pacific lowlands coastal region, separated from the Caribbean lowlands by swamps at the base of the Isthmus of Panama; and eastern Colombia, the great plain that lies to the east of the Andes Mountains.\nThe chief western mountain range, the Cordillera Occidental, is a moderately high range with peaks reaching up to about (4,670 m). The Cauca River Valley, an important agricultural region with several large cities on its borders, separates the Cordillera Occidental from the massive Cordillera Central. Several snow-clad volcanoes in the Cordillera Central have summits that rise above . The valley of the slow-flowing and muddy Magdalena River, a major transportation artery, separates the Cordillera Central from the main eastern range, the Cordillera Oriental. The peaks of the Cordillera Oriental are moderately high. This range differs from Colombia's other mountain ranges in that it contains several large basins. In the east, the sparsely populated, flat to gently rolling eastern lowlands called \"llanos\" cover almost 60 percent of the country's total land area.\nThis cross section of the republic does not include two of Colombia's regions: the Caribbean coastal lowlands and the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, both in the northern part of the country. The lowlands in the west are mostly swampy; the reed-filled marshes of the area are called \"ci\u00e9nagas\" by the people of Colombia. The Guajira Peninsula in the east is semiarid and is occupied primarily by indigenous peoples. The Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta is a spectacular triangular snowcapped block of rock that towers over the eastern part of this lowland. Here can be found the highest peak of the country, named Pico Cristobal Colon (5775 m).\nAndean region.\nNear the Ecuadorian frontier, the Andes Mountains divide into three distinct, roughly parallel chains, called cordilleras, that extend northeastward almost to the Caribbean Sea. Altitudes reach more than , and mountain peaks are permanently covered with snow. The elevated basins and plateaus of these ranges have a moderate climate that provides pleasant living conditions and in many places enables farmers to harvest twice a year. Torrential rivers on the slopes of the mountains produce a large hydroelectric power potential and add their volume to the navigable rivers in the valleys. In the late 1980s, approximately 78 percent of the country's population lived in the Andean highlands.\nThe Cordillera Occidental in the west, the Cordillera Central in the center, and the Cordillera Oriental in the east have different characteristics. Geologically, the Cordillera Occidental and the Cordillera Central form the western and eastern sides of a massive crystalline arch that extends from the Caribbean lowlands to the southern border of Ecuador. The Cordillera Oriental, however, is composed of folded stratified rocks overlying a crystalline core.\nThe Cordillera Occidental is relatively low and is the least populated of the three cordilleras. Summits are only about above sea level and do not have permanent snows. Few passes exist, although one that is about above sea level provides the major city of Cali with an outlet to the Pacific Ocean. The relatively low elevation of the cordillera permits dense vegetation, which on the western slopes is truly tropical.\nThe Cordillera Occidental is separated from the Cordillera Central by the deep rift of the Cauca Valley. The R\u00edo Cauca rises within of the border with Ecuador and flows through some of the best farmland in the country. After the two cordilleras converge, the Cauca Valley becomes a deep gorge reaching to the Caribbean lowlands.\nThe Cordillera Central is the loftiest of the mountain systems. Its crystalline rocks form a towering wall dotted with snow-covered volcanoes that is long. There are no plateaus in this range and no passes under . The highest peak in this range, the Nevado del Huila, reaches above sea level. The second highest peak is a volcano, Nevado del Ruiz, which erupted violently on November 13, 1985. Toward its northern end, this cordillera separates into several branches that descend toward the Caribbean coast.\nBetween the Cordillera Central and the Cordillera Oriental flows the Magdalena River. This river rises near a point some north of the border with Ecuador, where the Cordillera Oriental and the Cordillera Central diverge. Its spacious drainage area is fed by numerous mountain torrents originating high in the snowfields. The Magdalena River is generally navigable from the Caribbean Sea as far as the town of Neiva, deep in the interior, but it is interrupted midway by rapids. The valley floor is very deep; nearly from the river's mouth the elevation is no more than about .\nIn the Cordillera Oriental, at elevations between , three large fertile basins and a number of small ones provide suitable areas for settlement and intensive economic production. In the basin of Cundinamarca, where the Spanish encountered the regional Chibcha Indians, the European invaders established the town of Santa Fe de Bogot\u00e1 (present-day Bogot\u00e1) at an elevation of above sea level.\nTo the north of Bogot\u00e1, in the densely populated basins of Chiquinquir\u00e1 and Boyac\u00e1, are fertile fields, rich mines, and large industrial establishments that produce much of the national wealth. Still farther north, where the Cordillera Oriental makes an abrupt turn to the northwest near the border with Venezuela, the Sierra Nevada de Cocuy, the highest point of this range, rises to above sea level. In the department of Santander, the valleys on the western slopes are more spacious, and agriculture is intensive in the area around Bucaramanga. The northernmost region of the range around C\u00facuta is so rugged that historically it has been easier for residents here to maintain communications and transportation with Venezuela than with the adjacent parts of Colombia.\nThe basic plantation of Colombia is grassy and is near the equator which allows many tropical-like plants.\nCaribbean region.\nThe Caribbean lowlands consist of all of Colombia north of an imaginary line extending northeastward from the Golfo de Urab\u00e1 to the Venezuelan frontier at the northern extremity of the Cordillera Oriental. The semiarid Guajira Peninsula and Guajira\u2013Barranquilla xeric scrub, in the extreme north, bear little resemblance to the rest of the region. In the southern part rises the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, an isolated mountain system with peaks reaching heights over and slopes generally too steep for cultivation.\nThe Caribbean lowlands region is in roughly the shape of a triangle, the longest side of which is the coastline. Most of the country's commerce moves through the cities of Cartagena, Barranquilla, Santa Marta, and the other ports located along this important coast. Inland from these cities are swamps, hidden streams, and shallow lakes that support banana and cotton plantations for major commodity crops, countless small farms, and, in higher places, cattle ranches.\nThe city of Cartagena is a petrochemical, seaport (#1 in the country), and tourist city (#1 in the country). Santa Marta is also a seaport and tourist city but it is smaller scale city in comparison. Barranquilla is located some from the Caribbean coastline but it is a more developed city, with a greater number of industries and commercial places, widely known for its skilled workers in producing all forms of metalwork and accomplishing construction. Its inhabitants have the highest education level of the region. The city is famous as the starting point and focus of the region and the country's development: it was the first city in the nation to install and use telephones, public lighting, air mail, planes, and industrial works.\nThe Caribbean region merges next to and is connected with the Andean highlands through the two great river valleys. After the Andean highlands, it is the second-most important region in terms of economic activity. Approximately 17% of the country's population lived in this region in the late 1980s.\nThe region also includes the peninsular archipelago of San Andres Island and the Insular Territories of Colombia, which are disputed in part by Nicaragua. However, the Colombian Navy protects such territories with the use of force when necessary to avoid foreign invasion. The islands are fortified with two important bases for defense and custom controls. These were formerly used for research of classified projects with civilian assistance; the local universities often conduct research in the areas of oceanography and marine biology but also in the fields of biochemistry, genetics and immunology. Colombia is known for its advances in medical fields in experimental surgery, breast implant development, or prosthetics, and immunology. These facilities serve as containment and secure experimentation labs to complement those in Barranquilla and other undisclosed locations within the coast territories.\nThe Insular Region is considered by some as a geopolitical region of Colombia. It comprises the areas outside the continental territories of Colombia and includes the San Andr\u00e9s y Providencia Department in the Caribbean sea and the Malpelo and Gorgona islands in the Pacific Ocean. Its subregions include other groups of islands:\nPacific region.\nThe western third of the country is the most geographically complex. Starting at the shore of the Pacific Ocean in the west and moving eastward at a latitude of 5 degrees north, a diverse sequence of features is encountered. In the extreme west are the very narrow and discontinuous Pacific coastal lowlands, which are backed by the Serran\u00eda de Baud\u00f3, the lowest and narrowest of Colombia's mountain ranges. Next is the broad region of the R\u00edo Atrato/R\u00edo San Juan lowland.\nIn 1855, William Kennish, an engineer and veteran of the British Royal Navy, who had immigrated to the United States and was working for a New York City firm, studied the area and proposed an inter-oceanic river aqueduct and tunnel to connect the Rio Atrato, with its mouth at the Atlantic Ocean, with tributaries and through a tunnel and aqueduct through Nerqua Pass, to flow into Bah\u00eda Humboldt at the Pacific Ocean.\nThis was his alternative to the canal that was eventually built further west on the isthmus of what became Panama after it gained independence in the early 20th century. Although the US sent an expedition to explore Kennish's proposal, the concept was not developed at the time. Colombia refused a later US offer to build a canal. After independence, in 1903 Panama made a treaty with the US to support construction of the Panama Canal. Colombia occupies most of the Andes mountain range northern extremity, sharing a bit with Venezuela; the range splits into three branches between the Colombia-Ecuador border.\nIn the 1980s, only three percent of all Colombians resided in the Pacific lowlands, a region of jungle and swamp with considerable but little-exploited potential in minerals and other resources. Later in the 20th century, it was threatened by mining-related deforestation, as gold mining proceeded by both major companies and artisan miners. Buenaventura is the only port of any size on the coast. To the east, the Pacific lowlands are bounded by the Cordillera Occidental, from which numerous streams run. Most of the streams flow westward to the Pacific, but the largest, the navigable R\u00edo Atrato, flows northward to the Golfo de Urab\u00e1. Its river settlements have access to the major Atlantic ports and consequently are commercially related primarily to the Caribbean lowlands hinterland. To the west of the R\u00edo Atrato rises the Serran\u00eda de Baud\u00f3, an isolated chain of low mountains that occupies a large part of the region. Its highest elevation is less than 1,800 meters, and its vegetation resembles that of the surrounding tropical forest.\nThe Atrato Swamp, in Choc\u00f3 Department adjoining the border with Panama, is a deep muck sixty-five kilometers in width. For years it has challenged engineers seeking to complete the Pan-American Highway. This stretch, near Turbo, where the highway is interrupted, is known as the Tap\u00f3n del Choc\u00f3 (Chocon Plug).\nA second major transportation project in Choc\u00f3 Department has been proposed. A second inter-oceanic canal would be constructed by dredging the R\u00edo Atrato and tributary streams and digging short access canals. Completion of either of these projects would do much to transform this region, although it could have devastating consequences on the fragile, tropical forest environment.\nOrinoqu\u00eda region.\nThe area east of the Andes includes about 699,300 square kilometers or three-fifths of the country's total area, but Colombians view it almost as an alien land. The entire area, known as the eastern plains, was home to only two percent of the country's population in the late 1980s. The Spanish term for plains (\"llanos\") can be applied only to the open plains in the northern part, particularly the Piedmont areas near the Cordillera Oriental, where extensive cattle raising is practiced.\nThe region is unbroken by highlands except in Meta Department, where the Serran\u00eda de la Macarena, an outlier of the Andes has unique vegetation and wildlife believed to be reminiscent of those that once existed throughout the Andes.\nAmazon region.\nMany of the numerous large rivers of eastern Colombia are navigable. The R\u00edo Guaviare and the streams to its north flow eastward and drain into the basin of the R\u00edo Orinoco, a river that crosses into Venezuela and flows into the Atlantic Ocean. Those south of the R\u00edo Guaviare flows into the Amazon Basin. The R\u00edo Guaviare divides eastern Colombia into the llanos subregion in the north and the tropical rainforest, or selva, subregion in the south.\nClimate.\nThe striking variety in temperature and precipitation results principally from differences in elevation. Temperatures range from very hot at sea level to relatively cold at higher elevations but vary little with the season. At Bogot\u00e1, for example, the average annual temperature is , and the difference between the average of the coldest and the warmest months is less than 1\u00a0\u00b0C (1.8\u00a0\u00b0F). More significant, however, is the daily variation in temperature, from at night to during the day.\nColombians customarily describe their country in terms of the climatic zones: the area under in elevation is called the hot zone (tierra caliente), elevations between are the temperate zone (tierra templada), and elevations from to about constitute the cold zone (tierra fr\u00eda). The upper limit of the cold zone marks the tree line and the approximate limit of human habitation. The treeless regions adjacent to the cold zone and extending to approximately are high, bleak areas (usually referred to as the p\u00e1ramos), above which begins the area of permanent snow (nevado).\nAbout 86% of the country's total area lies in the hot zone. Included in the hot zone and interrupting the temperate area of the Andean highlands are the long and narrow extension of the Magdalena Valley and a small extension in the Cauca Valley. Temperatures, depending on elevation, vary between , and there are alternating dry and wet seasons corresponding to summer and winter, respectively. Breezes on the Caribbean coast, however, reduce both heat and precipitation.\nRainfall in the hot zone is heaviest in the Pacific lowlands and in parts of eastern Colombia, where rain is almost a daily occurrence and rain forests predominate. Precipitation exceeds annually in most of the Pacific lowlands, making this one of the wettest regions in the world. The highest average annual precipitation in the world is estimated to be in Lloro, Colombia, with . In eastern Colombia, it decreases from in portions of the Andean Piedmont to eastward. Extensive areas of the Caribbean interior are permanently flooded, more because of poor drainage than because of the moderately heavy precipitation during the rainy season from May through October.\nThe temperate zone covers about 8% of the country. This zone includes the lower slopes of the Cordillera Oriental and the Cordillera Central and most of the intermontane valleys. The important cities of Medell\u00edn () and Cali () are located in this zone, where rainfall is moderate and the mean annual temperature varies between , depending on the elevation. In the higher elevations of this zone, farmers benefit from two wet and two dry seasons each year; January through March and July through September are the dry seasons.\nThe cold or cool zone constitutes about 6% of the total area, including some of the most densely populated plateaus and terraces of the Colombian Andes; this zone supports about one fourth of the country's total population. The mean temperature ranges between , and the wet seasons occur in April and May and from September to December, as in the high elevations of the temperate zone.\nPrecipitation is moderate to heavy in most parts of the country; the heavier rainfall occurs in the low-lying hot zone. Considerable variations occur because of local conditions that affect wind currents, however, and areas on the leeward side of the Guajira Peninsula receive generally light rainfall; the annual rainfall of recorded at the Uribia station there is the lowest in Colombia. Considerable year-to-year variations have been recorded, and Colombia sometimes experiences droughts.\nColombia's geographic and climatic variations have combined to produce relatively well-defined \"ethnocultural\" groups among different regions of the country: the Coste\u00f1o from the Caribbean coast; the Caucano in the Cauca region and the Pacific coast; the Antioque\u00f1o in Antioquia, Caldas, Risaralda, and Valle del Cauca departments; the Tolimense in Tolima and Huila departments; the Cundiboyacense in the interior departments of Cundinamarca and Boyac\u00e1 in the Cordillera Oriental; the Santandereano in Norte de Santander and Santander departments; and the Llanero in the eastern plains. Each group has distinctive characteristics, accents, customs, social patterns, and forms of cultural adaptation to climate and topography that differentiates it from other groups. Even with rapid urbanization and modernization, regionalism and regional identification continued to be important reference points, although they were somewhat less prominent in the 1980s than in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.\nColombia's proximity to the equator influences its climates. The lowland areas are continuously hot. Altitude affects temperature greatly. Temperatures decrease about for every increase in altitude above sea level. Rainfall varies by location in Colombia, tending to increase as one travels southward. This is especially true in the eastern lowlands. For example, rainfall in parts of the Guajira Peninsula seldom exceeds per year. Colombia's rainy southeast, however, is often drenched by more than of rain per year. Rainfall in most of the rest of the country runs between these two extremes.\nVegetation.\nAltitude affects not only temperature, but also vegetation. In fact, altitude is one of the most important influences on vegetation patterns in Colombia. The mountainous parts of the country can be divided into several vegetation zones according to altitude, although the altitude limits of each zone may vary somewhat depending on the latitude.\nThe \"tierra caliente\" (hot land), below , is the zone of tropical crops such as bananas. The tierra templada (temperate land), extending from an altitude of , is the zone of coffee and maize. Wheat and potatoes dominate in the \"tierra fr\u00eda\" (cold land), at altitudes from . In the \"zona forestada\" (forested zone), which is located between , many of the trees have been cut for firewood. Treeless pastures dominate the p\u00e1ramos, or alpine grasslands, at altitudes of . Above , where temperatures are below freezing, is the \"tierra helada\", a zone of permanent snow and ice.\nVegetation also responds to rainfall patterns. A scrub woodland of scattered trees and bushes dominates the semiarid northeast. To the south, savannah (tropical grassland) vegetation covers the Colombian portion of the llanos. The rainy areas in the southeast are blanketed by tropical rainforest. In the mountains, the spotty patterns of precipitation in alpine areas complicate vegetation patterns. The rainy side of a mountain may be lush and green, while the other side, in the rain shadow, may be parched.\nRelief.\nThe Andean range is located in Colombia from the southwest (Ecuador border) toward the northeast (Venezuela border) and is divided in the Colombian Massif (\"Macizo Colombiano\") in three ranges (East Andes, Central Andes and West Andes) that form two long valleys, Magdalena and Cauca follow by the rivers of the same name.\nThe eastern half of Colombia, comprising more than half its territory, is plain and composed by savanna and rainforest, crossed by rivers belonging to the Amazon and Orinoco basins. The northern part, called the Llanos, is a savanna region, mostly in the Orinoco basin (therefore called also Orinoqu\u00eda). The southern part is covered by the Amazon rain forest and belongs mostly to the Amazon basin. It is usually called Amazon\u00eda.\nAt the north and west of the Andes range there are some coastal plains. The Caribbean plains at the north and the Pacific plains at the west.\nColombian Pacific Plains are among the most rainy parts in the world, chiefly at the north (Choc\u00f3).\nThe highest mountain in Colombia is not in the Andes but in the Caribbean plain: Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta with its highest points named Pico Cristobal Colon (5775 m) and Pico Simon Bolivar (same elevation). Other mountains in the Caribbean plain include the Montes de Mar\u00eda and the Serran\u00eda de San Lucas.\nIn the Pacific Plains there are other mountain formations, chiefly the Serran\u00eda del Dari\u00e9n and the Serran\u00eda del Baud\u00f3.\nIn the eastern Region, there is the Serran\u00eda de la Macarena and there are formations belonging to the Guyana Shield.\nNatural resources.\nThe natural resources of Colombia are varied and extensive with most of its territory and oceans still unexplored. Colombia has one of the largest open pit coal mines in the world in the region of Cerrejon in the Guajira Peninsula. It also has oil rigs and natural gas extraction in the eastern plains. Colombia is the main producer of emeralds and an important participant in gold, silver, iron, salt, platinum, petroleum, nickel, copper, hydropower and uranium extraction.\nEnvironmental issues.\nThe main environmental issues affecting Colombia are deforestation; soil and water quality damage from overuse of pesticides; air pollution, especially in Bogota, from vehicle emissions and other main cities. The collateral damaged produced by attacks against oil pipeline infrastructure by rebel guerrillas in the Colombian armed conflict has produced long term damage to the environment. The armed groups also deforest large areas to cultivate illegal crops and open unauthorized highways in protected areas.\nExtreme points.\nSnowfields and glaciers in Colombia are limited to the highest peaks and ranges in the Cordillera Central and Cordillera Oriental and above the elevation on the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta. The total area of snowfields and glaciers was estimated to be about 104 square kilometers in the early 1970s.\nHistorical, geographical, and pictorial records point toward a consistent and progressive depletion of ice-and-snow masses in the Colombian Andes since the end of the \"Little Ice Age\" in the late 1800s. Many glaciers have disappeared during the 20th century, and others are expected to disappear in the coming decades.\nFacts.\nLand size: \ntotal: \nLand boundaries: \ntotal: 6,6724\u00a0km\nCoastline: \n3,208\u00a0km (Caribbean Sea 1,760\u00a0km, North Pacific Ocean 1,448\u00a0km)\nExclusive Economic Zone: \ntotal: \nClimate: \ntropical along coast and eastern plains; cooler in highlands\nTerrain: \nflat coastal lowlands, central highlands, high Andes Mountains, eastern lowland plains\nElevation extremes: \nlowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m \nhighest point: Pico Cristobal Colon 5,975 m \nnote: nearby Pico Simon Bolivar also has the same elevation\nNatural resources: \npetroleum, natural gas, coal, iron ore, nickel, gold, copper, emeralds, hydropower\nLand use: \narable land: 1.43% \npermanent crops: 1.68% \nother: 96.89% (2012)\nIrrigated land: \n10,870\u00a0km\u00b2 (2011)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n2,132\u00a0km3 (2011)\nFreshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):\ntotal: 12.65\u00a0km3 (55%/4%/41%)\nper capita: 308 m3/yr (2010)\nNatural hazards: \nhighlands subject to volcanic eruptions; occasional earthquakes; periodic droughts\nEnvironment - international agreements: \nparty to: Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands \nsigned, but not ratified: Law of the Sea\nHydrology.\nColombia has four main drainage systems: the Pacific drain, the Caribbean drain, the Orinoco Basin and the Amazon Basin.\nThe Orinoco and Amazon Rivers mark limits with Colombia to Venezuela and Peru respectively."}
{"id": "5838", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5838", "title": "Politics of Colombia", "text": "The Politics of Colombia take place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the President of Colombia is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is carried out by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of congress, the Senate and the House of Representatives of Colombia. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nConstitutional reforms.\nColombia's present constitution, enacted on July 5, 1991, strengthened the administration of justice with the provision for introduction of an adversarial system which ultimately is to entirely replace the existing Napoleonic Code. Other significant reforms under the new constitution provide for civil divorce, dual nationality, the election of a vice president, and the election of departmental governors. The constitution expanded citizens' basic rights, including that of \"tutela,\" under which an immediate court action can be requested by an individual if he or she feels that their constitutional rights are being violated and if there is no other legal recourse.\nThe national government has separate executive, legislative, and judicial branches.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president is elected for a single four-year term. Between 2005 and 2015, the president could be re-elected for a second term. The 1991 constitution reestablished the position of vice president, who is elected on the same ticket as the president. By law, the vice president will succeed in the event of the president's resignation, illness, or death.\nLegislative branch.\nColombia's bicameral Congress consists of a 108-member Senate of Colombia and a 172-member Chamber of Representatives of Colombia. Senators are elected on the basis of a nationwide ballot, while representatives are elected in multi member districts co-located within the 32 national departments. The country's capital is a separate capital district and elects its own representatives. Members may be re-elected indefinitely, and, in contrast to the previous system, there are no alternate congressmen. Congress meets twice a year, and the president has the power to call it into special session when needed.\nJudicial branch.\nThe civilian judiciary is a separate and independent branch of government. Guidelines and the general structure for Colombia's administration of justice are set out in Law 270 of March 7, 1996. Colombia's legal system has recently begun to incorporate some elements of an oral, accusatory system. The judicial branch's general structure is composed of four distinct jurisdictions (ordinary, administrative, constitutional, and special). Colombia's highest judicial organs are the Supreme Court, the Council of State, the Constitutional Court, and the Superior Judicial Council. Although all the high courts technically oversee separate jurisdictions, the Constitutional Court has a broad spectrum of judicial oversight which often allows it to rule on issues overseen by different jurisdictions and even weigh in directly in the rulings of other high courts.\nInternational organization participation.\nGlobal.\nUnited Nations\nWorld Bank\nOther"}
{"id": "5839", "revid": "1022428825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5839", "title": "Economy of Colombia", "text": "The economy of Colombia is the fourth largest in Latin America as measured by gross domestic product. Colombia has experienced a historic economic boom over the last decade. Throughout the 20th century Colombia was Latin America's 4th and 3rd largest economy GDP (PPP) and between 2012-2014 it became the 4th largest in Latin America (nominal) GDP. As of 2018 the GDP (PPP) per capita has increased to over US$14,000, and GDP (PPP) increased from US$250 billion in 1990 to nearly US$800 billion. Poverty levels were as high as 65% in 1990, but decreased to under 30% by 2014.\nPetroleum is Colombia's main export, making over 45% of Colombia's exports. Manufacturing makes up nearly 12% of Colombia's exports, and grows at a rate of over 10% a year. Colombia has the fastest growing information technology industry in the world and has the longest fibre optic network in Latin America. Colombia also has one of the largest shipbuilding industries in the world outside Asia.\nModern industries like shipbuilding, electronics, automobile, tourism, construction, and mining, grew dramatically during the 2000s and 2010s, however, most of Colombia's exports are still commodity-based. Colombia is Latin America's 2nd-largest producer of domestically-made electronics and appliances only behind Mexico. Colombia had the fastest growing major economy in the western world in 2014, behind only China worldwide.\nSince the early 2010s, the Colombian government has shown interest in exporting modern Colombian pop culture to the world (which includes video games, music, movies, TV shows, fashion, cosmetics, and food) as a way of diversifying the economy and entirely changing the image of Colombia; a national campaign similar to the Korean Wave. Colombia is only behind Mexico in cultural exports and is already a regional leader in cosmetic and beauty exports.\nThe number of tourists in Colombia grows by over 12% every year. Colombia is projected to have over 15 million tourists by 2023.\nHistory.\n16th\u201319th centuries.\nEuropean explorers reached what is now Colombian territory as early as 1510 in Santa Mar\u00eda Antigua del Dari\u00e9n (in present-day Choc\u00f3 department). For the next couple of decades Colombia, and South America in general, remained largely unexplored. From 1533 to 1600, Europeans began expeditions into the interior of current Colombia. The intent of these expeditions was mainly to conquer new lands and exploit village resources. Legends of El Dorado that reached Spaniard explorers continued to fuel exploration and raiding of Indian villages.\nIn the 17th century, Spanish conquerors explored Colombia and made the first settlements, and this was the beginning of Colombia's modern economic history. Major conquistadors from this period were Pedro de Heredia, Gonzalo Jimenez de Quesada, Sebasti\u00e1n de Belalcazar, and Nikolaus Federmann.\nDuring the 16th and 17th centuries, the colonial settlements in Colombia served purposes of extraction of precious metals and other natural resources, and later slavery trade. This economic arrangement left the Colony with little room for building solid institutionality for economic development. The main non-extractive institutions emerging in this centuries were the fortified port of Cartagena and the Viceroyalty of New Granada. Cartagena developed military defenses mainly out of necessity from frequently having to deal with pirate attacks. A primitive form of colonial administration was organized in Santa f\u00e9 de Bogot\u00e1 with the Viceroyalty of New Granada, especially under the tenure of Jos\u00e9 Sol\u00eds y Folch de Cardona (1753\u20131761), who conducted a census and built roads, bridges and aqueducts.\nFollowing the War of the Thousand Days (1899\u20131902), Colombia experienced a coffee boom that catapulted the country into the modern period, bringing the attendant benefits of transportation, particularly railroads, communications infrastructure, and the first major attempts at manufacturing.\n20th century.\nColombia's consistently sound economic policies and aggressive promotion of free trade agreements in recent years have bolstered its ability to weather external shocks. Real GDP has grown more than 4% per year for the past three years, continuing almost a decade of strong economic performance.\nIn 1990, the administration of President C\u00e9sar Gaviria Trujillo (1990\u201394) initiated economic liberalism policies or \"apertura economica\" and this has continued since then, with tariff reductions, financial deregulation, privatization of state-owned enterprises, and adoption of a more liberal foreign exchange rate. Almost all sectors became open to foreign investment although agricultural products remained protected.\nThe original idea of his then Minister of Finance, Rudolf Homes, was that the country should import agricultural products in which it was not competitive, like maize, wheat, cotton and soybeans and export the ones in which it had an advantage, like fruits and flowers. In ten years, the sector lost 7,000\u00a0km2 to imports, represented mostly in heavily subsidized agricultural products from the United States, as a result of this policy, with a critical impact on employment in rural areas. Still, this policy makes food cheaper for the average Colombian than it would be if agricultural trade were more restricted.\nUntil 1997, Colombia had enjoyed a fairly stable economy. The first five years of liberalization were characterized by high economic growth rates of between 4% and 5%. The Ernesto Samper administration (1994\u201398) emphasized social welfare policies which targeted Colombia's lower income population. These reforms led to higher government spending which increased the fiscal deficit and public sector debt, the financing of which required higher interest rates. An over-valued peso inherited from the previous administration was maintained.\nThe economy slowed, and by 1998 GDP growth was only 0.6%. In 1999, the country fell into its first recession since the Great Depression. The economy shrank by 4.5% with unemployment at over 20%. While unemployment remained at 20% in 2000, GDP growth recovered to 3.1%.\nThe administration of President Andr\u00e9s Pastrana Arango, when it took office on 7 August 1998, faced an economy in crisis, with the difficult internal security situation and global economic turbulence additionally inhibiting confidence. As evidence of a serious recession became clear in 1999, the government took a number of steps. It engaged in a series of controlled devaluations of the peso, followed by a decision to let it float. Colombia also entered into an agreement with the International Monetary Fund which provided a $2.7 billion guarantee (extended funds facility), while committing the government to budget discipline and structural reforms.\nBy early 2000 there had been the beginning of an economic recovery, with the export sector leading the way, as it enjoyed the benefit of the more competitive exchange rate, as well as strong prices for petroleum, Colombia's leading export product. Prices of coffee, the other principal export product, have been more variable.\nEconomic growth reached 3.1% during 2000 and inflation 9.0%. Colombia's international reserves have remained stable at around $8.35 billion, and Colombia has successfully remained in international capital markets. Colombia's total foreign debt at the end of 1999 was $34.5 billion with $14.7 billion in private sector and $19.8 billion in public sector debt. Major international credit rating organizations have dropped Colombian sovereign debt below investment grade, primarily as a result of large fiscal deficits, which current policies are seeking to close.\nFormer president \u00c1lvaro Uribe (elected 7 August 2002) introduced several neoliberal economic reforms, including measures designed to reduce the public-sector deficit below 2.5% of GDP in 2004. The government's economic policy and controversial democratic security strategy have engendered a growing sense of confidence in the economy, particularly within the business sector, and GDP growth in 2003 was among the highest in Latin America, at over 4%. This growth rate was maintained over the next decade, averaging 4.8% from 2004 to 2014.\nColombia's President Iv\u00e1n Duque withdrew a controversial tax reform bill following four days of huge protests across the country on 02-May-2021.\nOverview.\nThe longstanding internal armed conflict in Colombia has had economic impacts.\nIn the early 21st century, the Colombian economy grew in part because of austere government budgets, focused efforts to reduce public debt levels, an export-oriented growth strategy, an improved security situation in the country, and high commodity prices. Growth slowed to 1.4 percent in 2017, and then increased to 3.3 percent in 2019.\nPresident Uribe, who was in office from 2002\u20132010, examined opportunities including reforming the pension system, reducing high unemployment, achieving congressional passage of a fiscal transfers reform, and exploring for new oil or producing ethanol. Colombia's Gini coefficient, a measure of inequality, was one of the highest in South America. International and domestic financial analysts warned of the growing central government deficit, which hovered at 5% of GDP. Nonetheless, confidence in the economy grew.\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\nlowest 10%: 0.8%\nhighest 10%: 45.9% (2006)\nInvestment (gross fixed):\n24.3% of GDP (2008 est.)\nBudget:\nrevenues: $83.22 billion\nexpenditures: $82.92 billion; including capital expenditures of $NA (2008 est.)\nCentral bank discount rate:\n11.5% (31 December 2008)\nCommercial bank prime lending rate:\n15.6% (31 December 2008)\nStock of money:\n$21.58 billion (31 December 2008)\nStock of quasi money:\n$26.57 billion (31 December 2008)\nStock of domestic credit:\n$89.69 billion (31 December 2008)\nMarket value of publicly traded shares:\n$87.03 billion (31 December 2008)\nAgriculture \u2013 products:\ncoffee, cut flowers, bananas, rice, tobacco, corn, sugarcane, cocoa beans, oilseed, vegetables; forest products; shrimp\nIndustries:\ntextiles, food processing, oil, clothing and footwear, beverages, chemicals, cement; gold, coal, emeralds, shipbuilding, electronics, home appliance, and furniture.\nIndustrial production growth rate:\n2% (2013 est.)\nElectricity \u2013 production:\n53.6 billion kWh (2007)\nElectricity \u2013 consumption:\n52.8 billion kWh (2007)\nElectricity \u2013 exports:\n876.7 million kWh (2007)\nElectricity \u2013 imports:\n38.4 million kWh (2007)\nOil \u2013 production:\n (2008 est.)\nOil \u2013 consumption:\n (2007 est.)\nOil \u2013 exports:\n (2008 est.)\nOil \u2013 imports:\n (2005)\nOil \u2013 proved reserves:\n (1 January 2008 est.)\nNatural gas \u2013 production:\n7.22 billion cu m (2006 est.)\nNatural gas \u2013 consumption:\n7.22 billion cu m (2006 est.)\nNatural gas \u2013 exports:\n0 cu m (2007 est.)\nNatural gas \u2013 imports:\n0 cu m (2007 est.)\nNatural gas \u2013 proved reserves:\n122.9 billion cu m (1 January 2008 est.)\nCurrent account balance:\n$\u22126.761 billion (2008 est.)\nExchange rates:\nColombian pesos (COP) per US dollar \u2013 2,243.6 (2008), 2,013.8 (2007), 2,358.6 (2006), 2,320.75 (2005), 2,628.61 (2004)\nSource:\nDevelopment of main indicators.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132017. Inflation under 5% is in green.\nLabor rights.\nOn 8 June 2020, the newly formed Employment Mission \"(Misi\u00f3n de Empleo)\" met for the first time to discuss labor reforms that it intended to propose to Congress. Some of these reforms had been desired for years, and others had come into starker view during the coronavirus pandemic.\nAgriculture.\nColombia is one of the 5 largest producers in the world of coffee, avocado and palm oil, and one of the 10 largest producers in the world of sugarcane, banana, pineapple and cocoa.\nColombia produced, in 2018, 36.2 million tons of sugarcane (7th largest producer in the world), 5.8 million tons of palm oil (5th largest producer in the world), 3.7 million tons of banana (11th largest producer in the world) and 720 thousand tons of coffee (4th largest producer in the world, behind Brazil, Vietnam and Indonesia). Although its neighbor Brazil is the largest producer of coffee in the world (3.5 million tons produced in the same year), the advertising carried out by the country for decades suggests that Colombian coffee is of higher quality, which generates greater added value to the country's product. In the same year, Colombia produced 3.3 million tons of rice, 3.1 million tons of potato, 2.2 million tons of cassava, 1.3 million tons of maize, 900 thousand tons of pineapple, 670 thousand tons of onion, 527 thousand tons of tomato, 419 thousand tons of yam, 338 thousand tons of mango, 326 thousand tons of avocado, in addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products such as orange, tangerine, lemon, papaya, beans, carrot, coconut, watermelon etc.\nThe share of agriculture in GDP has fallen consistently since 1945, as industry and services have expanded. However, Colombia's agricultural share of GDP decreased during the 1990s by less than in many of the world's countries at a similar level of development, even though the share of coffee in GDP diminished in a dramatic way. Agriculture has nevertheless remained an important source of employment, providing a fifth of Colombia's jobs in 2006.\nThe most industrially diverse member of the five-nation Andean Community, Colombia has four major industrial centers\u2014Bogota, Medellin, Cali, and Barranquilla, each located in a distinct geographical region. Colombia's industries include textiles and clothing, particularly lingerie, leather products, processed foods and beverages, paper and paper products, chemicals and petrochemicals, cement, construction, iron and steel products, and metalworking. Its diverse climate and topography permit the cultivation of a wide variety of crops. In addition, all regions yield forest products, ranging from tropical hardwoods in the hot country to pine and eucalyptus in the colder areas.\nCacao beans, sugarcane, coconuts, bananas, plantains, rice, cotton, tobacco, cassava, and most of the nation's beef cattle are produced in the hot regions from sea level to 1,000 meters elevation. The temperate regions\u2014between 1,000 and 2,000 meters\u2014are better suited for coffee; cut flowers; maize and other vegetables; and fruits such as citrus, pears, pineapples, and tomatoes. The cooler elevations\u2014between 2,000 and 3,000 meters\u2014produce wheat, barley, potatoes, cold-climate vegetables, flowers, dairy cattle, and poultry.\nLivestock.\nIn the production of beef and chicken meat, Colombia is among the 20 largest producers in the world. \nIn Colombia, the exploitation and breeding of cattle is carried out on small farms and large farms. Black-eared white, casanare\u00f1o, coastal with horns, romosinuano, chino santandereano and hart\u00f3n del Valle, are the Colombian breeds with the highest production.\nIn 2013, livestock occupied 80% of productive land in Colombia. The livestock sector is one of the most outstanding in areas such as Caribbean Region, where seven departments have livestock as their primary vocation. Also in Antioquia, where there is the largest cattle inventory in the country, the department had that year 11% of the head of cattle in Colombia, and according to the livestock inventory, in 2012 Antioque\u00f1os counted around 2,268,000 head of cattle.\nAlso in 2013, the bovine herd in Colombia reached 20.1 million head of cattle, of which 2.5 million (12.5%) were milking cows. In addition, the country's total milk production was 13.1 million liters.\nOn the other hand, the increase in imports of pork meat, the high prices of inputs and the slowdown in the national economy, produced a crisis in the raising of pork in Colombia in 2015.\nIndustry.\nThe World Bank lists the main producing countries each year, based on the total value of production. According to the 2019 list, Colombia has the 46th most valuable industry in the world (US $ 35.4 billion), behind Mexico, Brazil, Venezuela and Argentina, but ahead of Peru and Chile. \nManufacturing.\nDomestic appliances.\nAlthough Colombia has been producing domestic appliances since the 1930s, it wasn't until the late 1990s that Colombian corporations began exporting to neighboring countries. One of Colombia's largest producers of domestic appliances, HACEB has been producing refrigeration since 1940. Some domestic corporations include: Challenger, Kalley, HACEB, Imusa, and Landers. In 2011, Groupe SEB acquired Imusa as a form to expand to the Latin American market. Colombia also manufactures for foreign companies as well, such as Whirlpool and GE. LG has also been interested in building a plant in Colombia. Colombia is also Latin America's 3rd largest producer of appliances behind Mexico and Brazil and is growing rapidly.\nElectronics.\nColombia is a major producer of electronics in Latin America, and is South America's 2nd largest high-tech market. Colombia is also the 2nd largest producer and exporter of electronics made by domestic companies in Latin America. Since the early 2000s, major Colombian corporations began exporting aggressively to foreign markets. Some of these companies include: Challenger, PcSmart, Compumax, Colcircuirtos, and Kalley. Colombia is the first country in Latin America to manufacture a domestically made 4K television. In 2014, the Colombian Government launched a national campaign to promote IT and Electronic sectors, as well as investing in Colombia's own companies. Although innovation remains low on the global scale, the government sees heavy potential in the high tech industry and is investing heavily in education and innovation centers all across the nation. Because of this, Colombia could become a major global manufacturer of electronics and play an important role in the global high tech industry in the near future. In 2014, the Colombian government released another national campaign to help Colombian companies have a bigger share of the national market.\nConstruction.\nConstruction recently has played a vital role in the economy, and is growing rapidly at almost 20% annually. As a result, Colombia is seeing a historic building boom. The Colombian government is investing heavily in transport infrastructure through a plan called \"Fourth Generation Network\". The target of the Colombian government is to build 7,000\u00a0km of roads for the 2016\u20132020 period and reduce travel times by 30% and transport costs by 20%. A toll road concession program will comprise 40 projects, and is part of a larger strategic goal to invest nearly $50bn in transport infrastructure, including: railway systems; making the Magdalena river navigable again; improving port facilities; as well as an expansion of Bogot\u00e1's airport. Long-term plans include building a national high-speed train network, to vastly improve competitiveness.\nMining and energy.\nColombia is well-endowed with minerals and energy resources. It has the largest coal reserves in Latin America, and is second to Brazil in hydroelectric potential. Estimates of petroleum reserves in 1995 were . It also possesses significant amounts of nickel, gold, silver, platinum, and emeralds. \nThe country was the 12th largest producer of coal in the world in 2018. In 2019, Colombia was the 20th largest petroleum producer in the world, with 791 thousand barrels / day. In mining, Colombia is the world's largest producer of emerald.\nThe discovery of of high-quality oil at the Cusiana and Cupiagua fields, about east of Bogot\u00e1, has enabled Colombia to become a net oil exporter since 1986. The Transandino pipeline transports oil from Orito in the Department of Putumayo to the Pacific port of Tumaco in the Department of Nari\u00f1o. Total crude oil production averages ; about is exported. The Pastrana government has significantly liberalized its petroleum investment policies, leading to an increase in exploration activity. Refining capacity cannot satisfy domestic demand, so some refined products, especially gasoline, must be imported. Plans for the construction of a new refinery are under development.\nWhile Colombia has vast hydroelectric potential, a prolonged drought in 1992 forced severe electricity rationing throughout the country until mid-1993. The consequences of the drought on electricity-generating capacity caused the government to commission the construction or upgrading of 10 thermoelectric power plants. Half will be coal-fired, and half will be fired by natural gas. The government also has begun awarding bids for the construction of a natural gas pipeline system that will extend from the country's extensive gas fields to its major population centers. Plans call for this project to make natural gas available to millions of Colombian households by the middle of the next decade.\nAs of 2004, Colombia has become a net energy exporter, exporting electricity to Ecuador and developing connections to Peru, Venezuela and Panama to export to those markets as well. The Trans-Caribbean pipeline connecting western Venezuela to Panama through Colombia is also under construction, thanks to cooperation between presidents \u00c1lvaro Uribe of Colombia, Mart\u00edn Torrijos of Panama and Hugo Ch\u00e1vez of Venezuela. Coal is exported to Turkey.\nHuman rights abuses in mining zones.\nThe oil pipelines are a frequent target of extortion and bombing campaigns by the National Liberation Army (ELN) and, more recently, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC). The bombings, which have occurred on average once every 5 days, have caused substantial environmental damage, often in fragile rainforests and jungles, as well as causing significant loss of life. In April 1999 in Cartagena de Indias, Clinton's Secretary of Energy Bill Richardson spoke before investors from the United States, Canada and other countries. He expressed his government's willingness to use military aid to support the investment that they and their allies were going to make in Colombia, especially in strategically important sectors like mining and energy.\nIn 2002 there were 170 attacks on the 2nd largest pipeline, which travels 780\u00a0km from the Ca\u00f1o Lim\u00f3n to the Atlantic port of Cove\u00f1as. The pipeline was out of operation for 266 days of that year; the government estimates that these bombings reduced Colombia's GDP by 0.5%. The government of the United States increased military aid, in 2003, to Colombia to assist in the effort to defend the pipeline. Occidental Petroleum privately contracted mercenaries who flew Skymaster planes, from AirScan International Inc., to patrol the Cano Limon-Covenas pipeline. Many of these operations used helicopters, equipment and weapons provided by the U.S. military and anti-narcotics aid programs.\nMining and natural exploitation has had environmental consequences. The region of Guajira is undergoing an accelerated desertification with the disappearances of forests, land, and water sources, due to the increase in coal production. Social consequences or lack of development in resource rich areas is common. 11 million Colombians survive on less than one dollar a day. Over 65% of these live in mining zones. There are 3.5 million children out of school, and the most critical situation is in the mining zone of Choco, Bolivar, and Sucre.\nEconomic consequences of privatization and liberal institutions have meant changes in taxation to attract foreign investment. Colombia will lose another $800 million over the next 90 years that Glencore International operates in El Cerrejon Zona Media, if the company continues to produce coal at a rate of 5 million tons/year, because of the reduction of the royalty tax from 10-15% to .04%. If the company, as is plausible, doubles or triples its production, the losses will be proportionally greater. The operational losses from the three large mining projects (El Cerrejon, La Loma, operated by Drummond, and Montel\u00edbano, which produces ferronickel) for Colombia to more than 12 billion. \nCoal production has grown rapidly, from 22.7 million tons in 1994 to 50.0 million tons in 2003. Over 90% of this amount was exported, making Colombia the world's sixth largest coal exporter, behind Australia, China, Indonesia, South Africa and Russia. From the mid-1980s the center of coal production was the Cerrej\u00f3n mines in the Guajira department. However, the growth in output at La Loma in neighboring Cesar Department made this area the leader in Colombian coal production since 2004. Production in other departments, including Boyac\u00e1, Cundinamarca and Norte de Santander, forms about 13% of the total. The coal industry is largely controlled by international mining companies, including a consortium of BHP Billiton, Anglo American and Glencore International at Cerrej\u00f3n, and Conundrum Company at La Loma, which is undergoing a lawsuit in the U.S. District Court in Alabama for union assassinations and alleged paramilitary links.\nForeign investment.\nIn 1990, to attract foreign investors and promote trade, an experiment from the International Monetary Fund known as \"La Apertura\" was adopted by the government as an open trade strategy. Although the analysis of the results are not clear, the fact is that the agricultural sector was severely impacted by this policy.\nIn 1991 and 1992, the government passed laws to stimulate foreign investment in nearly all sectors of the economy. The only activities closed to foreign direct investment are defense and national security, disposal of hazardous wastes, and real estate\u2014the last of these restrictions is intended to hinder money laundering. Colombia established a special entity\u2014Converter\u2014to assist foreigners in making investments in the country. Foreign investment flows for 1999 were $4.4 billion, down from $4.8 billion in 1998.\nMajor foreign investment projects underway include the $6 billion development of the Cusiana and Cupiagua oil fields, development of coal fields in the north of the country, and the recently concluded licensing for establishment of cellular telephone service. The United States accounted for 26.5% of the total $19.4 billion stock of non-petroleum foreign direct investment in Colombia at the end of 1998.\nOn 21 October 1995, under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA), President Clinton signed an Executive Order barring U.S. entities from any commercial or financial transactions with four Colombian drug kingpins and with individuals and companies associated with the traffic in narcotics, as designated by the Secretary of the Treasury in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Attorney General. The list of designated individuals and companies is amended periodically and is maintained by the Office of Foreign Asset Control at the Department of the Treasury, tel. (202) 622-0077 (ask for Document #1900). The document also is available at the Department of Treasury web site.\nColombia is the United States' fifth-largest export market in Latin America\u2014behind Mexico, Brazil, Venezuela, and Argentina\u2014and the 26th-largest market for U.S. products worldwide. The United States is Colombia's principal trading partner, with two-way trade from November 1999 through November 2000 exceeding $9.5 billion--$3.5 billion U.S. exports and $6.0 billion U.S. imports. Colombia benefits from duty-free entry\u2014for a 10-year period, through 2001\u2014for certain of its exports to the United States under the Andean Trade Preferences Act. Colombia improved protection of intellectual property rights through the adoption of three Andean Pact decisions in 1993 and 1994, but the U.S. remains concerned over deficiencies in licensing, patent regulations, and copyright protection.\nColombia is also the largest export partner of the Dutch constituent country of Aruba (39.4%).\nThe petroleum and natural gas coal mining, chemical, and manufacturing industries attract the greatest U.S. investment interest. U.S. investment accounted for 37.8% ($4.2 billion) of the total $11.2 billion in foreign direct investment at the end of 1997, excluding petroleum and portfolio investment. Worker rights and benefits in the U.S.-dominated sectors are more favorable than general working conditions. Examples include shorter-than-average working hours, higher wages, and compliance with health and safety standards above the national average.\nTertiary industries.\nThe services sector dominates Colombia's GDP, contributing 58 percent of GDP in 2007, and, given worldwide trends, its dominance will probably continue. The sector is characterized by its heterogeneity, being the largest for employment (61 percent), in both the formal and informal sectors.\nArts and music.\nSince the early 2010s, the Colombian government has shown interest in exporting modern Colombian pop culture to the world (which includes video games, music, movies, TV shows, fashion, cosmetics, and food) as a way of diversifying the economy and changing the image of Colombia. In the Hispanic world, Colombia is only behind Mexico in cultural exports at US$750 million annually, and is already a regional leader in cosmetic and beauty exports.\nTravel and tourism.\nTourism in Colombia is an important sector in the country's economy. Colombia has major attractions as a tourist destination, such as Cartagena and its historic surroundings, which are on the UNESCO World Heritage List; the insular department of San Andr\u00e9s, Providencia y Santa Catalina; Santa Marta, Cartagena and the surrounding area. Fairly recently, Bogot\u00e1, the nation's capital, has become Colombia's major tourist destination because of its improved museums and entertainment facilities and its major urban renovations, including the rehabilitation of public areas, the development of parks, and the creation of an extensive network of cycling routes. With its very rich and varied geography, which includes the Amazon and Andean regions, the llanos, the Caribbean and Pacific coasts, and the deserts of La Guajira, and its unique biodiversity, Colombia also has major potential for ecotourism.\nThe direct contribution of Travel &amp; Tourism to GDP in 2013 was COP11,974.3mn (1.7% of GDP). This is forecast to rise by 7.4% to COP12,863.4mn in 2014. This primarily reflects the economic activity generated by industries such as hotels, travel agents, airlines and other passenger transportation services (excluding commuter services). But it also includes, for example, the activities of the restaurant and leisure industries directly supported by tourists. The direct contribution of Travel &amp; Tourism to GDP is expected to grow by 4.1% pa to COP19,208.4mn (1.8% of GDP) by 2024.\nEco-tourism.\nEco-tourism is very promising in Colombia. Colombia has vast coastlines, mountainous areas, and tropical jungles. There are volcanoes and waterfalls as well. This makes Colombia a biodiverse country with many attractions for foreign visitors.\nThe Colombian coffee growing axis (Spanish: Eje Cafetero), also known as the Coffee Triangle (Spanish: Tri\u00e1ngulo del Caf\u00e9), is a part of the Colombian Paisa region in the rural area of Colombia, which is famous for growing and production of a majority of Colombian coffee, considered by some as the best coffee in the world. There are three departments in the area: Caldas, Quind\u00edo and Risaralda. These departments are among the smallest departments in Colombia with a total combined area of 13873\u00a0km2 (5356\u00a0mi2), about 1.2% of the Colombian territory. The combined population is 2,291,195 (2005 census).\nTransportation and telecommunications.\nColombia's geography, with three cordilleras of the Andes running up the country from south to north, and jungle in the Amazon and Dari\u00e9n regions, represents a major obstacle to the development of national road networks with international connections. Thus, the basic nature of the country's transportation infrastructure is not surprising. In the spirit of the 1991 constitution, in 1993 the Ministry of Public\nWorks and Transportation was reorganized and renamed the Ministry of Transportation. In 2000 the new ministry strengthened its role as the planner and regulator within the sector.\nAir transportation.\nColombia was a pioneer in promoting airlines in an effort to overcome its geographic barriers to transportation. The Colombian Company of Air Navigation, formed in 1919, was the second commercial airline in the world. It was not until the 1940s that Colombia's air transportation began growing significantly in the number of companies, passengers carried, and kilometers covered. In the early 2000s, an average of 72 percent of the passengers transported by air go to national destinations, while 28 percent travel internationally. One notable feature is that after the reforms of the beginning of the 1990s, the number of international passengers tripled by 2003. In 1993 the construction, administration, operation, and maintenance of the main airports transferred to departmental authorities and the private sector, including companies specializing in air transportation. Within this process, in 2006 the International Airport Operator (Opain), a Swiss-Colombian consortium, won the concession to manage and develop Bogot\u00e1's El Dorado International Airport. El Dorado is the largest airport in Latin America in terms of cargo traffic (33rd worldwide), with 622,145 metric tons in 2013, second in terms of traffic movements (45th worldwide) and third in terms of passengers (50th among the busiest airports in the world). In addition to El Dorado, Colombia's international airports are Palo Negro in Bucaramanga, Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar in Santa Marta, Cortissoz in Barranquilla, Rafael N\u00fa\u00f1ez in Cartagena, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda C\u00f3rdova in Rionegro near Medell\u00edn, Alfonso Bonilla Arag\u00f3n in Cali, Alfredo V\u00e1squez Cobo in Leticia, Mateca\u00f1a in Pereira, Gustavo Rojas Pinilla in San Andr\u00e9s, and Camilo Daza in C\u00facuta. In 2006 Colombia was generally reported to have a total of 984 airports, of which 103 had paved runways and 883 were unpaved. The Ministry of Transportation listed 581 airports in 2007, but it may have used a different methodology for counting them.\nPoverty and inequality.\nAfter a large crisis in 1999, poverty in Colombia has had a decreasing trend. The share of Colombians below the income-based poverty line fell from 50% in 2002 to 28% in 2016. The share of Colombians below the extreme income-based poverty line fell from 18% to 9% in the same period. Multidimensional poverty fell from 30% to 18% between 2010 and 2016.\nColombia has a Gini coefficient of 51.7."}
{"id": "5840", "revid": "76", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5840", "title": "Communications in Colombia", "text": "Since being liberalized in 1991, the Colombian telecommunications sector has added new services, expanded coverage, improved efficiency, and lowered costs. The sector has had the second largest (after energy) investment in infrastructure (54 percent) since 1997. However, the economic downturn between 1999 and 2002 adversely affected telecommunications. During this period, Colombia's telecommunications industry lost US$2 billion despite a profit of US$1 billion in local service. In June 2003, the government liquidated the state-owned and heavily indebted National Telecommunications Company (Empresa Nacional de Telecomunicaciones\u2014Telecom) and replaced it with Colombia Telecomunicaciones (Colombia Telecom). The measure enabled the industry to expand rapidly, and in 2004 it constituted 2.8 percent of gross domestic product (GDP). Telef\u00f3nica of Spain acquired 50 percent plus one share of the company in 2006.\nAs a result of increasing competition, Colombia has a relatively modern telecommunications infrastructure that primarily serves larger towns and cities. Colombia's telecommunication system includes access to 8 different international Submarine cable systems, INTELSAT, 11 domestic satellite Earth stations, and a nationwide microwave radio relay system.\nTelephones.\nThe country's teledensity (the density of telephone lines in a community) is relatively high for Latin America (17 percent in 2006). However, there is a steep imbalance between rural and urban areas, with some regions below 10 percent and the big cities exceeding 30 percent. Bogot\u00e1, Medell\u00edn, and Cali account for about 50 percent of telephone lines in use. By the end of 2005, the number of telephone main lines in use totaled 7,851,649. Colombia Telecom accounted for only about 31 percent of these lines; 27 other operators accounted for the rest.\nColombia's mobile market is one of the fastest-growing businesses in the country. In mid-2004 mobile telephones overtook fixed lines in service for the first time. By 2005 Colombia had the highest mobile phone density (90 percent) in Latin America, as compared with the region's average density of 70 percent. The number of mobile telephone subscribers totaled an estimated 31 million in 2007, as compared to 21.8 million in 2005 and 6.8 million in 2001.\nRadio and television.\nIn late 2004, Radio Televisi\u00f3n Nacional de Colombia (RTVC) replaced the liquidated Inravisi\u00f3n (Instituto Nacional de Radio y Televisi\u00f3n) as the government-run radio and television broadcasting service, which oversees three national television stations and five radio companies (which operate about a dozen principal networks). Colombia has about 60 television stations, including seven low-power stations. In 2000 the population had about 11.9 million television receivers in use. Of the approximately 515 radio stations, 454 are AM; 34, FM; and 27, shortwave.\nUndersea Cables.\nAs of 2016, Colombia has access to the following international Submarine cable systems: SAC/LAN, Maya-1, AMX-1, Pan Am, SAm-1, ARCOS-1, CFX-1, and PCCS. These cables land at 4 locations in the Caribbean: Barranquilla, Cartagena, Riohacha, and Tolu. One cable lands on the Pacific Ocean coast at Buenaventura, Valle del Cauca.\nInternet.\nColombia is still far behind Brazil, Mexico, and Argentina in terms of online usage. It had an estimated total of 900,000 Internet subscribers by the end of 2005, a figure that equated to 4,739,000 Internet users, or 11.5 percent of the 2005 population (10.9 per 100 inhabitants). By late 2009 39% of households had internet access Colombia had 581,877 Internet hosts in 2006. Although as many as 70 percent of Colombians accessed the Internet over their ordinary telephone lines, dial-up access is losing ground to broadband. In 2005 Colombia had 345,000 broadband subscriber lines, or one per 100 inhabitants. In 2006 the number of personal computers per 1,000 people increased to an estimated 87 per 1,000 inhabitants, a rate still below that in other large Latin American economies. The internet country code is .co."}
{"id": "5841", "revid": "5229428", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5841", "title": "Transport in Colombia", "text": "Transport in Colombia is regulated by the Ministry of Transport.\nRoad travel is the main means of transport; 69 percent of cargo is transported by road, as compared with 27 percent by railroad, 3 percent by internal waterways, and 1 percent by air.\nHistory.\nIndigenous peoples influence.\nThe indigenous peoples in Colombia used and some continue to use the water ways as the way of transportation using rafts and canoes.\nSpanish influence.\nWith the arrival of the Europeans the Spaniards brought the horses, mules and donkey (which developed into the \"Paso Fino\") used by them in ranching duties later in the Spanish colonization of the Americas. Horses contributed greatly to the transport of the Spanish conquerors and colonizers. They also introduced the wheel, and brought wooden carts and carriages to facilitate their transport. The Spaniards also developed the first roads, rudimentary and most of these in the Caribbean region. Due to the rough terrain of Colombia communications between regions was difficult and affected the effectiveness of the central government creating isolation in some regions. Maritime navigation developed locally after Spain lifted its restrictions on ports within the Spanish Empire inducing mercantilism. Spanish also transported African slaves and forcedly migrated many indigenous tribes throughout Colombia.\nPost-independence.\nWith the independence and the influences of the European Industrial Revolution the main way of transport in Colombia became the navigation mainly through the Magdalena River which connected Honda in inland Colombia, with Barranquilla by the Caribbean sea to the trade with the United States and Europe. This also brought a large wave of immigrants from European and Middle Eastern countries. The industrialization process and transportation in Colombia were affected by the internal civil wars that surged after the independence from Spain and that continued throughout the 19th and 20th centuries.\nStandardization.\nDuring the late 19th century European and American companies introduced railways to carry to the ports the local production of raw materials intended for exports and also imports from Europe. Steam ships began carrying Colombians, immigrants and goods from Europe and the United States over the Magdalena River.\nThe Ministry of Transport was created in 1905 during the Presidency of Rafael Reyes under the name of \" Ministerio de Obras P\u00fablicas y Transporte\" or Ministry of Public Works and Transport with the main function of taking care of national assets issues, including mines, oil (fuel), patents and trade marks, railways, roads, bridges, national buildings and land without landowners.\nIn the early 20th century roads and highways maintenance and construction regulations were established. Rivers were cleaned, dragged and channeled and the navigational industry was organized. The Public works districts were created, as well as the Ferrocarriles Nacionales de Colombia (National Railways of Colombia). Among other major projects developed were the aqueduct of Bogot\u00e1, La Regadera Dam and the Vitelma Water Treatment Plant. The Ministry also created the National Institute of Transit (from the Spanish \"Instituto Nacional de Tr\u00e1nsito\"), (INTRA) under the Transport and tariffs Directorate and was in charge of designing the first National roads plan with the support of many foreign multinational construction companies.\nAviation was born in Barranquilla with the creation of SCADTA in 1919 a joint venture between Colombians and Germans that delivered mail to the main cities of Colombia which later merged with SACO to form Avianca.\nInfrastructure.\nRailways.\nColombia has of rail lines, of which are gauge and of which are gauge. However, only of lines are still in use. Rail transport in Colombia remains underdeveloped. The national railroad system, once the country's main mode of transport for freight, has been neglected in favor of road development and now accounts for only about a quarter of freight transport. Passenger-rail use was suspended in 1992 resumed at the end of the 1990s, and as of 2017 it is considered abandoned (at least for long distances). Fewer than 165,000 passenger journeys were made in 1999, as compared with more than 5 million in 1972, and the figure was only 160,130 in 2005. The two still-functioning passenger trains are: one between Puerto Berr\u00edo and Garc\u00eda Cadena, and another one between Bogot\u00e1 and Zipaquir\u00e1. Short sections of railroad, mainly the Bogot\u00e1-Atlantic rim, are used to haul goods, mostly coal, to the Caribbean and Pacific ports. In 2005 a total of 27.5 million metric tons of cargo were transported by rail. Although the nation's rail network links seven of the country's 10 major cities, very little of it has been used regularly because of security concerns, lack of maintenance, and the power of the road transport union. During 2004\u20136, approximately 2,000 kilometers of the country's rail lines underwent refurbishment. This upgrade involved two main projects: the 1,484-kilometer line linking Bogot\u00e1 to the Caribbean Coast and the 499-kilometer Pacific coastal network that links the industrial city of Cali and the surrounding coffee-growing region to the port of Buenaventura.\nRoads.\nThe three main north\u2013south highways are the Caribbean, Eastern, and Central Trunk Highways (troncales). Estimates of the length of Colombia's road system in 2004 ranged from 115,000 kilometers to 145,000 kilometers, of which fewer than 15 percent were paved. However, according to 2005 data reported by the Colombian government, the road network totaled 163,000 kilometers, 68 percent of which were paved and in good condition. The increase may reflect some newly built roads. President Uribe has vowed to pave more than 2,500 kilometers of roads during his administration, and about 5,000 kilometers of new secondary roads were being built in the 2003\u20136 period. Despite serious terrain obstacles, almost three-quarters of all cross-border dry cargo is now transported by road, 105,251 metric tons in 2005.\nHighways are managed by the Colombian Ministry of Transport through the National Roads Institute. The security of the highways in Colombia is managed by the Highway Police unit of the Colombian National Police. Colombia is crossed by the Panamerican Highway.\nPorts, waterways, and merchant marine.\nSeaports handle around 80 percent of international cargo. In 2005 a total of 105,251 metric tons of cargo were transported by water. Colombia's most important ocean terminals are Barranquilla, Cartagena, and Santa Marta on the Caribbean Coast and Buenaventura and Tumaco on the Pacific Coast. Exports mostly pass through the Caribbean ports of Cartagena and Santa Marta, while 65 percent of imports arrive at the port of Buenaventura. Other important ports and harbors are Bah\u00eda de Portete, Leticia, Puerto Bol\u00edvar, San Andr\u00e9s, Santa Marta, and Turbo. Since privatization was implemented in 1993, the efficiency of port handling has increased greatly. Privatization, however, has had negative impacts as well. In Buenaventura, for example, privatization of the harbor has increased unemployment and social issues. There are plans to construct a deep-water port at Bah\u00eda Solano.\nThe main inland waterways total about 18,200 kilometers, 11,000 kilometers of which are navigable by riverboats. A well-developed and important form of transport for both cargo and passengers, inland waterways transport approximately 3.8 million metric tons of freight and more than 5.5 million passengers annually. Main inland waterways are the Magdalena\u2013Cauca River system, which is navigable for 1,500 kilometers; the Atrato, which is navigable for 687 kilometers; the Orinoco system of more than five navigable rivers, which total more than 4,000 kilometers of potential navigation (mainly through Venezuela); and the Amazonas system, which has four main rivers totaling 3,000 navigable kilometers (mainly through Brazil). The government is planning an ambitious program to more fully utilize the main rivers for transport. In addition, the navy's riverine brigade has been patrolling waterways more aggressively in order to establish safer river transport in the more remote areas in the south and east of the country.\nThe merchant marine totals 17 ships (1,000 gross registered tons or more), including four bulk, 13 cargo, one container, one liquefied gas, and three petroleum tanker ships. Colombia also has seven ships registered in other countries (Antigua and Barbuda, two; Panama, five).\nCivil Aviation.\nThe Special Administrative Unit of Civil Aeronautics is responsible of regulating and controlling the use of air space by civil aviation. The customs/immigration issues are controlled by the Departamento Administrativo de Seguridad (DAS).\nColombia has well-developed air routes and an estimated total of 984 airports, 100 of which have paved runways, plus two heliports. Of the 74 main airports, 20 can accommodate jet aircraft. Two airports are more than 3,047 meters in length, nine are 2,438\u20133,047 meters, 39 are 1,524\u20132,437 meters, 38 are 914\u20131,523 meters, 12 are shorter than 914 meters, and 880 have unpaved runways. The government has been selling its stake in local airports in order to allow their privatization. The country has 40 regional airports, and the cities of Bogot\u00e1, Medell\u00edn, Cali, Barranquilla, Bucaramanga, Cartagena, C\u00facuta, Leticia, Pereira, Armenia, San Andr\u00e9s, and Santa Marta have international airports. Bogot\u00e1's El Dorado International Airport handles 550 million metric tons of cargo and 22 million passengers a year, making it the largest airport in Latin America in terms of cargo and the third largest in passenger numbers.\nUrban transport.\nUrban transport systems have been developed in Bogot\u00e1, Medell\u00edn, Cali and Barranquilla. Traffic congestion in Bogot\u00e1 has been greatly exacerbated by the lack of rail transport. However, this problem has been alleviated somewhat by the development of one of the world's largest and highest capacity bus rapid transit (BRT) systems, known as the TransMilenio (opened 2000), and the restriction of vehicles through a daily, rotating ban on private cars depending on plate numbers. Bogot\u00e1's system consists of bus and minibus services managed by both private- and public-sector enterprises. Since 1995 Medell\u00edn has had a modern urban railway referred to as the Metro de Medell\u00edn, which also connects with the cities of Itag\u00fc\u00ed, Envigado, and Bello. An elevated cable car system, Metrocable, was added in 2004 to link some of Medell\u00edn's poorer mountainous neighborhoods with the Metro de Medell\u00edn. A BRT line called Transmetro began operating in 2011, with a second line added in 2013. Other cities have also installed BRT systems such as Cali with a six line system (opened 2008), Barranquilla with two lines (opened 2010), Bucaramanga with one line (opened 2010), Cartagena with one line (opened 2015) and Pereira with three lines (opened 2006). A light rail line in Barranquilla is planned.\nPipelines.\nColombia has 4,350 kilometers of gas pipelines, 6,134 kilometers of oil pipelines, and 3,140 kilometers of refined-products pipelines. The country has five major oil pipelines, four of which connect with the Caribbean export terminal at Puerto Cove\u00f1as. Until at least September 2005, the United States funded efforts to help protect a major pipeline, the 769-kilometer-long Ca\u00f1o Lim\u00f3n\u2013Puerto Cove\u00f1as pipeline, which carries about 20 percent of Colombia's oil production to Puerto Cove\u00f1as from the guerrilla-infested Arauca region in the eastern Andean foothills and Amazonian jungle. The number of attacks against pipelines began declining substantially in 2002. In 2004 there were only 17 attacks against the Ca\u00f1o Lim\u00f3n\u2013Puerto Cove\u00f1as pipeline, down from 170 in 2001. However, a bombing in February 2005 shut the pipeline for several weeks, and attacks against the electrical gird system that provides energy to the Ca\u00f1o Lim\u00f3n oilfield have continued. New oil pipeline projects with Brazil and Venezuela are underway. In addition, the already strong cross-border trade links between Colombia and Venezuela were solidified in July 2004 with an agreement to build a US$320 million natural gas pipeline between the two countries, to be completed in 2008."}
{"id": "5842", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5842", "title": "Colombia/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "5843", "revid": "1023507129", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5843", "title": "Military Forces of Colombia", "text": "The Military Forces of Colombia () are the unified armed forces of the Republic of Colombia. They consist of the Colombian Army, the Colombian Navy and the Colombian Air Force. The National Police of Colombia, although technically not part of the military, is controlled and administered by the Ministry of National Defence, and national conscription also includes service in the National Police, thus making it a \"de facto\" gendarmerie and a branch of the military. The President of Colombia is the military's commander in chief, and helps formulate defense policy through the Ministry of National Defence, which is in charge of day-to-day operations.\nThe Military Forces of Colombia have their roots in the Army of the Commoners (), which was formed on 7 August 1819 \u2013 before the establishment of the present day Colombia \u2013 to meet the demands of the Revolutionary War against the Spanish Empire. After their triumph in the war, the Army of the Commoners disbanded, and the Congress of Angostura created the Gran Colombian Army to replace it, thus establishing the first military service branch of the country.\nThe Colombian military was operationally involved in World War II and was the only Latin American country to send troops to the Korean War. Ever since the advent of the Colombian Conflict, the Colombian military has been involved in combat, pacification, counter-insurgency, and drug interdiction operations all over the country's national territory. Recently it has participated in counter-piracy efforts in the Horn of Africa under Operation Ocean Shield and Operation Atlanta.\nThe military of Colombia is the third largest in the Western Hemisphere in terms of active personnel and has the fourth largest expenditure in the Americas, behind the United States Armed Forces, the Canadian Armed Forces and the Brazilian Armed Forces respectively.\nServices.\nThe Colombian Constitution includes two overlapping definitions of what could be defined as 'armed forces' in English:\nThis is a subtle yet important distinction, both in terms of emphasizing the civil nature of the National Police, but also adapting the national police to function as a paramilitary force which can perform military duties as a result of the Colombian Conflict. This has led to some of the most important police units adopting military training and conducting special operations alongside the Colombian Army, Air Force, and Navy. Therefore, the functions of the Colombian Police in practical terms are similar to those of a gendarmerie, like the Spanish Civil Guard and the Carabineros de Chile, which maintain military ranks for all police personnel.\nPersonnel.\nThe Colombian armed forces consist of: \nMilitary Forces:\nAnd, \nPublic Force strength as of April 2014.\nMilitary strength \nFunding.\nIn 2000, Colombia assigned 3.9% of its GDP to defense. By 2008 this figure had risen to 4.8%, ranking it 14th in the world. The armed forces number about 250,000 uniformed personnel: 145,000 military and 105,000 police. These figures do not include assistance personnel such as cooks, medics, mechanics, and so on. This makes the Colombian military one of the largest and most well-equipped in Latin America. Many Colombian military personnel have received military training assistance directly in Colombia and also in the United States. The United States has provided equipment and financing to the Colombian military and police through the military assistance program, foreign military sales, and the international narcotics control program, all currently united under the auspices of Plan Colombia."}
{"id": "5844", "revid": "1023393805", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5844", "title": "History of Colombia", "text": "The history of Colombia includes the settlements and society by indigenous peoples, most notably, the Muisca Confederation, Quimbaya Civilization, and Tairona Chiefdoms; the Spanish arrived in 1499 and initiated a period of annexation and colonization, most noteworthy being Spanish conquest of the Muisca; ultimately creating the Viceroyalty of New Granada, with its capital at Bogot\u00e1. Independence from Spain was won in 1819, but by 1830 the \"Gran Colombia\" Federation was dissolved. What is now Colombia and Panama emerged as the Republic of New Granada. The new nation experimented with federalism as the Granadine Confederation (1858), and then the United States of Colombia (1863), before the Republic of Colombia was finally declared in 1886; as well as constant political violence in the country. Panama seceded in 1903. Since the 1960s, the country has suffered from an asymmetric low-intensity armed conflict, which escalated in the 1990s, but then decreased from 2005 onward. The legacy of Colombia's history has resulted in a rich cultural heritage; while varied geography, and the imposing landscape of the country has resulted in the development of very strong regional identities.\nPre-Colombian period.\nFrom approximately 12,000 years BP onwards, hunter-gatherer societies existed near present-day Bogot\u00e1 (at El Abra and Tequendama), and they traded with one another and with cultures living in the Magdalena River valley. Due to its location, the present territory of Colombia was a corridor of early human migration from Mesoamerica and the Caribbean to the Andes and the Amazon basin. The oldest archaeological finds are from the Pubenza archaeological site and El Totumo archaeological site in the Magdalena Valley southwest of Bogot\u00e1. These sites date from the Paleoindian period (18,000\u20138000 BCE). At Puerto Hormiga archaeological site and other sites, traces from the Archaic period in South America (~8000\u20132000 BCE) have been found. Vestiges indicate that there was also early occupation in the regions of El Abra, Tibit\u00f3 and Tequendama in Cundinamarca. The oldest pottery discovered in the Americas, found at San Jacinto archaeological site, dates to 5000\u20134000 BCE.\nIndigenous people inhabited the territory that is now Colombia by 10,500 BCE. Nomadic hunter-gatherer tribes at the El Abra and Tequendama sites near present-day Bogot\u00e1 traded with one another and with other cultures from the Magdalena River Valley.\nSerran\u00eda La Lindosa, a mountainous region of Guaviare Department is known for an extensive prehistoric rock art site which stretches for nearly eight miles. The site, near to the\u00a0 Guayabero River was discovered in 2019, but was not revealed to the public until 2020. There are tens of thousands of paintings of animals and humans created up to 12,500 BP. Images of now-extinct ice age animals, such as the mastodon, helped date the site. Other ice-age animals depicted include the palaeolama, giant sloths and ice age horses. The site has gone undiscovered because of an conflict between the government and the Farc. The remote site is a two-hour drive from San Jos\u00e9 del Guaviare, followed by a four hour trek. The site was discovered by a team from National University of Colombia, University of Antioquia and the University of Exeter as part of a project funded by European Research Council as part of the Horizon 2020 Framework Programmes for Research and Technological Development. The site is to be featured in episode 2 of the Channel 4 series, Jungle Mystery: Lost Kingdoms of the Amazon, on 12 December 2020.\nBetween 5000 and 1000 BCE, hunter-gatherer tribes transitioned to agrarian societies; fixed settlements were established, and pottery appeared. Beginning in the 1st millennium BCE, groups of Amerindians including the Muisca, Quimbaya, Tairona, Calima, Zen\u00fa, Tierradentro, San Agust\u00edn, Tolima, and Urab\u00e1 became skilled in farming, mining, and metalcraft; and some developed the political system of \"cacicazgos\" with a pyramidal structure of power headed by caciques. The Muisca inhabited mainly the area of what is now the Departments of Boyac\u00e1 and Cundinamarca high plateau (\"Altiplano Cundiboyacense\") where they formed the Muisca Confederation. The Muisca had one of the most developed political systems (Muisca Confederation) in South America, surpassed only by the Incas. They farmed maize, potato, quinoa and cotton, and traded gold, emeralds, blankets, ceramic handicrafts, coca and especially salt with neighboring nations. The Tairona inhabited northern Colombia in the isolated Andes mountain range of Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta. The Quimbaya inhabited regions of the Cauca River Valley between the Western and Central Ranges. The Incas expanded their empire on the southwest part of the country.\nSpanish annexation.\nPre-Columbian history.\nEuropeans first visited the territory that became Colombia in 1499 when the first expedition of Alonso de Ojeda arrived at the Cabo de la Vela. The Spanish made several attempts to settle along the north coast of today's Colombia in the early 16th century, but their first permanent settlement, at Santa Marta, dates from 1525. The Spanish commander Pedro de Heredia founded Cartagena on June 1, 1533 in the former location of the indigenous Caribbean Calamar\u00ed village. Cartagena grew rapidly, fueled first by the gold in the tombs of the Sin\u00fa Culture, and later by trade. The thirst for gold and land lured Spanish explorers to visit Chibchan-speaking areas; resulting in the Spanish conquest of the Chibchan Nations - the conquest by the Spanish monarchy of the Chibcha language-speaking nations, mainly the Muisca and Tairona who inhabited present-day Colombia, beginning the Spanish colonization of the Americas.\nThe Spanish advance inland from the Caribbean coast began independently from three different directions, under Jimen\u00e9z de Ques\u00e1da, Sebasti\u00e1n de Benalc\u00e1zar (known in Colombia as Belalc\u00e1zar) and Nikolaus Federmann. Although all three were drawn by the Indian treasures, none intended to reach Muisca territory, where they finally met.\nIn August 1538, Ques\u00e1da founded Santa Fe de Bogot\u00e1 on the site of Muisca village of Bacat\u00e1.\nIn 1549, the institution of the Spanish Royal Audiencia in Bogot\u00e1 gave that city the status of capital of New Granada, which comprised in large part what is now the territory of Colombia. In 1717, the Viceroyalty of New Granada was originally created, and then it was temporarily removed, to finally be reestablished in 1739. The Viceroyalty had Santa F\u00e9 de Bogot\u00e1 as its capital. This Viceroyalty included some other provinces of northwestern South America which had previously been under the jurisdiction of the Viceroyalties of New Spain or Peru and correspond mainly to today's Venezuela, Ecuador and Panama. So, Bogot\u00e1 became one of the principal administrative centers of the Spanish possessions in the New World, along with Lima and Mexico City.\nGran Colombia: independence achieved.\nFrom then on, the long independence struggle was led mainly by Bol\u00edvar and Francisco de Paula Santander in neighboring Venezuela. Bol\u00edvar returned to New Granada only in 1819 after establishing himself as leader of the pro-independence forces in the Venezuelan \"llanos\". From there he led an army over the Andes and captured New Granada after a quick campaign that ended at the Battle of Boyac\u00e1, on August 7, 1819. (\"For more information, see Military career of Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar\".)\nThat year, the Congress of Angostura established the Republic of Gran Colombia, which included all territories under the jurisdiction of the former Viceroyalty of New Granada. Bol\u00edvar was elected the first president of Gran Colombia and Santander, vice president.\nAs the Federation of Gran Colombia was dissolved in 1830, the Department of Cundinamarca (as established in Angostura) became a new country, the Republic of New Granada.\nThe Republic: Liberal and Conservative Conflict.\nIn 1863 the name of the Republic was changed officially to \"United States of Colombia\", and in 1886 the country adopted its present name: \"Republic of Colombia\".\nTwo political parties grew out of conflicts between the followers of Bol\u00edvar and Santander and their political visions\u2014the Conservatives and the Liberals \u2013 and have since dominated Colombian politics. Bol\u00edvar's supporters, who later formed the nucleus of the Conservative Party, sought strong centralized government, alliance with the Roman Catholic Church, and a limited franchise. Santander's followers, forerunners of the Liberals, wanted a decentralized government, state rather than church control over education and other civil matters, and a broadened suffrage.\nThroughout the 19th and early 20th centuries, each party held the presidency for roughly equal periods of time. Colombia maintained a tradition of civilian government and regular, free elections. The military has seized power three times in Colombia's history: in 1830, after the dissolution of Great Colombia; again in 1854 (by General Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Melo); and from 1953 to 1957 (under General Gustavo Rojas Pinilla). Civilian rule was restored within one year in the first two instances.\nNot withstanding the country's commitment to democratic institutions, Colombia's history has also been characterized by widespread, violent conflict. Two civil wars resulted from bitter rivalry between the Conservative and Liberal parties. The Thousand Days' War (1899\u20131902) cost an estimated 100,000 lives, and up to 300,000 people died during \"La Violencia\" of the late 1940s and 1950s, a bipartisan confrontation which erupted after the assassination of Liberal popular candidate Jorge Eli\u00e9cer Gait\u00e1n. United States activity to influence the area (especially the Panama Canal construction and control) led to a military uprising in the Isthmus Department in 1903, which resulted in the separation and independence of Panama.\nA military coup in 1953 toppled the right-wing government of Conservative Laureano G\u00f3mez and brought General Gustavo Rojas Pinilla to power. Initially, Rojas enjoyed considerable popular support, due largely to his success in reducing \"La Violencia\". When he did not restore democratic rule and occasionally engaged in open repression, however, he was overthrown by the military in 1957 with the backing of both political parties, and a provisional government was installed.\nThe National Front regime (1958\u20131974).\nIn July 1957, former Conservative President Laureano G\u00f3mez (1950\u20131953) and former Liberal President Alberto Lleras (1945\u20131946, 1958\u20131962) issued the \"Declaration of Sitges,\" in which they proposed a \"National Front,\" whereby the Liberal and Conservative parties would govern jointly. The presidency would be determined by an alternating conservative and liberal president every 4 years for 16 years; the two parties would have parity in all other elective offices.\nThe National Front ended \"La Violencia\", and National Front administrations attempted to institute far-reaching social and economic reforms in cooperation with the Alliance for Progress. In particular, the Liberal president Alberto Lleras Camargo (1958\u20131962) created the Colombian Institute for Agrarian Reform (INCORA), and Carlos Lleras Restrepo (1966\u20131970) further developed land entitlement. In 1968 and 1969 alone, the INCORA issued more than 60,000 land titles to farmers and workers.\nIn the end, the contradictions between each successive Liberal and Conservative administration made the results decidedly mixed. Despite the progress in certain sectors, many social and political injustices continued.\nThe National Front system itself eventually began to be seen as a form of political repression by dissidents and even many mainstream voters, and many protesters were victimized during this period. Especially after what was later confirmed as the fraudulent election of Conservative candidate Misael Pastrana in 1970, which resulted in the defeat of the relatively populist candidate and former President (dictator) Gustavo Rojas Pinilla. The M-19 guerrilla movement, \"Movimiento 19 de Abril\" (19 April Movement), would eventually be founded in part as a response to this particular event. The FARC was formed in 1964 by Manuel Marulanda V\u00e9lez and other Marxist\u2013Leninist supporters, after a military attack on the community of Marquetalia.\nAlthough the system established by the Sitges agreement was phased out by 1974, the 1886 Colombian constitution \u2014 in effect until 1991\u2014required that the losing political party be given adequate and equitable participation in the government which, according to many observers and later analysis, eventually resulted in some increase in corruption and legal relaxation. The current 1991 constitution does not have that requirement, but subsequent administrations have tended to include members of opposition parties.\nPost-National Front.\nFrom 1974 until 1982, different presidential administrations chose to focus on ending the persistent insurgencies that sought to undermine Colombia's traditional political system. Both groups claimed to represent the poor and weak against the rich and powerful classes of the country, demanding the completion of true land and political reform, from an openly Communist perspective.\nBy 1974, another challenge to the state's authority and legitimacy had come from 19th of April Movement (M-19), a mostly urban guerrilla group founded in response to an alleged electoral fraud during the final National Front election of Misael Pastrana Borrero (1970\u20131974) and the defeat of former dictator Gustavo Rojas Pinilla. Initially, the M-19 attracted a degree of attention and sympathy from mainstream Colombians that the FARC and National Liberation Army (ELN) had found largely elusive earlier due to extravagant and daring operations, such as stealing a sword that had belonged to Colombia's Independence hero Simon Bol\u00edvar. At the same time, its larger profile soon made it the focus of the state's counterinsurgency efforts.\nThe ELN guerrilla had been seriously crippled by military operations in the region of Anor\u00ed by 1974, but it managed to reconstitute itself and escape destruction, in part due to the administration of Alfonso L\u00f3pez Michelsen (1974\u20131978) allowing it to escape encirclement, hoping to initiate a peace process with the group.\nBy 1982, the perceived passivity of the FARC, together with the relative success of the government's efforts against the M-19 and ELN, enabled the administration of the Liberal Party's Julio C\u00e9sar Turbay (1978\u20131982) to lift a state-of-siege decree that had been in effect, on and off, for most of the previous 30 years. Under the latest such decree, president Turbay had implemented security policies that, though of some military value against the M-19 in particular, were considered highly questionable both inside and outside Colombian circles due to numerous accusations of military human rights abuses against suspects and captured guerrillas.\nCitizen exhaustion due to the conflict's newfound intensity led to the election of president Belisario Betancur (1982\u20131986), a Conservative who won 47% of the popular vote, directed peace feelers at all the insurgents, and negotiated a 1984 cease-fire with the FARC and M-19 after a 1982 release of many guerrillas imprisoned during the previous effort to overpower them. The ELN rejected entering any negotiation and continued to recover itself through the use of extortions and threats, in particular against foreign oil companies of European and U.S. origin.\nAs these events were developing, the growing illegal drug trade and its consequences were also increasingly becoming a matter of widespread importance to all participants in the Colombian conflict. Guerrillas and newly wealthy drug lords had mutually uneven relations and thus numerous incidents occurred between them. Eventually, the kidnapping of drug cartel family members by guerrillas led to the creation of the 1981 \"Muerte a Secuestradores\" (MAS) death squad (\"Death to Kidnappers\"). Pressure from the U.S. government and critical sectors of Colombian society was met with further violence, as the Medell\u00edn Cartel and its hitmen, bribed or murdered numerous public officials, politicians and others who stood in its way by supporting the implementation of extradition of Colombian nationals to the U.S. Victims of cartel violence included Justice Minister Rodrigo Lara, whose assassination in 1984 made the Betancur administration begin to directly oppose the drug lords.\nThe first negotiated cease-fire with the M-19 ended when the guerrillas resumed fighting in 1985, claiming that the cease-fire had not been fully respected by official security forces, saying that several of its members had suffered threats and assaults, and also questioning the government's real willingness to implement any accords. The Betancur administration, in turn, questioned the M-19's actions and its commitment to the peace process, as it continued to advance high-profile negotiations with the FARC, which led to the creation of the Patriotic Union (Colombia) (UP), a legal and non-clandestine political organization.\nOn November 6, 1985, the M-19 stormed the Colombian Palace of Justice and held the Supreme Court magistrates hostage, intending to put president Betancur on trial. In the ensuing crossfire that followed the military's reaction, scores of people lost their lives, as did most of the guerrillas, including several high-ranking operatives. Both sides blamed each other for the outcome.\nMeanwhile, individual FARC members initially joined the UP leadership in representation of the guerrilla command, though most of the guerrilla's chiefs and militiamen did not demobilize nor disarm, as that was not a requirement of the process at that point in time. Tension soon significantly increased, as both sides began to accuse each other of not respecting the cease-fire. Political violence against FARC and UP members (including presidential candidate Jaime Pardo) was blamed on drug lords and also on members of the security forces (to a much lesser degree on the argued inaction of Betancur administration). Members of the government and security authorities increasingly accused the FARC of continuing to recruit guerrillas, as well as kidnapping, extorting and politically intimidating voters even as the UP was already participating in politics.\nThe Virgilio Barco (1986\u20131990) administration, in addition to continuing to handle the difficulties of the complex negotiations with the guerrillas, also inherited a particularly chaotic confrontation against the drug lords, who were engaged in a campaign of terrorism and murder in response to government moves in favor of their extradition overseas. The UP also suffered an increasing number of losses during this term (including the assassination of presidential candidate Bernardo Jaramillo), which stemmed both from private proto-paramilitary organizations, increasingly powerful drug lords and a number of would-be paramilitary-sympathizers within the armed forces.\nPost-1990.\nFollowing administrations had to contend with the guerrillas, paramilitaries, narcotics traffickers and the violence and corruption that they all perpetuated, both through force and negotiation. Narcoterrorists assassinated three presidential candidates before C\u00e9sar Gaviria was elected in 1990. Since the death of Medell\u00edn cartel leader Pablo Escobar in a police shootout during December 1993, indiscriminate acts of violence associated with that organization have abated as the \"cartels\" have broken up into multiple, smaller and often-competing trafficking organizations. Nevertheless, violence continues as these drug organizations resort to violence as part of their operations but also to protest government policies, including extradition.\nThe M-19 and several smaller guerrilla groups were successfully incorporated into a peace process as the 1980s ended and the 1990s began, which culminated in the elections for a Constituent Assembly of Colombia that would write a new constitution, which took effect in 1991. The new Constitution, brought about a considerable number of institutional and legal reforms based on principles that the delegates considered as more modern, humanist, democratic and politically open than those in the 1886 constitution. Practical results were mixed and mingled emerged (such as the debate surrounding the constitutional prohibition of extradition, which later was reversed), but together with the reincorporation of some of the guerrilla groups to the legal political framework, the new Constitution inaugurated an era that was both a continuation and a gradual, but significant, departure from what had come before.\nContacts with the FARC, which had irregularly continued despite the generalized de facto interruptions of the ceasefire and the official 1987 break from negotiations, were temporarily cut off in 1990 under the presidency of C\u00e9sar Gaviria (1990\u20131994). The Colombian Army's assault on the FARC's \"Casa Verde\" sanctuary at La Uribe, Meta, followed by a FARC offensive that sought to undermine the deliberations of the Constitutional Assembly, began to highlight a significant break in the uneven negotiations carried over from the previous decade.\nPresident Ernesto Samper assumed office in August 1994. However, a political crisis relating to large-scale contributions from drug traffickers to Samper's presidential campaign diverted attention from governance programs, thus slowing, and in many cases, halting progress on the nation's domestic reform agenda. The military also suffered several setbacks in its fight against the guerrillas, when several of its rural bases began to be overrun and a record number of soldiers and officers were taken prisoner by the FARC (which since 1982 was attempting to implement a more \"conventional\" style of warfare, seeking to eventually defeat the military in the field).\nOn August 7, 1998, Andr\u00e9s Pastrana was sworn in as the President of Colombia. A member of the Conservative Party, Pastrana defeated Liberal Party candidate Horacio Serpa in a run-off election marked by high voter turnout and little political unrest. The new president's program was based on a commitment to bring about a peaceful resolution of Colombia's longstanding civil conflict and to cooperate fully with the United States to combat the trafficking of illegal drugs.\nWhile early initiatives in the Colombian peace process gave reason for optimism, the Pastrana administration also has had to combat high unemployment and other economic problems, such as the fiscal deficit and the impact of global financial instability on Colombia. During his administration, unemployment has risen to over 20%. Additionally, the growing severity of countrywide guerrilla attacks by the FARC and ELN, and smaller movements, as well as the growth of drug production, corruption and the spread of even more violent paramilitary groups such as the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) has made it difficult to solve the country's problems.\nAlthough the FARC and ELN accepted participation in the peace process, they did not make explicit commitments to end the conflict. The FARC suspended talks in November 2000, to protest what it called \"paramilitary terrorism\" but returned to the negotiating table in February 2001, following 2 days of meetings between President Pastrana and FARC leader Manuel Marulanda. The Colombian Government and ELN in early 2001 continued discussions aimed at opening a formal peace process.\nFrom 2004 and on.\nBy 2004, the security situation of Colombia had shown some measure of an improvement and the economy, while still fragile, had also shown some positive signs. On the other hand, relatively little had been accomplished in structurally solving most of the country's other grave problems, in part due to legislative and political conflicts between the administration and the Colombian Congress (including those over the controversial 2006 project to give President \u00c1lvaro Uribe the right to be re-elected), and a relative lack of freely allocated funds and credits.\nSome critical observers consider in retrospect that Uribe's policies, while admittedly reducing crime and guerrilla activity, were too slanted in favor of a military solution to Colombia's internal war, neglecting grave social and human rights concerns to a certain extent. They hoped that Uribe's government would make serious efforts towards improving the human rights situation inside the country, protecting civilians and reducing any abuses committed by the armed forces.\nUribe's supporters in turn believed that increased military action was a necessary prelude to any serious negotiation attempt with the guerrillas and that the increased security situation would help the government, in the long term, to focus more actively on reducing most wide-scale abuses and human rights violations on the part of both the armed groups and any rogue security forces that might have links to the paramilitaries. In short, these supporters maintained that the security situation needed to be stabilized in favor of the government before any other social concerns could take precedence. Uribe left the presidency in 2010.\nIn 2010 Juan Manuel Santos was elected president; he was supported by ex-president Uribe, and, in fact, he owed his election mainly through having won over former Uribe supporters. But two years after winning the presidential election, Santos (to widespread surprise) began peace talks with FARC, which took place in Havana. Re-elected in 2014, Santos revived an important infrastructure program, which in fact had been planned during the Uribe administration. Focused mainly on the provision of national highways, the program was led by former vice-president Germ\u00e1n Vargas Lleras.\nTalks between the government and the guerrillas resulted in the announcement of a peace agreement. However, a referendum to ratify the deal was unsuccessful. Afterward, the Colombian government and the FARC signed a revised peace deal in November 2016, which the Colombian congress approved. In 2016, President Santos was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. The Government began a process of attention and comprehensive reparation for victims of conflict. Colombia under President Santos showed some progress in the struggle to defend human rights, as expressed by HRW. A Special Jurisdiction of Peace was created to investigate, clarify, prosecute and punish serious human rights violations and grave breaches of international humanitarian law which occurred during the armed conflict and to satisfy victims' right to justice. During his visit to Colombia, Pope Francis paid tribute to the victims of the conflict.\nIn May 2018, Ivan Duque, the candidate of right-wing Centro Democr\u00e1tico (Democratic Centre), won the presidential election. On 7 August 2018, he was sworn in as the new President of Columbia.\nColombia's relations with Venezuela have fluctuated due to the ideological differences between both governments. Colombia has offered humanitarian support with food and medicines to mitigate the shortage of supplies in Venezuela. Colombia's Foreign Ministry said that all efforts to resolve Venezuela's crisis should be peaceful. Colombia proposed the idea of the Sustainable Development Goals and a final document was adopted by the United Nations. In February 2019, Venezuelan president Nicol\u00e1s Maduro cut diplomatic relations with Colombia after Colombian President Ivan Duque helped Venezuelan opposition politicians deliver humanitarian aid to their country. Colombia recognized Venezuelan opposition leader Juan Guaido as the country\u2019s legitimate president. In January 2020, Colombia rejected Maduro\u2019s proposal that the two countries restore diplomatic relations."}
{"id": "5845", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5845", "title": "Foreign relations of Colombia", "text": "Colombia seeks diplomatic and commercial relations with all countries, regardless of their ideologies or political or economic systems. For this reason, the Colombian economy is quite open, relying on international trade and following guidelines given by international law.\nSince 2008, Colombia's Ministry of Trade and Commerce has either reached or strengthened Bilateral Trade Agreements with South Korea, Japan and China building stronger commerce interchange and development in the Pacific Rim.\nRegional relations have also vastly improved under the Santos Administration (2010-2018). Issues however remain regarding spillover of the FARC leftist-terrorist group, being chased out of hiding in rural areas of Colombia and finding save-havens in non-monitored areas of bordering states. The FARC numbers have significantly diminished in the last decade to an estimated 5,000-7,000. And while joint-military collaboration has steadily increased with the bordering countries of Brazil, Panama, Peru, and Venezuela, there have been tensions between Colombia and Ecuador regarding the issue. In 2002, the Ecuadorian government closed its main border crossing with Colombia, restricting its hours of operation. Ecuador continues to voice its concerns over an influx of \u00e9migr\u00e9 stemming from guerilla activity at its borders. Evidence has since emerged however, suggesting that a significant number of the FARC's foot-soldiers in and around the Colombia\u2013Ecuador border, consist of Ecuadorian \u00e9migr\u00e9 who joined the leftist terrorist group out of need. Returning Ecuadorian \u00e9migr\u00e9 have faced re-entry restrictions.\nIn 2012, relations with Nicaragua and Venezuela and Ghana were tested over territorial island disputes. Bilateral committees are negotiating the dispute with Venezuela over waters in the Gulf of Venezuela.\nBackground.\nIn 1969, Colombia formed what is now the Andean Community along with Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, and Peru (Venezuela joined in 1973, and Chile left in 1976).\nIn the 1980s, Colombia broadened its bilateral and multilateral relations, joining the Contadora Group, the Group of Eight (now the Rio Group), and the Non-Aligned Movement, which it chaired from 1994 until September 1998. In addition, it has signed free trade agreements with Chile, Mexico, and Venezuela.\nColombia has traditionally played an active role in the United Nations and the Organization of American States and in their subsidiary agencies. Former President C\u00e9sar Gaviria became Secretary General of the OAS in September 1994 and was reelected in 1999. Colombia was a participant in the December 1994 and April 1998 Summits of the Americas and followed up on initiatives developed at the summit by hosting two post-summit, ministerial-level meetings on trade and science and technology.\nColombia regularly participates in international fora, including CICAD, the Organization of American States' body on money laundering, chemical controls, and drug abuse prevention. Although the Colombian Government ratified the 1988 UN Convention on Narcotics in 1994\u2014the last of the Andean governments to do so\u2014it took important reservations, notably to the anti-money-laundering measures, asset forfeiture and confiscation provisions, maritime interdiction, and extradition clauses. Colombia subsequently withdrew some of its reservations, most notably a reservation on extradition.\nInternational relations.\nDisputes \u2013 international.\nMaritime boundary dispute with Venezuela in the Gulf of Venezuela; territorial disputes with Nicaragua over Archipelago de San Andr\u00e9s y Providencia and Quita Sue\u00f1o Bank. The United States disputes sovereignty with Colombia over the Serranilla Bank and the Bajo Nuevo Bank. Quita Sue\u00f1o Bank is claimed by the United States to be a submerged reef, and thus does not recognize the sovereignty of any nation over the bank.\nMembership of international organizations.\nMembership in International Organizations: The major organizations in which Colombia is a member include: the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean, Andean Pact, Caribbean Development Bank, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Group of 3, Group of 11, Group of 24, Group of 77, Inter-American Development Bank, International Atomic Energy Agency, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, International Chamber of Commerce, International Civil Aviation Organization, International Criminal Police Organization, International Development Association, International Finance Corporation, International Fund for Agricultural Development, International Labour Organization, International Maritime Organization, International Maritime Satellite Organization, International Monetary Fund (IMF), International Olympic Committee, International Organization for Migration, International Organization for Standardization, International Telecommunication Union, International Telecommunications Satellite Organization, International Trade Union Confederation, Latin American Economic System, Latin American Integration Association, Non-Aligned Movement, Organization of American States (OAS), Permanent Court of Arbitration, Rio Group, United Nations (UN), UN Conference on Trade and Development, UNESCO, UN Industrial Development Organization, UN Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees, Universal Postal Union, World Confederation of Labour, World Federation of Trade Unions, World Health Organization, World Intellectual Property Organization, World Meteorological Organization, World Tourism Organization, and World Trade Organization. An OAS observer has monitored the government's peace process with the paramilitaries, lending the negotiations much-needed international credibility. The United States helps Colombia secure favorable treatment from the IMF.\nMajor international treaties.\nRegional treaties include the Andean Pact, now known as the Andean Community, which also includes Bolivia, Ecuador, and Peru, the bodies and institutions making up the Andean Integration System (AIS). Colombia has signed free-trade agreements with Chile, Mexico, and Venezuela.\nIts recent trade agreements with Korea, China and Japan, have focused on Economic, and Technical Cooperation between those nations. Within the regional Caribbean Community and Common Market (Caricom), Colombia has also deepened Economic and Medical Science Research collaboration agreements. Colombia has also signed and ratified 105 international treaties or agreements relating to the protection of the environment. These include the Antarctic Treaty and Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and conventions on Biodiversity, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, and Wetlands. It has signed, but not ratified, the Antarctic-Environmental Protocol and conventions on Law of the Sea and Marine Dumping. Colombia also has signed the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the Tlatelolco Treaty. By 1975 signatories to the 1974 Declaration of Ayacucho, of which Colombia was one, had decided on limitations to nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons.\nGaining all 186 votes, Colombia served on the U.N. Security Council from 2011 to 2012 representing Latin American and the Caribbean.\nColombia is also a member of the International Criminal Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the United States-military (as covered under Article 98).\nDomestic politics and foreign policy.\nInternational Relations scholars long emphasized international constraints, and particularly Colombia's relationship with the United States, as central to its foreign policy. In terms of foreign policy process, presidents have broad constitutional authorities, in consultation with their foreign ministers. However, since the 2000s, the influence of other domestic actors in Colombian foreign policy-making has increased. Long, Bitar, and Jim\u00e9nez-Pe\u00f1a examine the role of the Colombian Constitutional Court, congressional politics, social movements, and electoral challengers. They find that Colombian institutions permit increasing challenges to presidential authority, and that in important cases Colombian presidents have been forced to drop their preferred foreign policies.\nEurope.\nUnder the Uribe administration, Colombia's relations with the European Union (EU) have been cordial. Representatives of the EU have been critical of Colombia's antiguerrilla and antidrug strategies in several respects. The EU is particularly concerned about the potential for increased human rights abuses within Colombia at the hands of both government forces and illegal armed groups, and it has continued to distance itself from Plan Colombia. The EU is in favor of a negotiated solution to the nation's internal conflict. EU aid to Colombia has mainly consisted of social, economic and development investments.\nIn 2004, the EU as an entity did not offer unrestricted support for the Uribe government's peace initiative with paramilitaries, citing concerns over the possible lack of a credible and comprehensive peace strategy and its application, but it did approve US$2 million in aid for the process. Individual EU members such Sweden, Italy, Germany and the Netherlands also provided limited support on their own.\nTransnational issues.\nNarcotics &amp; Terrorism.\nBy the 1990s, Colombia had become the world's leading supplier of refined cocaine and a growing source for heroin. More than 90% of the cocaine that entered in the 1990s the United States was produced, processed, or transshipped in Colombia. The cultivation of coca reduced between 1995 and 1999 from 3,020 to , primarily in areas where government control is more active.\nDespite the death of Medell\u00edn cartel drug kingpin Pablo Escobar in 1993 and the arrests of major Cali cartel leaders in 1995 and 1996, Colombian drug cartels remain among the most sophisticated criminal organizations in the world, controlling cocaine processing, international wholesale distribution chains, and markets. In 1999 Colombian police arrested over 30 narcotraffickers, most of them extraditable, in \"Operation Millennium\" involving extensive international cooperation. More arrests were made in a following \"Operation Millennium II.\"\nColombia is engaged in a broad range of narcotics control activities. Through aerial spraying of herbicide and manual eradication, Colombia has attempted to keep coca, opium poppy, and cannabis cultivation from expanding. The government has committed itself to the eradication of all illicit crops, interdiction of drug shipments, and financial controls to prevent money laundering. Alternative development programs were introduced in 1999.\nCorruption and intimidation by traffickers complicate the drug-control efforts of the institutions of government. Colombia passed revised criminal procedures code in 1993 that permits traffickers to surrender and negotiate lenient sentences in return for cooperating with prosecutors. In December 1996 and February 1997, however, the Colombian Congress passed legislation to toughen sentencing, asset forfeiture, and money-laundering penalties.\nIn November 1997, the Colombian Congress amended the constitution to permit the extradition of Colombian nationals, albeit not retroactively. In late 1999, President Pastrana authorized the first extradition in almost 10 years of a Colombian trafficker to stand trial for U.S. crimes. Three such extraditions to the United States have taken place, the most recent in August 2000, with cases against others pending in Colombian courts. Under the Pastrana administration, Plan Colombia was developed and implemented with U.S. backing.\nDuring the presidency of \u00c1lvaro Uribe, the government applied more military pressure on the FARC and other outlawed groups. After the offensive, many security indicators improved. Colombia achieved a great decrease in cocaine production, leading White House drug czar R. Gil Kerlikowske to announce that Colombia is no longer the world's biggest producer of cocaine.\nIn addition to the challenge posed to the United States by Colombian drug trafficking, illegal Colombian immigrants in the United States are an issue in Colombia-U.S. relations. According to figures from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Colombia is the fourth-leading source country of illegal immigration to the United States. According to its estimates, the number of illegal Colombian residents in the United States almost tripled from 51,000 in 1990 to 141,000 in 2000. According to the US Census Bureau, the number of authorized Colombian immigrants in the United States in 2006 was 801,363.\nColombia rejects threats and blackmail of the United States of America after the threat of Donald Trump to decertify the country as a partner in counter-narcotics efforts."}
{"id": "5846", "revid": "1005745713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5846", "title": "Geography of the Czech Republic", "text": "The Czech Republic is a land-locked country in Central Europe. It is bordered by Germany to the west, Austria to the south, Slovakia to the east and Poland to the north. It consists mostly of low hills and plateaus surrounded along the borders by low mountains. Two areas of lowlands follow the Elbe river and the Morava river. About a third of the area of the Czech Republic is covered by forests. \nThe Czech Republic also possesses Moldauhafen, a 30,000 m2 enclave in the middle of Hamburg docks in Germany, which was awarded to Czechoslovakia by Article 363 of the Treaty of Versailles to allow the landlocked country a place where goods transported down river could be transferred to seagoing ships. This territory reverts to Germany in 2028.\nPhysical geography.\nClimate.\nThe Czech Republic's climate is temperate, transitional between an oceanic climate and a continental climate. The summers are rather cool and dry, with average temperatures in most areas around 20 \u00b0C, the winters are fairly mild and wet with temperatures averaging around 0 \u00b0C in most areas. The relative humidity moves between 60\u201380 %. \nGeology.\nMost of the area of the Czech Republic belongs to the geographically stable Czech Massif. Only an area of the Western Carpathians in the east of the country is younger, lifted during the Tertiary. Igneous rocks make up the base of the Czech Massive. Sedimentary rocks are mostly found in the north-eastern part of Bohemia with significant areas of sandstone. Among the metamorphic rocks, the most commonly found is Gneiss.\nMountains.\nThe most notable mountain ranges in the Czech Republic are all found along the borders of the country. In the Bohemia it is the Bohemian Forest and Ore Mountains, both bordering Germany. Then the long mountain range of Sudeten with Sn\u011b\u017eka (1602) \u2013 the highest peak of the Czech Republic. The last major mountain range is the Beskid Mountains in the east, which then continue further east into Poland and Slovakia.\nRivers.\nThere are four major rivers in the Czech Republic. Elbe (\"Labe\" in Czech) flows from Krkono\u0161e Mountains in the north east of Bohemia to the west and then flows through northern Germany all the way to the North Sea. Morava River drains most of Moravia and flows to the south into Danube and ultimately to the Black Sea. Odra River starts in the Moravian Silesia and flows north through Poland into the Baltic Sea. The fourth major river is Moldau (\"Vltava\" in Czech), which is the longest river of the Czech Republic and drains the southern part of Bohemia before flowing into Elbe in M\u011bln\u00edk. \nBodies of water.\nNatural occurring bodies of water are rather scarce, most of the significant bodies of water are man-made ponds and reservoirs. The largest pond is the Ro\u017emberk Pond, which is one of the ponds in the system of fish ponds built in the 16th century around T\u0159ebo\u0148. The largest reservoir by area covered is the Lipno Reservoir (4870 ha), built in the 1950s and the largest reservoir by cubic capacity is Orl\u00edk Reservoir (716,000,000 m\u00b3), built around the same time. \nHuman geography.\nPopulation geography.\nThe population of the Czech Republic is estimated to be around 10.6 million. The highest population density is in the larger metropolitan area of Ostrava and of course in the area around the capital of Prague. The lowest population density is in the Czech-German and Czech-Austrian borderlands, mostly as a lasting result of the expulsion of Germans from Czechoslovakia after the World War II.\nPolitical geography.\nThe Czech Republic is divided into thirteen regions (\"kraje\" in Czech) and one capital city with regional status. The older administrative units of seventy-six districts (\"okresy\" in Czech) are still recognized and remain the seats of various branches of state administration. Historically, the Czech Republic can be split into three regions: Bohemia in the west, Moravia in the east and Czech Silesia in the north east.\nIndustry and agriculture.\nAreas affected the most by heavy industry are the Sokolov Basin and the Most Basin in the north-west of the Czech Republic. The extensive deposits of brown coal in those areas are mostly used for electricity production. It is estimated, that almost 40 % of all electric power produced in the Czech Republic comes from burning brown coal mined in these areas. Plant agriculture is focused around the lowlands surrounding the Elbe River and the Morava River. Around a third of the country is covered by forests and approximately 40 % of land is arable. The area of irrigated land is estimated to spread across 385 km2 and freshwater withdrawal per capita is around 164 m3 every year. "}
{"id": "5848", "revid": "1017200719", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5848", "title": "Politics of the Czech Republic", "text": "The Czech Republic is a unitary parliamentary constitutional republic, in which the President is the head of state and the Prime Minister is the head of government. &lt;br&gt;\nExecutive power is exercised by the Government of the Czech Republic which reports to the Chamber of Deputies. The Legislature is exercised by the Parliament. Czech Parliament is bicameral, the upper house of the Parliament is the Senate, the lower house of the Parliament is the Chamber of Deputies. The Senate consists of 81 members who are elected for six years. The Chamber of Deputies consists of 200 members who are elected for four years. The Judiciary system is topped by the trio of Constitutional Court, Supreme Court and Supreme Administrative Court.&lt;br&gt; \nThe highest legal document is the Constitution of the Czech Republic, complemented by constitutional laws and the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms. The current constitution went in effect on 1st January 1993, after the Dissolution of Czechoslovakia.\nThe Czech Republic has a multi-party system. Between 1993 and 2013, the two largest political parties were the left-wing Czech Social Democratic Party (\u010cSSD) and right-wing Civic Democratic Party (ODS). This changed in early 2014, with the rise of a new major political party ANO 2011, which has since lead two cabinets. &lt;br&gt;\nExecutive branch.\nThe President is the head of state, the Prime Minister is the head of government. The majority of executive power is given to the Cabinet, which consists of the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Ministers and Ministers (usually heads of the Ministries).\nPresident.\nThe President of the Czech Republic is elected by a direct vote for five years. They can only serve for two terms. The president is a formal head of state with limited executive powers specified in the articles 54 to 66 of the Constitution:\nHe is also the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces and ratifies all domestic laws and international agreements.\nCabinet.\nThe Cabinet is the supreme executive body in the Czech Republic. It makes its decisions as a body. It is held responsible by the Chamber of Deputies. The president appoints every new Prime Minister, who then chooses the Ministers. All Ministers of the Cabinet need to be approved by the President and within thirty days after the presidential approval they must ask the Chamber of Deputies for a vote of confidence.\nPrime Minister.\nThe Prime Minister is the head of government. They organize the work of the Cabinet, preside over it and act in its name. They set the agenda for most foreign and domestic policies. They have to obtain the President's approval to hire or dissmis any other member of the Cabinet.\nMinisters.\nA minister is any member of the Cabinet that is not the Prime Minister. They are usually the head of a Ministry, but it is not required. Ministry \u2013 sometimes called Government Department \u2013 is a governmental organisation that manages a specific sector of public administration. The number of Ministries varies depending on the particular Cabinet and is managed by the Competence Law. As of 2021, the Czech Republic had 13 Ministers and 14 Ministries.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Parliament (\"Parlament\" in Czech) consists of two Houses. The Lower House is the Chamber of Deputies and the Upper House is the Senate. \nChamber of Deputies.\nChamber of Deputies (\"Poslaneck\u00e1 sn\u011bmovna\" in Czech) has 200 members, elected for four-year terms by proportional representation with a 5% election threshold. The Chamber of Deputies elections happen every four years, unless the reigning Cabinet prematurely loses the Chamber of Deputies' support. Candidates for every political party participating in the elections are split among 14 electoral districts, which are identical to the country's administrative Regions. A citizen must be at least 21 years old to be eligible for candidacy.&lt;br&gt; \nThe Chamber of Deputies was formerly known as the Czech National Council. It has the same powers and responsibilities as the now-defunct Federal Assembly of the Czechoslovakia.\nSenate.\nThe Senate (\"Sen\u00e1t\" in Czech) has 81 members, each elected for a six-year term. Senate elections happen every two years and only a third of the seats is contested each time. All of the 81 Senate electoral districts are designed to contain roughly the same number of voters. The Senate elections use a two-round system, when the two most successful candidates from the first round face each other again in the second round usually a week later. Only citizens who have reached the age of 40 are eligible for candidacy. The senate's function is to be a stabilizing force and its influence is significantly lower than that of the Chamber of Deputies.\nJudicial branch.\nThe Czech court system recognizes four categories of courts and the Constitutional Court, which stands outside of the court system.\nConstitutional Court.\nThe Constitutional Court's main purpose is to protect people's constitutional rights and freedoms. The decisions of the Court are final, cannot be overturned and are considered a source of law. The Court is composed of 15 justices who are named for a renewable period of 10 years by the President and approved by the Senate. \nAll justices of the Constitutional Court have a mandatory retirement age of 70. Its functionality is similar to that of the Supreme Court of the United States.\nSupreme Courts.\nThere are two Supreme Courts in the court system of the Czech Republic \u2013 the Supreme Court and the Supreme Administrative Court. Both reside in Brno.\nSupreme Court.\nThe Supreme Court of the Czech Republic is the court of highest appeal for almost all legal cases heard in the Czech Republic. The justices of the Supreme Court analyze and evaluate legally effective decisions of lower courts. They unify the Czech judicature.\nSupreme Administrative Court.\nThe Supreme Administrative Court of the Czech Republic protects people from unlawful decisions and procedures of the state authorities. It examines objections to elections and has the authority to ban or suspend the activity of political parties. It resolves competence disputes between governmental organizations and also serves as disciplinary court for other members of the judiciary. \nHigh Courts.\nThere are two High Courts in the Czech Republic \u2013 one in Prague and one in Olomouc . They serve as courts of appeal to Regional Courts in cases, where the Regional Court acted as a court of first instance. Presidents of the High Courts are appointed by the President for seven years. The vice-presidents are appointed by the Minister of Justice and also serve a seven-year term. A justice is required by the law to have at least 8 years of experience before becoming a member of a High Court.\nRegional Courts.\nRegional Courts serve mainly as the courts of appeal to District Courts. But they can also act as courts of first instance in cases of more severe criminal charges, disputes between corporations or disputes over intellectual property. There are eight Regional Courts in the Czech Republic: in Brno, Ostrava, Hradec Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9, \u00dast\u00ed nad Labem, Plze\u0148, \u010cesk\u00e9 Bud\u011bjovice and two in Prague.\nDistrict Courts.\nDistrict Courts serve as the courts of first instance in almost all civil or criminal proceedings. There is a total of 86 District Courts in the Czech Republic. Notaries and executors are appointed by the Minister of Justice to their jurisdictions. \nRegional government.\nThe Czech Republic is divided in 14 administrative Regions including one for the capital of Prague. The older system of 73 administrative Districts (\"okresy\" in Czech) and 4 municipalities was abandoned in 1999 in an administrative reform. Each of the Regions has a Regional Council with a varied number of Regional Councilors and a President of the Regional Cabinet (\"hejtman\" in Czech) as its formal head. The capital of Prague is the only exception to this, as the City Council acts both as regional and municipal governing body and is led by a mayor. Regional Councilors are elected for four-year terms similarly to Deputies in the Chamber of Deputies. All adults eligible to vote are also eligible to candidate to a Regional Council.\nInternational organization participation.\nThe Czech Republic is a member of:\nLinks.\nExternal links.\nGovernment"}
{"id": "5849", "revid": "14218903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5849", "title": "Economy of the Czech Republic", "text": "The economy of the Czech Republic is a developed export-oriented social market economy based in services, manufacturing, and innovation, that maintains a high-income welfare state and the European social model. The Czech Republic participates in the European Single Market as a member of the European Union, and is therefore a part of the economy of the European Union, but uses its own currency, the Czech koruna, instead of the euro. It is a member of the OECD. The Czech Republic ranks 13th in inequality-adjusted human development and 14th in World Bank Human Capital Index ahead of countries such as the United States, the United Kingdom or France. It was described by \"The Guardian\" as \"one of Europe\u2019s most flourishing economies\".\nThe industry sector accounts for 37.5% of the economy, while services for 60% and agriculture for 2.5%. The principal industries are high tech engineering, electronics and machine-building, steel production, transportation equipment (automotive, rail and aerospace industry), chemicals, advanced materials and pharmaceuticals. The major services are research and development, ICT and software development, nanotechnology and life sciences among others. Its main agricultural products are cereals, vegetable oils and hops.\nAs of 2018, the Czech GDP per capita at purchasing power parity is $37,370 and $22,850 at nominal value. As of June 2019, the unemployment rate in the Czech Republic was the lowest in the EU at 1.9%, and the poverty rate is the second lowest of OECD members only behind Denmark. Czech Republic ranks 24th in both the Index of Economic Freedom (ranked behind Norway) and the Global Innovation Index (ranked behind Australia), 32nd in the Global Competitiveness Report, 41st in the ease of doing business index and 25th in the Global Enabling Trade Report (ranked behind Canada). The largest trading partner for both export and import is Germany and other members of the EU in general. The Czech Republic has a highly diverse economy that ranks 9th in the 2017 Economic Complexity Index.\nHistory.\nPre\u20131989.\nThe Czech lands were among the first industrialized countries in continental Europe during the German Confederation era. The Czech industrial tradition dates back to the 19th century, when the Lands of the Bohemian Crown were the economic and industrial heartland of the Austrian Empire and later the Austrian side of Austria-Hungary. The Czech lands produced a majority (about 70%) of all industrial goods in the Empire, some of which were almost monopolistic. The Czechoslovak crown was introduced in April 1919. Introduced at a 1:1 ratio to the Austro-Hungarian currency, it became one of the most stable currencies in Europe. The First Republic became one of the 10 most developed countries of the world (behind the U.S., Canada, Australia, Switzerland, Argentina, Britain, France, Sweden and Belgium).\nThe consequences of the 1938 Munich Agreement and subsequent occupation were disastrous for the economy. After the occupation and forced subordination of the economy to German economic interests, the crown was officially pegged to the mark at a ratio of 1:10, even though the unofficial exchange rate was 1 to 6-7 and Germans immediately started buying Czech goods in large quantities.\nIn accordance with Stalin's development policy of planned interdependence, all the economies of the socialist countries were tightly linked to that of the Soviet Union. Czechoslovakia was the most prosperous country in the Eastern Bloc, however it continued to lag further behind the rest of the developed world. With the disintegration of the communist economic alliance in 1991, Czech manufacturers lost their traditional markets among former communist countries in the east.\nToday, this heritage is both an asset and a liability. The Czech Republic has a well-educated population and a densely developed infrastructure.\n1989\u20131995.\nThe \"Velvet Revolution\" in 1989, offered a chance for profound and sustained political and economic reform. Signs of economic resurgence began to appear in the wake of the shock therapy that the International Monetary Fund (IMF) labelled the \"big bang\" of January 1991. Since then, consistent liberalization and astute economic management has led to the removal of 95% of all price controls, low unemployment, a positive balance of payments position, a stable exchange rate, a shift of exports from former communist economic bloc markets to Western Europe, and relatively low foreign debt. Inflation has been higher than in some other countries \u2013 mostly in the 10% range \u2013 and the government has run consistent modest budget deficits.\nTwo government priorities have been strict fiscal policies and creating a good climate for incoming investment in the republic. Following a series of currency devaluations, the crown has remained stable in relation to the US dollar. The Czech crown became fully convertible for most business purposes in late 1995.\nIn order to stimulate the economy and attract foreign partners, the government has revamped the legal and administrative structure governing investment. With the breakup of the Soviet Union, the country, till that point highly dependent on exports to the USSR, had to make a radical shift in economic outlook: away from the East, and towards the West. This necessitated the restructuring of existing banking and telecommunications facilities, as well as adjusting commercial laws and practices to fit Western standards. Further minimizing reliance on a single major partner, successive Czech governments have welcomed U.S. investment (amongst others) as a counterbalance to the strong economic influence of Western European partners, especially of their powerful neighbour, Germany. Although foreign direct investment (FDI) runs in uneven cycles, with a 12.9% share of total FDI between 1990 and March 1998, the U.S. was the third-largest foreign investor in the Czech economy, behind Germany and the Netherlands.\nProgress toward creating a stable investment climate was recognized when the Czech Republic became the first post-communist country to receive an investment-grade credit rating by international credit institutions.\nThe country boasts a flourishing consumer production sector and has privatized most state-owned heavy industries through the voucher privatization system. Under the system, every citizen was given the opportunity to buy, for a moderate price, a book of vouchers that represents potential shares in any state-owned company. The voucher holders could then invest their vouchers, increasing the capital base of the chosen company, and creating a nation of citizen share-holders. This is in contrast to Russian privatization, which consisted of sales of communal assets to private companies rather than share-transfer to citizens. The effect of this policy has been dramatic. Under communism, state ownership of businesses was estimated to be 97%. Privatization through restitution of real estate to the former owners was largely completed in 1992. By 1998, more than 80% of enterprises were in private hands. Now completed, the program has made Czechs, who own shares of each of the Czech companies, one of the highest per-capita share owners in the world. \n1995\u20132000.\nThe country's economic transformation was far from complete. Political and financial crises in 1997, shattered the Czech Republic's image as one of the most stable and prosperous of post-Communist states. Delays in enterprise restructuring and failure to develop a well-functioning capital market played major roles in Czech economic troubles, which culminated in a currency crisis in May. The formerly pegged currency was forced into a floating system as investors sold their Korunas faster than the government could buy them. This followed a worldwide trend to divest from developing countries that year. Investors also worried the republic's economic transformation was far from complete. Another complicating factor was the current account deficit, which reached nearly 8% of GDP.\nIn response to the crisis, two austerity packages were introduced later in the spring (called vernacularly \"The Packages\"), which cut government spending by 2.5% of GDP. Growth dropped to 0.3% in 1997, \u22122.3% in 1998, and \u22120.5% in 1999. The government established a restructuring agency in 1999 and launched a revitalization program \u2013 to spur the sale of firms to foreign companies. Key priorities included accelerating legislative convergence with EU norms, restructuring enterprises, and privatising banks and utilities. The economy, fueled by increased export growth and investment, was expected to recover by 2000.\n2000\u20132005.\nGrowth in 2000\u201305 was supported by exports to the EU, primarily to Germany, and a strong recovery of foreign and domestic investment. Domestic demand is playing an ever more important role in underpinning growth as interest rates drop and the availability of credit cards and mortgages increases. Current account deficits of around 5% of GDP are beginning to decline as demand for Czech products in the European Union increases. Inflation is under control. Recent accession to the EU gives further impetus and direction to structural reform. In early 2004 the government passed increases in the Value Added Tax (VAT) and tightened eligibility for social benefits with the intention to bring the public finance gap down to 4% of GDP by 2006, but more difficult pension and healthcare reforms will have to wait until after the next elections. Privatization of the state-owned telecommunications firm \u010cesk\u00fd Telecom took place in 2005. Intensified restructuring among large enterprises, improvements in the financial sector, and effective use of available EU funds should strengthen output growth.\n2005\u20132010.\nGrowth continued in the first years of the EU membership. The credit portion of the Financial crisis of 2007\u20132010 did not affect the Czech Republic much, mostly due to its stable banking sector which has learned its lessons during a smaller crisis in the late 1990s and became much more cautious. As a fraction of the GDP, the Czech public debt is among the smallest ones in Central and Eastern Europe. Moreover, unlike many other post-communist countries, an overwhelming majority of the household debt \u2013 over 99% \u2013 is denominated in the local Czech currency. That's why the country wasn't affected by the shrunken money supply in the U.S. dollars.\nHowever, as a large exporter, the economy was sensitive to the decrease of the demand in Germany and other trading partners. In the middle of 2009, the annual drop of the GDP for 2009 was estimated around 3% or 4.3%, a relatively modest decrease. The impact of the economic crisis may have been limited by the existence of the national currency that temporarily weakened in H1 of 2009, simplifying the life of the exporters.\n2010\u20132015.\nFrom the financial crisis of 2007\u20132010, Czech Republic is in stagnation or decreasing of GDP. Some commenters and economists criticising fiscally conservative policy of Petr Ne\u010das' right-wing government, especially criticising ex-minister of finance, Miroslav Kalousek. Miroslav Kalousek in a 2008 interview, as minister of finance in the center-right government of Mirek Topol\u00e1nek, said \"Czech Republic will not suffer by financial crisis\". In September 2008, Miroslav Kalousek formed state budget with projection of 5% GDP increase in 2009. In 2009 and 2010, Czech Republic suffered strong economical crisis and GDP decreased by 4,5%. From 2009 to 2012, Czech Republic suffered highest state budget deficits in history of independent Czech Republic. From 2008 to 2012, the public debt of Czech Republic increased by 18,9%. Most decrease of industrial output was in construction industry (-25% in 2009, -15,5% in 2013). From 4Q 2009 to 1Q 2013, GDP decreased by 7,8%.\nIn 2012, Czech government increased VAT. Basic VAT was increased from 20% in 2012 to 21% in 2013 and reduced VAT increased from 14% to 15% in 2013. Small enterprises sales decreased by 21% from 2012 to 2013 as result of increasing VAT. Patria.cz predicting sales stagnation and mild increase in 2013.\nAnother problem is foreign trade. The Czech Republic is considered an export economy (the Czech Republic has strong machinery and automobile industries), however in 2013, foreign trade rapidly decreased which led to many other problems and increase of state budget deficit. In 2013, Czech National Bank, central bank, implemented controversial monetary step. To increase export and employment, CNB wilfully deflated Czech Crown (CZK), which inflation increased from 0.2% in November 2013, to 1.3% in 1Q 2014.\nIn 2014, GDP in the Czech Republic increased by 2% and is predicted to increase by 2.7% in 2015. In 2015, Czech Republic's economy grew by 4,2% and it's the fastest growing economy in the European Union. On 29 May 2015, it was announced that growth of the Czech economy has increased from calculated 3,9% to 4,2%.\n2015\u2013present.\nIn August 2015, Czech GDP growth was 4.4%, making the Czech economy the highest growing in Europe. On 9 November 2015, unemployment in the Czech Republic was at 5.9%, the lowest number since February 2009. Dividends worth CZK 289 billion were paid to the foreign owners of Czech companies in 2016.\nEuropean Union.\nSince its accession to the European Union in 2004, the Czech Republic has adopted the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union and it is bound by the Treaty of Accession 2003 to adopt the Euro currency in the future.\nThe Czech Republic also receives \u20ac24.2bn between 2014 and 2020 from the European Structural and Investment Funds, however, this sum does not outweigh the amount of capital outflow of profits of foreign owned firms from the Czech Republic into other EU members, at which the funds are aimed to compensate for.\nPublic policy.\nAs of 2016, the Czech Republic has the second lowest poverty rate of OECD members only behind Denmark. The Czech healthcare system ranks 13th in the 2016 Euro health consumer index.\nEnergy.\nThe Czech Republic is a long-term net-exporter of electricity. 97% -98% of oil used in the Czech Republic is imported.\nThe government's 2015 energy policy designates nuclear power as main source of energy and its share is projected to rise to between 46% and 58% by 2040. Coal-powered energy is planned to fall to 21%, while renewables would rise to 25% and gas range from 5 to 15%.\nThe updated energy strategy of 2019 envisions a gradual phase out of coal power share in total electricity generation from 2015's 46.2% down to 15.5% by 2040. The strategy sees nuclear energy as a non-carbon source of energy to be used during a slow transition to renewables in order to minimize the use of carbon-emitting fossil fuels that cause climate change. The increase in the share of nuclear, renewables and natural gas is to fill in the energy demand created by the impending gradual shutdowns of coal power stations. This 2015-approved energy strategy expects construction of an additional nuclear reactor in the Temel\u00edn Nuclear Power Station and another one in the Dukovany Nuclear Power Station with the possibility of further expansion to two reactors in each power station. The older station of the two, Dukovany, is to be expanded before Temel\u00edn. As of 2019, the financing models and contractor selection for the planned reactors are being negotiated by the government.\nStatistical indicators.\nDevelopment of main indicators.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132017. Inflation under 2% is in green.\nBackground.\n\"From the CIA World Factbook 2017\"\nGDP (pp.): $353.9 billion (2016)\nGDP (nom.): $195.3 billion (2016)\nGDP Growth: 2.6% (2016)\nGDP per capita (pp.): $33,500 (2016)\nGDP per capita (nom.): $18,487 (2016)\nGDP by sector:\n\"Agriculture:\" 2.5%\n\"Industry:\" 37.5%\n\"Services:\" 60% (2016)\nInflation: 0.7% (2016)\nLabour Force: 5.427 million (2017)\nUnemployment: 2,3% (September 2018)\nIndustrial production growth rate: 3.5% (2016)\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share: (2015)\nPublic Debt: 34.2% GDP (2018)\nTrade and finance.\nExports: $136.1 billion\n\"Export goods:\" machinery and transport equipment, raw materials, fuel, chemicals (2018)\nImports: $122.8 billion\n\"Import goods:\" machinery and transport equipment, raw materials and fuels, chemicals (2018)\nCurrent Account balance: $2.216 billion (2018)\nExport partners: Germany 32.4%, Slovakia 8.4%, Poland 5.8%, UK 5.2%, France 5.2%, Italy 4.3%, Austria 4.2% (2016)\nImport partners: Germany 30.6%, Poland 9.6%, China 7.5%, Slovakia 6.3%, Netherlands 5.3%, Italy 4.1% (2016)\nReserves: $85.73 billion (31 December 2016)\nForeign Direct Investment: $139.6 billion (31 December 2016)\nCzech Investment Abroad: $43.09 billion (31 December 2016)\nExternal debt: $138 billion (31 December 2016)\nValue of Publicly Traded Shares: $44.5 billion (31 December 2016)\nExchange rates:\nIT and Telecommunications.\nHouseholds with access to fixed and mobile telephone access\nIndividuals with mobile telephone access\nBroadband penetration rate\nIndividuals using computer and internet"}
{"id": "5850", "revid": "398607", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5850", "title": "Telecommunications in the Czech Republic", "text": "Telephones - main lines in use:\n2.888 million (2006) \nTelephones - mobile cellular:\n13.075 million (2007)\nTelephone system:\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\"\n86% of exchanges now digital; existing copper subscriber systems now being improved with Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL) equipment to accommodate Internet and other digital signals; trunk systems include fibre-optic cable and microwave radio relay \nIndian Ocean regions), 1 Intelsat, 1 Eutelsat, 1 Inmarsat, 1 Globalstar \nRadio broadcast stations:\nAM 31, FM 304, shortwave 17 (2000) \nRadios:\n3,159,134 (December 2000) \nTelevision broadcast stations:\n150 (plus 1,434 repeaters) (2000) \nTelevisions:\n3,405,834 (December 2000) \nInternet Service Providers (ISPs):\nmore than 300 (2000) \nInternet users:\n4.4 million (2007) \nCountry code: CZ"}
{"id": "5851", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5851", "title": "Transport in the Czech Republic", "text": "Transport in the Czech Republic relies on several main modes, including transport by road, rail, water and air.\nRailways.\nThe Czech Republic has a total railway length of . The vast majority () is standard gauge. Electrified railways generally have voltages of 3 kV DC or 25 kV AC. of track is narrow gauge. The most prominent Czech railway company is the state-owned \u010cesk\u00e9 dr\u00e1hy (\u010cD) (English: \"Czech Railways\"). Prague has an underground rapid transit system, the Prague Metro. In addition, the cities of Brno, Liberec, Most, Olomouc, Ostrava, Plze\u0148, and Prague have tram systems.\nRoads.\nThe Czech Republic has, in total, of roads. It has of motorways. In the 1980s and 1990s there was a significant increase in passenger transport on the roads in the Czech Republic, which was associated with a sharp increase in the accident rate. Between 2007 and 2013, the death rate fell in every year, with a record low of 583 deaths in 2013, compared with the 1994 high of 1,473 casualties. Despite this however, the fatality rate per head of population is moderately high, comparable to the United States.\nHighways.\nThe highways in the Czech Republic are no longer divided into motorways and expressways as of 2016.\nThese dual carriageways are managed by the state-owned Road and Motorway Directorate of the Czech Republic \u2013 \u0158SD, established in 1997. The first modern highways in the Czech Republic was the motorway from Prague to the Slovak border through Brno whose construction was started on May 2, 1939.\n\u0158SD currently manages and maintains 1,247\u00a0km of motorways (\"d\u00e1lnice\").\nWaterways.\nThe Vltava is the country's longest river, at 430\u00a0km. 358\u00a0km of the Elbe (Labe), which totals 1154\u00a0km, is also present in the country. An artificial waterway, nowadays used for recreation, is the Ba\u0165a Canal.\nPorts and harbors.\nD\u011b\u010d\u00edn, M\u011bln\u00edk, Prague, \u00dast\u00ed nad Labem, Moldauhafen in Hamburg (no longer operational, will be handed over to Germany in 2028)\nAirports.\nIn 2006, the Czech Republic had a total 121 airports. 46 of these airports had paved runways while 75 had unpaved runways. The largest and busiest airport in the Czech Republic is V\u00e1clav Havel Airport Prague, opened in 1937. Other international airports include Brno\u2013Tu\u0159any Airport, Karlovy Vary Airport, Ostrava Leo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek Airport, Pardubice Airport, Kunovice Airport and Public domestic and private international airport is for example Hradec Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9 Airport.\nTotal: 46 (2007) \nTotal: 75 (2007) \nHeliports.\n2 (2006)"}
{"id": "5852", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5852", "title": "Czech Republic/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "5853", "revid": "16505349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5853", "title": "Army of the Czech Republic", "text": "The Army of the Czech Republic (, A\u010cR), also known as the Czech Army, is the military service responsible for the defence of the Czech Republic in compliance with international obligations and treaties on collective defence. It is also set to support peacekeeping, rescue and humanitarian operations both within the national territory and abroad. Armed Forces consist of the General Staff, the Land Forces, the Air Force and support units.\nFrom the late 1940s to 1989, the extensive Czechoslovak People's Army (about 200,000) formed one of the pillars of the Warsaw Pact military alliance. After the dissolution of Czechoslovakia, the Czech Republic is completing a major reorganisation and reduction of the armed forces, which intensified after the Czech Republic joined NATO on 12 March 1999.\nAs defined by the Czech Law No. 219/1999 Coll., the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic () are the military forces of the Czech Republic. They consist of the Army of the Czech Republic, the Military Office of President of the Republic and the Castle Guard.\nHistory.\nCzech lands.\nMilitary history of the Czech people dates back to the Middle Ages and the creation of Duchy of Bohemia and Kingdom of Bohemia. During the Hussite Wars, Jan \u017di\u017eka became a military leader of such skill and eminence that the Hussite legacy became an important and lasting part of the Czech military traditions. European wars of religion once again wrecked the Czech lands, and at the Battle of White Mountain in 1620, Czech freedom was lost to the Habsburg Monarchy. Throughout the centuries of foreign rule, the Czechs were subjected, at times, to intense Germanization. Nevertheless, Czechs maintained their ethnic identity and seized the opportunity for independence during World War I. Czechs and Slovaks deserted the armies of Austria-Hungary in large numbers to form the Czechoslovak Legion.\nCzechoslovakia.\nThe Czechoslovak Armed Forces were originally formed on 30 June 1918 when 6,000 members of the Czechoslovak Legion in France, which had been established in 1914, took oath and received a battle banner in Darney, France, thus preceding the official declaration of Czechoslovak independence by four months. There were also 50 000 legion soldiers in Russia at that time. The military achievements of the Czechoslovak legions on the French, Italian and especially Russian front became one of the main arguments that the Czechoslovak pro-independence leaders, especially for T. G. Masaryk in America, could use to gain the support for the country's independence by the Allies of World War I.\nIn 1938, servicemen of the Czechoslovak Army and the State Defense Guard fought in an undeclared border war against the German-backed Sudetendeutsches Freikorps as well as Polish and Hungarian paramilitary forces. As a result of the Munich Agreement, areas heavily populated by ethnic German speaking people were incorporated into the Third Reich and military aged men living there were subject to being drafted into the Wehrmacht. In 1939, after the Slovak State proclaimed it's independence and the remainder of Carpathian Ruthenia was occupied and annexed by Hungary, the German occupation of the Czech Lands followed and the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia was proclaimed after the negotiations with Emil H\u00e1cha. The Protectorate's government possessed its own armed force, the Government Army (6,500 men), tasked with public security and rearguard duties. On the other side of the conflict, a number of Czechoslovak units and formations served with the Polish Army (Czechoslovak Legion), the French Army, the Royal Air Force, the British Army (the 1st Czechoslovak Armoured Brigade), and the Red Army (I Corps). Four Czech and Slovak-manned RAF squadrons were transferred to Czechoslovak control in late 1945.\nFrom 1954 until 1990, the Army was known as the Czechoslovak People's Army (\u010cSLA). Although the \u010cSLA, as formed in 1945, included both Soviet- and British-equipped/trained expatriate troops, the \"Western\" soldiers had been purged from the \u010cSLA after 1948 when the communists took power. The \u010cSLA offered no resistance to the invasion mounted by the Soviets in 1968 in reaction to the \"Prague Spring\", and was extensively reorganized by the Soviets following the re-imposition of communist rule in Prague.\nOf the approximately 201,000 personnel on active duty in the \u010cSLA in 1987, about 145,000, or about 72 percent, served in the ground forces (commonly referred to as the army). About 100,000 of these were conscripts. There were two military districts, Western and Eastern. A 1989 listing of forces shows two Czechoslovak armies in the west, the 1st Army at P\u0159\u00edbram with one tank division and three motor rifle divisions, the 4th Army at P\u00edsek with two tank divisions and two motor rifle divisions. In the Eastern Military District, there were two tank divisions, the 13th and 14th, with a supervisory headquarters at Tren\u010d\u00edn in the Slovak part of the country.\nDuring the Cold War, the \u010cSLA was equipped primarily with Soviet arms, although certain arms like the OT-64 SKOT armored personnel carrier, the L-29 \"Delf\u00edn\" and L-39 \"Albatros\" aircraft, the P-27 \"Panc\u00e9\u0159ovka\" antitank rocket launcher, the vz. 58 assault rifle or the Uk vz. 59 machine gun were of Czechoslovak design.\nAfter 1992 (dissolution of Czechoslovakia).\nThe Army of the Czech Republic was formed after the Czechoslovak Armed Forces split after the 1 January 1993 dissolution of Czechoslovakia. Czech forces stood at 90,000 in 1993. They were reduced to around 65,000 in 11 combat brigades and the Air Force in 1997, to 63,601 in 1999, and to 35,000 in 2005. At the same time, the forces were modernized and reoriented towards a defensive posture. In 2004, the army transformed itself into a fully professional organization and compulsory military service was abolished. The Army maintains an active reserve. Paradoxically, the extent of this centralised structure is not recognised by applying the 50-30-20 NATO rule on sustainable military budget.\nThe Czech Republic is a member of the United Nations and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. At the 1999 Washington summit, the Czech Republic joined NATO. Since 1990, the ACR and the Czech Armed Forces have contributed to numerous peacekeeping and humanitarian operations, including IFOR, SFOR, and EUFOR Althea in Bosnia, Desert Shield/Desert Storm, Afghanistan, Kosovo, Albania, Turkey, Pakistan and with the Coalition forces in Iraq.\nCurrent deployments (2019):\nStructure.\nMany of the duties of the President of the Czech Republic can be said to be ceremonial to one degree or another, especially since the President has relatively few powers independent of the will of the Prime Minister. One of those is the status as commander in chief of the military; no part of these duties can take place but through the assent of the Prime Minister. In matters of war, he is in every sense merely a figurehead, since the Constitution gives all substantive constitutional authority over the use of the armed forces to the Parliament. In fact, the only specific thing the constitution allows the President to do with respect to the military is to appoint its generalsbut even this must be done with the signature of the Prime Minister.\nStructure of the Czech Armed Forces consists of two parts:\nThe 153rd Engineer Battalion based in Olomouc was created on 15 October 2008 and is subordinated to the 15th Engineer Regiment. The unit is stationed in the outskirts of the city of Olomouc, in place of the canceled 156th Rescue Battalion.\nActive reserves.\nActive Reserve (in Czech \"Aktivn\u00ed z\u00e1loha\") is a part of the otherwise professional Army of the Czech Republic. This service was created to allow the participation of citizens with a positive attitude to the military.\nA volunteer needs either to have completed the compulsory military service (which ended in 2004) or to attend 6 week training. Then the reservists have to serve up to three weeks a year and can be called up to serve two weeks during a non-military crisis. They are not intended to serve abroad. The Reserve presents itself on events like BAHNA, a military show.\nEquipment.\nThe Army of the Czech Republic is, to a large extent, using inventory dating back to the times of the Warsaw Pact. During the Cold War, Czechoslovakia was a major supplier of tanks, armoured personnel carriers, military trucks and trainer aircraft \u2013 the bulk of military exports went to its Comecon partners. Replacement of the obsolete equipment, or making it at least compliant with the NATO standards, is urgently required. Modernization plans include acquisition of new multi-role helicopters, transport aircraft, infantry fighting vehicles or air defence radars and missiles. If possible, the Czech Ministry of Defence selects products that are manufactured or co-produced in the Czech Republic. This includes firearms of the \u010cesk\u00e1 zbrojovka Uhersk\u00fd Brod, namely the CZ 75 pistols, CZ Scorpion Evo 3 submachine guns, CZ 805 BREN and BREN 2 assault rifles. Moreover, the Czech Army is equipped with about 3000 T810 and T815 vehicles of various modifications produced by the Czech Tatra Trucks company. Tatra Defence Vehicle factory ensures licensed production of Pandur II and Titus armoured vehicles. Aircraft such as the Aero L-39 Albatros, Aero L-159 Alca and Let L-410 Turbolet have been produced domestically as well.\nAt the beginning of 2019 Czech Ministry of Defence announced its modernization program consisting of acquiring 210 new modern IFVs as a replacement for aging BVP-2. MoD approached four manufacturers: BAE Systems (CV90), GDELS (ASCOD), Rheinmetall (Lynx) and PSM (Puma). Cost of the program should exceed 50 billions CZK.\nUniforms.\nDifferent types of Czech Army uniforms:\nCurrent and historic military ranks.\nThese are the military ranks, historic and present-day, of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic and its predecessor force, the Czechoslovak Armed Forces, later known as the People's Army."}
{"id": "5855", "revid": "16680171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5855", "title": "Foreign relations of the Czech Republic", "text": "The Czech Republic is a Central European country, a member of the European Union, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OSCE), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the United Nations (and all of its main specialized agencies and boards). It entertains diplomatic relations with 191 countries of the world, around half of which maintain a resident embassy in the Czech capital city, Prague.\nDuring the years 1948\u20131989, the foreign policy of Czechoslovakia had followed that of the Soviet Union. Since the revolution and the subsequent mutually-agreed peaceful dissolution of Czechoslovakia into the Czech Republic and Slovakia, the Czechs have made reintegration with Western institutions their chief foreign policy objective. This goal was rapidly met with great success, as the nation joined NATO in 1999 and the European Union in 2004, and held the Presidency of the European Union during the first half of 2009.\nInternational disputes.\nLiechtenstein.\nThroughout the past decades, Liechtenstein continuously claimed restitution for , or an area roughly ten times the size of Liechtenstein, of land currently located in the Czech Republic. The land was partially confiscated from the Liechtenstein family in 1918 with the rest of the property being confiscated in 1945 after the expulsion of Germans and confiscation of German property. The Czech Republic insisted that it could not acknowledge or be responsible for claims going back to before February 1948, when the Communists had seized power.\nAs a result, Liechtenstein did not diplomatically recognize the existence of the Czech Republic as a new state (and, for that matter, also that of the Slovak Republic) until 2009.\nIn July 2009, the Prince of Liechtenstein announced he was resigning to the previous unsuccessful claims to property located in the Czech Republic, and on 13 July 2009, after politically recognizing one another, the Czech Republic and Liechtenstein formally established diplomatic relations.\nPlacement of US National Missile Defense base.\nIn February 2007, the US started formal negotiations with Czech Republic and Poland concerning construction of missile shield installations in those countries for a Ground-based Midcourse Defense System. Government of the Czech Republic agrees (while 67% Czechs disagree and only about 22% support it) to host a missile defense radar on its territory while a base of missile interceptors is supposed to be built in Poland. The objective is reportedly to protect another parts of US National Missile Defense from long-range missile strikes from Iran and North Korea, but Czech PM Mirek Topol\u00e1nek said the main reason is to avoid Russian influence and strengthen ties to US.\nThe main government supporter Alexandr Vondra, Deputy Prime Minister for European affairs, used to be an ambassador to the USA. More problematic is that between 2004 and 2006 he was an executive director of a lobbying company Dutko Worldwide Prague. Dutko's and its strategic partner AMI Communications (PR company) customers are Boeing, Lockheed Martin, Nortrop Grumman, which are largest contractors for NMD development. AMI Communications also received (without a formal selection procedure) a government contract to persuade Czechs to support US radar base.\nBilateral relations.\nEurope.\n! style=\"width: 10em\" | Country\n! Formal relations began\n! Notes\nThe multi-national Communist armed forces' sole joint action was the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968. All member countries, with the exception of the People's Republic of Albania and the Socialist Republic of Romania participated in the invasion. Albania formally withdrew from the Warsaw Pact in 1968 over the matter.\nBoth countries are full members of the European Union. They share of common border, which can be crossed anywhere without border control due to the Schengen Agreement.\nDiplomatic relations between Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia were established on 27 September 1920, they were severed on 1 June 1939 and were restored on 10 October 1945. On 23 December 1992 Bulgaria recognised the Czech Republic and established diplomatic relations with it at the level of embassies as of 1 January 1993. \nSee Czech Republic\u2013France relations"}
{"id": "5856", "revid": "32", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5856", "title": "Czech Republic/Sacrum", "text": ""}
{"id": "5857", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5857", "title": "Climbing", "text": "Climbing is the activity of using one's hands, feet, or any other part of the body to ascend a steep topographical object. It is done for locomotion, recreation and competition, and within trades that rely on ascension; such as emergency rescue and military operations. It is done indoors and out, on natural and man-made structures.\nProfessional mountain guides or rock climbing guides, such as members of the IFMGA, have been known to be a historically significant element of developing the popularity of the sport in the natural environment, and remain so today.\nClimbing will be an official sport for the first time in the 2021 Olympic Games in Tokyo (see Sport climbing at the 2020 Summer Olympics).\nTypes.\nClimbing activities include:\nRock, ice and tree climbing all usually utilize ropes for safety or aid. Pole climbing and rope climbing were among the first exercises to be included in the origins of modern gymnastics in the late 18th century and early 19th century.\nFilm.\nClimbing has been the subject of both film and documentary film with notable examples being \"Touching the Void\", \"Everest\", \"Cliffhanger\" and \"Free Solo\"."}
{"id": "5859", "revid": "34646063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5859", "title": "Continuity Irish Republican Army", "text": "The Continuity Irish Republican Army (Continuity IRA or CIRA), styling itself as the Irish Republican Army (), is an Irish republican paramilitary group that aims to bring about a united Ireland. It claims to a direct continuation of the original Irish Republican Army and the national army of the Irish Republic that was proclaimed in 1916. It emerged from a split in the Provisional IRA in 1986 but did not become active until the Provisional IRA ceasefire of 1994. It is an illegal organisation in the Republic of Ireland and is designated a terrorist organisation in the United Kingdom, New Zealand and the United States. It has links with the political party Republican Sinn F\u00e9in (RSF).\nSince 1994, the CIRA has waged a campaign in Northern Ireland against the British Army and the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI), formerly the Royal Ulster Constabulary. This is part of a wider campaign against the British security forces by dissident republican paramilitaries. It has targeted the security forces in gun attacks and bombings, as well as with grenades, mortars and rockets. The CIRA has also carried out bombings with the goal of causing economic harm and/or disruption, as well as many punishment attacks on alleged criminals.\nTo date, it has been responsible for the death of one PSNI officer. The CIRA is smaller and less active than the Real IRA, and there have been a number of splits within the organisation since the mid-2000s.\nOrigins.\nThe Continuity IRA has its origins in a split in the Provisional IRA. In September 1986, the Provisional IRA held a General Army Convention (GAC), the organisation's supreme decision-making body. It was the first GAC in 16 years. The meeting, which like all such meetings was secret, was convened to discuss among other resolutions, the articles of the Provisional IRA constitution which dealt with abstentionism, specifically its opposition to the taking of seats in D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann (the parliament of the Republic of Ireland). The GAC passed motions (by the necessary two-thirds majority) allowing members of the Provisional IRA to discuss and debate the taking of parliamentary seats, and the removal of the ban on members of the organisation from supporting any successful republican candidate who took their seat in D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann.\nThe Provisional IRA convention delegates opposed to the change in the constitution claimed that the convention was gerrymandered \"by the creation of new IRA organisational structures for the convention, including the combinations of Sligo-Roscommon-Longford and Wicklow-Wexford-Waterford.\" The only IRA body that supported this viewpoint was the outgoing IRA Executive. Those members of the outgoing Executive who opposed the change comprised a quorum. They met, dismissed those in favour of the change, and set up a new Executive. They contacted Tom Maguire, who was a commander in the old IRA and had supported the Provisionals against the Official IRA (see Irish republican legitimatism), and asked him for support. Maguire had also been contacted by supporters of Gerry Adams, then president of Sinn F\u00e9in, and a supporter of the change in the Provisional IRA constitution.\nMaguire rejected Adams' supporters, supported the IRA Executive members opposed to the change, and named the new organisers the Continuity Army Council. In a 1986 statement, he rejected \"the legitimacy of an Army Council styling itself the Council of the Irish Republican Army which lends support to any person or organisation styling itself as Sinn F\u00e9in and prepared to enter the partition parliament of Leinster House.\" In 1987, Maguire described the \"Continuity Executive\" as the \"lawful Executive of the Irish Republican Army.\"\nCampaign.\nInitially, the Continuity IRA did not reveal its existence, either in the form of press statements or paramilitary activity. Although the Garda S\u00edoch\u00e1na had suspicions that the organisation existed, they were unsure of its name, labelling it the \"Irish National Republican Army\". On 3 January 1991, a man in paramilitary uniform fired a single shot at the funeral of D\u00e1ith\u00ed \u00d3 Conaill (later alleged to be the Continuity IRA's chief of staff). On 21 January 1994, on the 75th anniversary of the First D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann, Continuity IRA volunteers offered a \"final salute\" to Tom Maguire by firing over his grave, and a public statement and a photo were published in \"Saoirse Irish Freedom\". In February 1994 it was reported that in previous months Garda\u00ed had found arms dumps along the Cooley Peninsula in County Louth that did not belong to the Provisional IRA, and forensics tests determined had been used for firing practice recently. \nIt was only after the Provisional IRA declared a ceasefire in 1994 that the Continuity IRA became active, announcing its intention to continue the campaign against British rule. The CIRA continues to oppose the Good Friday Agreement and, unlike the Provisional IRA (and the Real IRA in 1998), the CIRA has not announced a ceasefire or agreed to participate in weapons decommissioning\u2014nor is there any evidence that it will. In the 18th Independent Monitoring Commission's report, the RIRA, the CIRA and the Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) were deemed a potential future threat. The CIRA was labelled \"active, dangerous and committed and... capable of a greater level of violent and other crime\". Like the RIRA and RIRA splinter group \u00d3glaigh na h\u00c9ireann, it too sought funds for expansion. It is also known to have worked with the INLA.\nThe CIRA has been involved in a number of bombing and shooting incidents. Targets of the CIRA have included the British military, the Northern Ireland police (both the Royal Ulster Constabulary and its successor the Police Service of Northern Ireland) and Ulster loyalist paramilitaries. Since the Good Friday Agreement in 1998 the CIRA, along with other paramilitaries opposing the ceasefire, have been involved with a countless number of punishment shootings and beatings. By 2005 the CIRA was believed to be an established presence on the island of Great Britain with the capability of launching attacks. A bomb defused in Dublin in December 2005 was believed to have been the work of the CIRA. In February 2006, the Independent Monitoring Commission (IMC) blamed the CIRA for planting four bombs in Northern Ireland during the final quarter of 2005, as well as several hoax bomb warnings. The IMC also blamed the CIRA for the killings of two former CIRA members in Belfast, who had stolen CIRA weapons and established a rival organisation.\nThe CIRA continued to be active in both planning and undertaking attacks on the PSNI. The IMC said they tried to lure police into ambushes, while they have also taken to stoning and using petrol bombs. In addition, other assaults, robbery, tiger kidnapping, extortion, fuel laundering and smuggling were undertaken by the group. The CIRA also actively took part in recruiting and training members, including disgruntled former Provisional IRA members. As a result of this continued activity the IMC said the group remained \"a very serious threat\".\nOn 10 March 2009 the CIRA claimed responsibility for the fatal shooting of a PSNI officer in Craigavon, County Armagh\u2014the first police fatality in Northern Ireland since 1998. The officer was fatally shot by a sniper as he and a colleague investigated \"suspicious activity\" at a house nearby when a window was smashed by youths causing the occupant to phone the police. The PSNI officers responded to the emergency call, giving a CIRA sniper the chance to shoot and kill officer Stephen Carroll. Carroll was killed two days after the Real IRA's 2009 Massereene Barracks shooting at Massereene Barracks in Antrim. In a press interview with Republican Sinn F\u00e9in some days later, regarded by some to be the political wing of the Continuity IRA, Richard Walsh described the attacks as \"acts of war\".\nIn 2013, the Continuity IRA's 'South Down Brigade' threatened a Traveller family in Newry and published a statement in the local newspaper. There were negotiations with community representatives and the CIRA announced the threat was lifted. It was believed the threat was issued after a Traveller feud which resulted in a pipe bomb attack in Bessbrook, near Newry. The Continuity IRA is believed to be strongest in the County Fermanagh \u2013 North County Armagh area (Craigavon, Armagh and Lurgan). It is believed to be behind a number of attacks such as pipe bombings, rocket attacks, gun attacks, and the PSNI claimed it orchestrated riots a number of times to lure police officers into areas such as Kilwilkie in Lurgan and Drumbeg in Craigavon in order to attack them. It also claimed the group orchestrated a riot during a security alert in Lurgan. The alert turned out to be a hoax.\nOn Easter 2016, the Continuity IRA marched in paramilitary uniforms through North Lurgan, Co Armagh, without any hindrance from the PSNI who monitored the parade from a police helicopter.\nIn July and August 2019 the CIRA carried out attempted bomb attacks on the PSNI in Craigavon, County Armagh and Wattlebridge, County Fermanagh.\nOn 5 February 2020, a bomb planted by the CIRA was found by the PSNI in a lorry in Lurgan. The CIRA believed the lorry was going to be put on a North Channel ferry to Scotland in January 2020.\nClaim to legitimacy.\n Similar to the claim put forward by the Provisional IRA after its split from the Official IRA in 1969, the Continuity IRA claims to be the legitimate continuation of the original Irish Republican Army or \"\u00d3glaigh na h\u00c9ireann\". This argument is based on the view that the surviving anti-Treaty members of the Second D\u00e1il delegated their \"authority\" to the IRA Army Council in 1938. As further justification for this claim, Tom Maguire, one of those anti-Treaty members of the Second D\u00e1il, issued a statement in favour of the Continuity IRA, just as he had done in 1969 in favour of the Provisionals. J. Bowyer Bell, in his \"The Irish Troubles\", describes Maguire's opinion in 1986: \"abstentionism was a basic tenet of republicanism, a moral issue of principle. Abstentionism gave the movement legitimacy, the right to wage war, to speak for a Republic all but established in the hearts of the people\". Maguire's stature was such that a delegation from Gerry Adams sought his support in 1986, but was rejected.\nRelationship to other organisations.\nThese changes within the IRA were accompanied by changes on the political side and at the 1986 Sinn F\u00e9in Ard Fheis (party conference), which followed the IRA Convention, the party's policy of abstentionism, which forbade Sinn F\u00e9in elected representatives from taking seats in the Oireachtas, the parliament of the Republic, was dropped. On 2 November, the 628 delegates present cast their votes, the result being 429 to 161. The traditionalists, having lost at both conventions, walked out of the Mansion House, met that evening at the West County Hotel, and reformed as Republican Sinn F\u00e9in (RSF).\nAccording to a report in the \"Cork Examiner\", the Continuity IRA's first chief of staff was D\u00e1ith\u00ed \u00d3 Conaill, who also served as the first chairman of RSF from 1986 to 1987. The Continuity IRA and RSF perceive themselves as forming a \"true\" Republican Movement.\nStructure and status.\nThe leadership of the Continuity IRA is believed to be based in the provinces of Munster and Ulster. It was alleged that its chief of staff was a Limerick man and that a number of other key members were from that county, until their expulsion. D\u00e1ith\u00ed \u00d3 Conaill was the first chief of staff until 1991. In 2004 the United States (US) government believed the Continuity IRA consisted of fewer than fifty hardcore activists. In 2005, Irish Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform Michael McDowell told D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann that the organisation had a maximum of 150 members.\nThe CIRA is an illegal organisation under UK (section 11(1) of the Terrorism Act 2000) and ROI law due to the use of 'IRA' in the group's name, in a situation analogous to that of the Real Irish Republican Army (RIRA). Membership of the organisation is punishable by a sentence of up to ten years imprisonment under UK law. On 31 May 2001 Dermot Gannon became the first person to be convicted of membership of the CIRA solely on the word of a Garda S\u00edoch\u00e1na chief superintendent. On 13 July 2004, the US government designated the CIRA as a 'Foreign Terrorist Organization'. This made it illegal for Americans to provide material support to the CIRA, requires US financial institutions to block the group's assets and denies alleged CIRA members visas into the US.\nExternal aid and arsenal.\nThe US government suspects the Continuity IRA of having received funds and arms from supporters in the United States. Security sources in Ireland have expressed the suspicion that, in co-operation with the RIRA, the Continuity IRA may have acquired arms and materiel from the Balkans. They also suspect that the Continuity IRA arsenal contains some weapons that were taken from Provisional IRA arms dumps, including a few dozen rifles, machine guns, and pistols; a small amount of the explosive Semtex; and a few dozen detonators.\nInternal tension and splits.\nIn 2005, several members of the CIRA, who were serving prison sentences in Portlaoise Prison for paramilitary activity, left the organisation. Some transferred to the INLA landing of the prison, but the majority of those who left are now independent and on E4 landing. The remaining CIRA prisoners have moved to D Wing. Supporters of the Continuity IRA leadership claim that this resulted from an internal disagreement, which although brought to a conclusion, was followed by some people leaving the organisation anyway. Supporters of the disaffected members established the Concerned Group for Republican Prisoners. Most of those who had left went back to the CIRA, or dissociated themselves from the CGRP, which is now defunct.\nIn February 2006, the Independent Monitoring Commission claimed in a report on paramilitary activity that two groups, styling themselves as \"\u00d3glaigh na h\u00c9ireann\" and \"Saoirse na h\u00c9ireann\", had been formed after a split in the Continuity IRA either in early 2006 or late 2005. The \u00d3glaigh na h\u00c9ireann group was responsible for a number of pipe bomb attacks on the PSNI, bomb hoaxes, and robberies, the IMC also claimed the organisation was responsible for the killing of Andrew Burns on 12 February 2008 and was seeking to recruit former members of the RIRA. The Saoirse na h\u00c9ireann (SNH) group was composed of \"disaffected and largely young republicans\" and was responsible for a number of bomb hoaxes, two of which took place in September 2006. It was thought to have operated largely in republican areas of Belfast . The groups had apparently ceased operations by early 2009.\nIn 2007, the Continuity IRA was responsible for shooting dead two of its members who had left and attempted to create their own organisation. Upon leaving the CIRA, they had allegedly taken a number of guns with them. The Continuity IRA is believed by Garda\u00ed to have been involved in a number of gangland killings in Dublin and Limerick.\nIn July 2010, members of a \"militant Northern-based faction within the CIRA\" led by a well-known member from south Londonderry claimed to have overthrown the leadership of the organisation. They also claimed that an Army Convention representing \"95 per cent of volunteers\" had unanimously elected a new 12-member Army Executive, which in turn appointed a new seven-member Army Council. The moves came as a result of dissatisfication with the southern-based leadership and the apparent winding-down of military operations. A senior source from RSF said: \"We would see them [the purported new leadership] as just another splinter group that has broken away.\" This organisation is referred to as the Real CIRA.\nIn June 2011 CIRA member Liam Kenny was murdered, allegedly by drug dealers, at his home in Clondalkin, West Dublin. On 28 November 2011 an innocent man was mistakenly shot dead in retaliation for the murder of Liam Kenny. Limerick Real IRA volunteer Rose Lynch pleaded guilty to this murder at the Special Criminal Court and was sentenced to life imprisonment.\nIn July 2012 the CIRA announced it had a new leadership after expelling members who had been working against the organisation.\nIn April 2014 a former leading member of the Belfast Continuity IRA who had been expelled from the organisation, Tommy Crossan, was shot dead.\nIn popular culture.\nThe CIRA are depicted in RT\u00c9's TV series crime drama \"Love/Hate\"."}
{"id": "5862", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5862", "title": "Congo", "text": "Congo may refer to either of two countries that border the Congo River in central Africa:\nCongo or Kongo may also refer to:"}
{"id": "5863", "revid": "13006032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5863", "title": "Copenhagen interpretation", "text": "The Copenhagen interpretation is a collection of views about the meaning of quantum mechanics principally attributed to Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg. It is one of the oldest of numerous proposed interpretations of quantum mechanics, as features of it date to the development of quantum mechanics during 1925\u20131927, and it remains one of the most commonly taught.\nThere is no definitive historical statement of what is the Copenhagen interpretation. There are some fundamental agreements and disagreements between the views of Bohr and Heisenberg. For example, Heisenberg emphasized a sharp \"cut\" between the observer (or the instrument) and the system being observed, while Bohr offered an interpretation that is independent of a subjective observer or measurement or collapse, which relies on an \"irreversible\" or effectively irreversible process, which could take place within the quantum system.\nHans Primas describes nine theses or principles of the Copenhagen interpretation: quantum physics applies to individual objects, not only ensembles of objects; their description is probabilistic; their description is the result of experiments described in terms of classical (non-quantum) physics; the \"frontier\" that separates the classical from the quantum can be chosen arbitrarily; the act of \"observation\" or \"measurement\" is irreversible; the act of \"observation\" or \"measurement\" involves an action upon the object measured and reduces the wave packet; complementary properties cannot be observed simultaneously; no truth can be attributed to an object except according to the results of its measurement; and that quantum descriptions are objective, in that they are independent of physicists' mental arbitrariness.\nOver the years, there have been many objections to aspects of the Copenhagen interpretation, including the discontinuous and stochastic nature of the \"observation\" or \"measurement\" process, the apparent subjectivity of requiring an observer, the difficulty of defining what might count as a measuring device, and the seeming reliance upon classical physics in describing such devices.\nBackground.\nStarting in 1900, investigations into atomic and subatomic phenomena forced a revision to the basic concepts of classical physics. However, it was not until a quarter-century had elapsed that the revision reached the status of a coherent theory. During the intervening period, now known as the time of the \"old quantum theory\", physicists worked with approximations and heuristic corrections to classical physics. Notable results from this period include Max Planck's calculation of the blackbody radiation spectrum, Albert Einstein's explanation of the photoelectric effect, Einstein and Peter Debye's work on the specific heat of solids, Niels Bohr and Hendrika Johanna van Leeuwen's proof that classical physics cannot account for diamagnetism, Bohr's model of the hydrogen atom and Arnold Sommerfeld's extension of the Bohr model to include relativistic effects. From 1922 through 1925, this method of heuristic corrections encountered increasing difficulties; for example, the Bohr\u2013Sommerfeld model could not be extended from hydrogen to the next simplest case, the helium atom.\nThe transition from the old quantum theory to full-fledged quantum physics began in 1925, when Werner Heisenberg presented a treatment of electron behavior based on discussing only \"observable\" quantities, meaning to Heisenberg the frequencies of light that atoms absorbed and emitted. Max Born then realized that in Heisenberg's theory, the classical variables of position and momentum would instead be represented by matrices, mathematical objects that can be multiplied together like numbers with the crucial difference that the order of multiplication matters. Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger presented an equation that treated the electron as a wave, and Born discovered that the way to successfully interpret the wave function that appeared in the Schr\u00f6dinger equation was as a tool for calculating probabilities.\nQuantum mechanics cannot easily be reconciled with everyday language and observation, and has often seemed counter-intuitive to physicists, including its inventors. The ideas grouped together as the Copenhagen interpretation suggest a way to think about how the mathematics of quantum theory relates to physical reality.\nOrigin and use of the term.\nWerner Heisenberg had been an assistant to Niels Bohr at his institute in Copenhagen during part of the 1920s, when they helped originate quantum mechanical theory. In 1929, Heisenberg gave a series of invited lectures at the University of Chicago explaining the new field of quantum mechanics. The lectures then served as the basis for his textbook, \"The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory\", published in 1930. In the book's preface, Heisenberg wrote:\nOn the whole, the book contains nothing that is not to be found in previous publications, particularly in the investigations of Bohr. The purpose of the book seems to me to be fulfilled if it contributes somewhat to the diffusion of that 'Kopenhagener Geist der Quantentheorie' [i.e., Copenhagen spirit of quantum theory] if I may so express myself, which has directed the entire development of modern atomic physics.\nThe term 'Copenhagen interpretation' suggests something more than just a spirit, such as some definite set of rules for interpreting the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics, presumably dating back to the 1920s. However, no such text exists, and the writings of Bohr and Heisenberg contradict each other on several important issues. It appears that the particular term, with its more definite sense, was coined by Heisenberg in the 1950s, while criticizing alternative \"interpretations\" (e.g., David Bohm's) that had been developed. Lectures with the titles 'The Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Theory' and 'Criticisms and Counterproposals to the Copenhagen Interpretation', that Heisenberg delivered in 1955, are reprinted in the collection \"Physics and Philosophy\". Before the book was released for sale, Heisenberg privately expressed regret for having used the term, due to its suggestion of the existence of other interpretations, that he considered to be \"nonsense\".\nPrinciples.\nThere is no uniquely definitive statement of the Copenhagen interpretation. The term encompasses the views developed by a number of scientists and philosophers during the second quarter of the 20th century. Bohr and Heisenberg never totally agreed on how to understand the mathematical formalism of quantum mechanics, and Bohr distanced himself from what he considered Heisenberg's more subjective interpretation. Bohr offered an interpretation that is independent of a subjective observer, or measurement, or collapse; instead, an \"irreversible\" or effectively irreversible process causes the decay of quantum coherence which imparts the classical behavior of \"observation\" or \"measurement\".\nDifferent commentators and researchers have associated various ideas with it. Asher Peres remarked that very different, sometimes opposite, views are presented as \"the Copenhagen interpretation\" by different authors. N. David Mermin coined the phrase \"Shut up and calculate!\" to summarize Copenhagen-type views, a saying often misattributed to Richard Feynman and which Mermin later found insufficiently nuanced.\nSome basic principles generally accepted as part of the interpretation include the following:\nHans Primas and Roland Omn\u00e8s give a more detailed breakdown that, in addition to the above, includes the following:\nAnother issue of importance where Bohr and Heisenberg disagreed is wave\u2013particle duality. Bohr maintained that the distinction between a wave view and a particle view was defined by a distinction between experimental setups, whereas Heisenberg held that it was defined by the possibility of viewing the mathematical formulas as referring to waves or particles. Bohr thought that a particular experimental setup would display either a wave picture or a particle picture, but not both. Heisenberg thought that every mathematical formulation was capable of both wave and particle interpretations.\nOne difficulty in discussing the philosophical position of \"the Copenhagen interpretation\" is that there is no single, authoritative source that establishes what the interpretation is. Another complication is that the philosophical background familiar to Einstein, Bohr, Heisenberg, and contemporaries is much less so to physicists and even philosophers of physics in more recent times.\nNature of the wave function.\nA wave function is a mathematical entity that provides a probability distribution for the outcomes of each possible measurement on a system. Knowledge of the quantum state together with the rules for the system's evolution in time exhausts all that can be predicted about the system's behavior. Generally, Copenhagen-type interpretations deny that the wave function provides a directly apprehensible image of an ordinary material body or a discernible component of some such, or anything more than a theoretical concept.\nProbabilities via the Born rule.\nThe Born rule is essential to the Copenhagen interpretation. Formulated by Max Born in 1926, it gives the probability that a measurement of a quantum system will yield a given result. In its simplest form, it states that the probability density of finding a particle at a given point, when measured, is proportional to the square of the magnitude of the particle's wave function at that point.\nCollapse.\nA common perception of \"the\" Copenhagen interpretation is that an important part of it is the \"collapse\" of the wave function. In the act of measurement, it is postulated, the wave function of a system can change suddenly and discontinuously. Prior to a measurement, a wave function involves the various probabilities for the different potential outcomes of that measurement. But when the apparatus registers one of those outcomes, no traces of the others linger.\nHeisenberg spoke of the wave function as representing available knowledge of a system, and did not use the term \"collapse\", but instead termed it \"reduction\" of the wave function to a new state representing the change in available knowledge which occurs once a particular phenomenon is registered by the apparatus. According to Howard and Faye, the writings of Bohr do not mention wave function collapse.\nBecause they assert that the existence of an observed value depends upon the intercession of the observer, Copenhagen-type interpretations are sometimes called \"subjective\". This term is rejected by many Copenhagenists because the process of observation is mechanical and does not depend on the individuality of the observer. Wolfgang Pauli, for example, insisted that measurement results could be obtained and recorded by \"objective registering apparatus\". As Heisenberg wrote,\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, the theory of decoherence helped to explain the appearance of quasi-classical realities emerging from quantum theory, but was insufficient to provide a technical explanation for the apparent wave function collapse.\nCompletion by hidden variables?\nIn metaphysical terms, the Copenhagen interpretation views quantum mechanics as providing knowledge of phenomena, but not as pointing to 'really existing objects', which it regards as residues of ordinary intuition. This makes it an epistemic theory. This may be contrasted with Einstein's view, that physics should look for 'really existing objects', making itself an ontic theory.\nThe metaphysical question is sometimes asked: \"Could quantum mechanics be extended by adding so-called \"hidden variables\" to the mathematical formalism, to convert it from an epistemic to an ontic theory?\" The Copenhagen interpretation answers this with a strong 'No'. It is sometimes alleged, for example by J.S. Bell, that Einstein opposed the Copenhagen interpretation because he believed that the answer to that question of \"hidden variables\" was \"yes\". By contrast, Max Jammer writes \"Einstein never proposed a hidden variable theory.\" Einstein explored the possibility of a hidden variable theory, and wrote a paper describing his exploration, but withdrew it from publication because he felt it was faulty.\nAcceptance among physicists.\nDuring the 1930s and 1940s, views about quantum mechanics attributed to Bohr and emphasizing complementarity became commonplace among physicists. Textbooks of the time generally maintained the principle that the numerical value of a physical quantity is not meaningful or does not exist until it is measured. Prominent physicists associated with Copenhagen-type interpretations included Lev Landau, Wolfgang Pauli, Rudolf Peierls, Asher Peres, and L\u00e9on Rosenfeld.\nThroughout much of the 20th century, the Copenhagen tradition had overwhelming acceptance among physicists. According to a very informal poll (some people voted for multiple interpretations) conducted at a quantum mechanics conference in 1997, the Copenhagen interpretation remained the most widely accepted label that physicists applied to their own views. A similar result was found in a poll conducted in 2011.\nConsequences.\nThe nature of the Copenhagen interpretation is exposed by considering a number of experiments and paradoxes.\nCriticism.\nIncompleteness and indeterminism.\nEinstein was an early and persistent critic of the Copenhagen school. Bohr and Heisenberg advanced the position that no physical property could be understood without an act of measurement, while Einstein refused to accept this. Abraham Pais recalled a walk with Einstein when the two discussed quantum mechanics: \"Einstein suddenly stopped, turned to me and asked whether I really believed that the moon exists only when I look at it.\" While Einstein did not doubt that quantum mechanics was a correct physical theory in that it gave correct predictions, he maintained that it could not be a \"complete\" theory. The most famous product of his efforts to argue the incompleteness of quantum theory is the Einstein\u2013Podolsky\u2013Rosen thought experiment, which was intended to show that physical properties like position and momentum have values even if not measured. The argument of EPR was not generally persuasive to other physicists.\nCarl Friedrich von Weizs\u00e4cker, while participating in a colloquium at Cambridge, denied that the Copenhagen interpretation asserted \"What cannot be observed does not exist\". Instead, he suggested that the Copenhagen interpretation follows the principle \"What is observed certainly exists; about what is not observed we are still free to make suitable assumptions. We use that freedom to avoid paradoxes.\"\nEinstein was likewise dissatisfied with the indeterminism of quantum theory. Regarding the possibility of randomness in nature, Einstein said that he was \"convinced that He [God] does not throw dice.\" Bohr, in response, reputedly said that \"it cannot be for us to tell God, how he is to run the world\".\nThe \"shifty split\".\nMuch criticism of Copenhagen-type interpretations has focused on the need for a classical domain where observers or measuring devices can reside, and the imprecision of how the boundary between quantum and classical might be defined. John Bell called this the \"shifty split\". As typically portrayed, Copenhagen-type interpretations involve two different kinds of time evolution for wave functions, the deterministic flow according to the Schr\u00f6dinger equation and the probabilistic jump during measurement, without a clear criterion for when each kind applies. Why should these two different processes exist, when physicists and laboratory equipment are made of the same matter as the rest of the universe? And if there is somehow a split, where should it be placed? Steven Weinberg writes that the traditional presentation gives \"no way to locate the boundary between the realms in which [...] quantum mechanics does or does not apply.\"\nThe problem of thinking in terms of classical measurements of a quantum system becomes particularly acute in the field of quantum cosmology, where the quantum system is the universe. How does an observer stand outside the universe in order to measure it, and who was there to observe the universe in its earliest stages? Advocates of Copenhagen-type interpretations have disputed the seriousness of these objections. Rudolf Peierls noted that \"the observer does not have to be contemporaneous with the event\"; for example, we study the early universe through the cosmic microwave background, and we can apply quantum mechanics to that just as well as to any electromagnetic field. Likewise, Asher Peres argued that physicists \"are\", conceptually, outside those degrees of freedom that cosmology studies, and applying quantum mechanics to the radius of the universe while neglecting the physicists in it is no different from quantizing the electric current in a superconductor while neglecting the atomic-level details.\nE. T. Jaynes, an advocate of Bayesian probability, argued that probability is a measure of a state of information about the physical world, and so regarding it as a physical phenomenon would be an example of a mind projection fallacy. Jaynes described the mathematical formalism of quantum physics as \"a peculiar mixture describing in part realities of Nature, in part incomplete human information about Nature\u2014all scrambled up together by Heisenberg and Bohr into an omelette that nobody has seen how to unscramble\".\nAlternatives.\nThe ensemble interpretation is similar; it offers an interpretation of the wave function, but not for single particles. The consistent histories interpretation advertises itself as \"Copenhagen done right\". Although the Copenhagen interpretation is often confused with the idea that consciousness causes collapse, it defines an \"observer\" merely as that which collapses the wave function. More recently, interpretations inspired by quantum information theory like QBism and relational quantum mechanics have attracted support.\nUnder realism and determinism, if the wave function is regarded as ontologically real, and collapse is entirely rejected, a many worlds theory results. If wave function collapse is regarded as ontologically real as well, an objective collapse theory is obtained. Bohmian mechanics shows that it is possible to reformulate quantum mechanics to make it deterministic, at the price of making it explicitly nonlocal. It attributes not only a wave function to a physical system, but in addition a real position, that evolves deterministically under a nonlocal guiding equation. The evolution of a physical system is given at all times by the Schr\u00f6dinger equation together with the guiding equation; there is never a collapse of the wave function. The transactional interpretation is also explicitly nonlocal.\nSome physicists espoused views in the \"Copenhagen spirit\" and then went on to advocate other interpretations. For example, David Bohm and Alfred Land\u00e9 both wrote textbooks that put forth ideas in the Bohr\u2013Heisenberg tradition, and later promoted nonlocal hidden variables and an ensemble interpretation respectively. John Archibald Wheeler began his career as an \"apostle of Niels Bohr\"; he then supervised the PhD thesis of Hugh Everett that proposed the many-worlds interpretation. After supporting Everett's work for several years, he began to distance himself from the many-worlds interpretation in the 1970s. Late in life, he wrote that while the Copenhagen interpretation might fairly be called \"the fog from the north\", it \"remains the best interpretation of the quantum that we have\".\nOther physicists, while influenced by the Copenhagen tradition, have expressed frustration at how it took the mathematical formalism of quantum theory as given, rather than trying to understand how it might arise from something more fundamental. This dissatisfaction has motivated new interpretative variants as well as technical work in quantum foundations."}
{"id": "5864", "revid": "1017112857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5864", "title": "Customs union", "text": "A customs union is generally defined as a type of trade bloc which is composed of a free trade area with a common external tariff.\nCustoms unions are established through trade pacts where the participant countries set up common external trade policy (in some cases they use different import quotas). Common competition policy is also helpful to avoid \"competition deficiency\".\nPurposes for establishing a customs union normally include increasing economic efficiency and establishing closer political and cultural ties between the member countries. It is the third stage of economic integration.\nEvery economic union, customs and monetary union and economic and monetary union includes a customs union.\nWTO Definition.\nThe General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, part of the World Trade Organization framework defines a customs union in the following way:\nHistorical background.\nThe German Customs Union, the Zollverein, which was established in 1834, and gradually developed and expanded, was a customs union organization that appeared earlier and played a role in promoting German economic development and political unification at that time. Before the establishment of the unified German Empire in the 1870s, there were checkpoints between and within the German states, which hindered the development of industry and commerce. In 1818, Prussia took the lead in abolishing the customs duties in the mainland; it was followed by the establishment of the North German Customs Union in 1826. Two years later, two customs unions were established in the states of China and South Germany.\nIn 1834, 18 states joined together to form the German Customs Union with Prussia as the main leader. Thereafter, this alliance was further expanded to all German-speaking regions and became the All-German Customs Union. The contents of the alliance convention included: abolishing internal tariffs, unifying external tariffs, raising import tax rates, and allocating tariff income to all states in the alliance in proportion. In addition, there is a customs union between France and Monaco, which was established in 1865.\nA customs union was established by Switzerland and Liechtenstein in 1924, by Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg in 1948, by the countries of the European Economic Community in 1958, and by the Economic Community of Central African States in 1964. At that time, the European Free Trade Association was different from the European Economic Community Customs Union. Free trade within the former was limited to industrial products, and no uniform tariffs were imposed on countries outside the Union.\nMain feature.\nThe main feature of the Customs Union is that the member countries have not only eliminated trade barriers and implemented free trade, but also established a common external tariff. In other words, in addition to agreeing to eliminate each other 's trade barriers, members of the Customs Union also adopt common external tariff and trade policies. GATT stipulates that if the customs union is not established immediately, but is gradually completed over a period of time, it should be completed within a reasonable period, which generally does not exceed 10 years.\nProtect measures.\nThe exclusive protection measures of the Customs Union mainly include the following:\nEconomic Effects.\nThe Customs Union started in Europe and is one of the organizational forms of economic integration. The customs union has two economic effects, static effects and dynamic effects.\nThere are trade creation effects and trade diversion effects. The trade creation effect refers to the benefits generated by products from domestic production with higher production costs to the production of customs union countries with lower costs. The trade diversion effect refers to the loss incurred when a product is imported from a non-member country with lower production costs to a member country with a higher cost. This is the price of joining the customs union. When the trade creation effect is greater than the transfer effect, the combined effect of joining the Customs Union on the member countries is net profit, which means an increase in the economic welfare level of the member countries; otherwise, it is a net loss and a decline in the economic welfare level.\nThe trade creation effect is usually regarded as a positive effect. This is because the domestic production cost of country A is higher than the production cost of country A 's imports from country B. The Customs Union made Country A give up the domestic production of some commodities and change it to Country B to produce these commodities. From a worldwide perspective, this kind of production conversion improves the efficiency of resource allocation.\nThe customs union will not only bring static effects to member states, but also bring some dynamic effects to them. Sometimes, this dynamic effect is more important than its static effect, which has an important impact on the economic growth of member countries.\nLists of customs unions.\nCurrent.\nAdditionally, the autonomous and dependent territories such as some of the EU member state special territories are sometimes treated as separate customs territories from their mainland states or have varying arrangements of formal or de facto customs union, common market and currency union (or combinations thereof) with the mainland and in regards to third countries through the trade pacts signed by the mainland state.\nThe European Union is a customs union and therefore sets a common external tarif."}
{"id": "5865", "revid": "41405785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5865", "title": "Council of Europe", "text": "The Council of Europe (CoE; , ) is an international organisation founded in the wake of World War II to uphold human rights, democracy and the rule of law in Europe. Founded in 1949, it has 47 member states, with a population of approximately 820 million, and operates with an annual budget of approximately 500 million euros.\nThe organisation is distinct from the 27-nation European Union (EU), although it is sometimes confused with it, partly because the EU has adopted the original European Flag which was created by the Council of Europe in 1955, as well as the European Anthem. No country has ever joined the EU without first belonging to the Council of Europe. The Council of Europe is an official United Nations Observer.\nThe Council of Europe cannot make binding laws, but it does have the power to enforce select international agreements reached by European states on various topics. The best known body of the Council of Europe is the European Court of Human Rights, which enforces the European Convention on Human Rights.\nThe Council's two statutory bodies are the Committee of Ministers, comprising the foreign ministers of each member state, and the Parliamentary Assembly, composed of members of the national parliaments of each member state. The Commissioner for Human Rights is an independent institution within the Council of Europe, mandated to promote awareness of and respect for human rights in the member states. The Secretary General heads the secretariat of the organisation. Other major CoE bodies include the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines and the European Audiovisual Observatory.\nThe headquarters of the Council of Europe are in Strasbourg, France. English and French are its two official languages. The Committee of Ministers, the Parliamentary Assembly, and the Congress of the Council of Europe also use German, Italian, and Russian for some of their work.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nIn a speech in 1929, French Foreign Minister Aristide Briand floated the idea of an organisation which would gather European nations together in a \"federal union\" to resolve common problems. But it was Britain's wartime leader Sir Winston Churchill who first publicly suggested the creation of a \u201cCouncil of Europe\u201d in a BBC radio broadcast on 21 March 1943, while the Second World War was still raging. In his own words, he tried to \"peer through the mists of the future to the end of the war\u201d, and think about how to re-build and maintain peace on a shattered continent. Given that Europe had been at the origin of two world wars, the creation of such a body would be, he suggested, \"a stupendous business\". He returned to the idea during a well-known speech at the University of Zurich on 19 September 1946, throwing the full weight of his considerable post-war prestige behind it. But there were many other statesmen and politicians across the continent, many of them members of the European Movement, who were quietly working towards the creation of the Council. Some regarded it as a guarantee that the horrors of war could never again be visited on the continent, others came to see it as a \"club of democracies\", built around a set of common values that could stand as a bulwark against totalitarian states belonging to the Eastern Bloc. Others again saw it as a nascent \"United States of Europe\", the resonant phrase that Churchill had reached for at Zurich in 1946.\nThe future structure of the Council of Europe was discussed at the Congress of Europe which brought together several hundred leading politicians, government representatives and members of civil society in The Hague, Netherlands, in 1948. There were two competing schools of thought: some favoured a classical international organisation with representatives of governments, while others preferred a political forum with parliamentarians. Both approaches were finally combined through the creation of a Committee of Ministers (in which governments were represented) and a Consultative Assembly (in which parliaments were represented), the two main bodies mentioned in the Statute of the Council of Europe. This dual intergovernmental and inter-parliamentary structure was later copied for the European Communities, North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe.\nThe Council of Europe was signed into existence on 5 May 1949 by the Treaty of London, the organisation's founding Statute which set out the three basic values that should guide its work: democracy, human rights and the rule of law. It was signed in London on that day by ten states: Belgium, Denmark, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom, though Turkey and Greece joined three months later. On 10 August 1949, 100 members of the Council's Consultative Assembly, parliamentarians drawn from the twelve member nations, met in Strasbourg for its first plenary session, held over 18 sittings and lasting nearly a month. They debated how to reconcile and reconstruct a continent still reeling from war, yet already facing a new East\u2013West divide, launched the concept of a trans-national court to protect the basic human rights of every citizen, and took the first steps in a process that would eventually lead to the creation of the European Union.\nIn August 1949, Paul-Henri Spaak resigned as Belgium\u2019s Foreign Minister in order to be elected as the first President of the Assembly. Behind the scenes, he too had been quietly working towards the creation of the Council, and played a key role in steering its early work. However, in December 1951, after nearly three years in the role, Spaak resigned in disappointment after the Assembly rejected proposals for a \u201cEuropean political authority\u201d. Convinced that the Council of Europe was never going to be in a position to achieve his long-term goal of a unified Europe, he soon tried again in a new and more promising format, based this time on economic integration, becoming one of the founders of the European Union.\nEarly years.\nThere was huge enthusiasm for the Council of Europe in its early years, as its pioneers set about drafting what was to become the European Convention on Human Rights, a charter of individual rights which - it was hoped - no member government could ever again violate. They drew, in part, on the tenets of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, signed only a few months earlier in Paris. But crucially, where the Universal Declaration was essentially aspirational, the European Convention from the beginning featured an enforcement mechanism - an international Court - which was to adjudicate on alleged violations of its articles and hold governments to account, a dramatic leap forward for international justice. Today, this is the European Court of Human Rights, whose rulings are binding on 47 European nations, the most far-reaching system of international justice anywhere in the world. \nOne of the Council's first acts was to welcome West Germany into its fold on 2 May 1951, setting a pattern of post-war reconciliation that was to become a hallmark of the Council, and beginning a long process of \"enlargement\" which was to see the organisation grow from its original ten founding member states to the 47 nations that make up the Council of Europe today. Iceland had already joined in 1950, followed in 1956 by Austria, Cyprus in 1961, Switzerland in 1963 and Malta in 1965.\nHistoric speeches at the Council of Europe.\nIn 2018 an archive of all speeches made to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe by heads of state or government since the Council of Europe's creation in 1949 appeared online, the fruit of a two-year project entitled \"Voices of Europe\". At the time of its launch, the archive comprised 263 speeches delivered over a 70-year period by some 216 Presidents, Prime Ministers, monarchs and religious leaders from 45 countries - though it continues to expand, as new speeches are added every few months.\nSome very early speeches by individuals considered to be \"founding figures\" of the European institutions, even if they were not heads of state or government at the time, are also included (such as Sir Winston Churchill or Robert Schuman). Addresses by eight monarchs appear in the list (such as King Juan Carlos I of Spain, King Albert II of Belgium and Grand Duke Henri of Luxembourg) as well as the speeches given by religious figures (such as Pope John Paul II, and Pope Francis) and several leaders from countries in the Middle East and North Africa (such as Shimon Peres, Yasser Arafat, Hosni Mubarak, L\u00e9opold S\u00e9dar Senghor or King Hussein of Jordan).\nThe full text of the speeches is given in both English and French, regardless of the original language used. The archive is searchable by country, by name, and chronologically.\nAims and achievements.\nArticle 1(a) of the Statute states that \"The aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater unity between its members for the purpose of safeguarding and realising the ideals and principles which are their common heritage and facilitating their economic and social progress.\" Membership is open to all European states who seek harmony, cooperation, good governance and human rights, accepting the principle of the rule of law and are able and willing to guarantee democracy, fundamental human rights and freedoms.\nWhereas the member states of the European Union transfer part of their national legislative and executive powers to the European Commission and the European Parliament, Council of Europe member states maintain their sovereignty but commit themselves through conventions/treaties (international law) and co-operate on the basis of common values and common political decisions. Those conventions and decisions are developed by the member states working together at the Council of Europe. Both organisations function as concentric circles around the common foundations for European co-operation and harmony, with the Council of Europe being the geographically wider circle. The European Union could be seen as the smaller circle with a much higher level of integration through the transfer of powers from the national to the EU level. \"The Council of Europe and the European Union: different roles, shared values.\" Council of Europe conventions/treaties are also open for signature to non-member states, thus facilitating equal co-operation with countries outside Europe.\nThe Council of Europe's most famous achievement is the European Convention on Human Rights, which was adopted in 1950 following a report by the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly, and followed on from the United Nations 'Universal Declaration of Human Rights' (UDHR). The Convention created the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. The Court supervises compliance with the European Convention on Human Rights and thus functions as the highest European court. It is to this court that Europeans can bring cases if they believe that a member country has violated their fundamental rights and freedoms.\nThe various activities and achievements of the Council of Europe can be found in detail on its official website. The Council of Europe works in the following areas:\nInstitutions.\nThe institutions of the Council of Europe are:\nThe CoE system also includes a number of semi-autonomous structures known as \"Partial Agreements\", some of which are also open to non-member states:\nHeadquarters and buildings.\nThe seat of the Council of Europe is in Strasbourg, France. First meetings were held in Strasbourg's University Palace in 1949, but the Council of Europe soon moved into its own buildings. The Council of Europe's eight main buildings are situated in the \"Quartier europ\u00e9en\", an area in the northeast of Strasbourg spread over the three districts of Le Wacken, La Robertsau and Quartier de l'Orangerie, where are also located the four buildings of the seat of the European Parliament in Strasbourg, the Arte headquarters and the seat of the International Institute of Human Rights.\nBuilding in the area started in 1949 with the predecessor of the Palais de l'Europe, the House of Europe (demolished in 1977), and came to a provisional end in 2007 with the opening of the New General Office Building, later named \"Agora\", in 2008. The Palais de l'Europe (Palace of Europe) and the Art Nouveau Villa Schutzenberger (seat of the European Audiovisual Observatory) are in the Orangerie district, and the European Court of Human Rights, the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines and the Agora Building are in the Robertsau district. The Agora building has been voted \"best international business center real estate project of 2007\" on 13 March 2008, at the MIPIM 2008. The European Youth Centre is located in the Wacken district.\nBesides its headquarters in Strasbourg, the Council of Europe is also present in other cities and countries. The Council of Europe Development Bank has its seat in Paris, the North-South Centre of the Council of Europe is established in Lisbon, Portugal, and the Centre for Modern Languages is in Graz, Austria. There are European Youth Centres in Budapest, Hungary, and in Strasbourg. The European Wergeland Centre, a new Resource Centre on education for intercultural dialogue, human rights and democratic citizenship, operated in cooperation with the Norwegian Government, opened in Oslo, Norway, in February 2009.\nThe Council of Europe has offices in Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Moldova, Montenegro, Serbia, and Ukraine; information offices in Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, North Macedonia, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Ukraine; and a projects office in Turkey. All these offices are establishments of the Council of Europe and they share its juridical personality with privileges and immunities.\nMember states, observers, partners.\nThe Council of Europe was founded on 5 May 1949 by Belgium, Denmark, France, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom. Greece joined three months later, and Iceland, Turkey and West Germany the next year. It now has 47 member states, with Montenegro being the latest to join.\nArticle 4 of the Council of Europe Statute specifies that membership is open to any \"European\" State. This has been interpreted liberally from the beginning, when Turkey was admitted, to include transcontinental states (such as Georgia and Azerbaijan) and states that are geographically Asian but socio-politically European (such as Armenia and Cyprus).\nNearly all European states have acceded to the Council of Europe, with the exceptions of Belarus (human rights concerns including active use of the death penalty), Kazakhstan (human rights concerns), and the Vatican City (a theocracy), as well as some of the territories with limited recognition.\nBesides the status as a full member, the Council of Europe has established other instruments for cooperation and participation of non-member states: observer, applicant, special guest, and partner for democracy.\nCo-operation.\nNon-member states.\nThe Council of Europe works mainly through conventions. By drafting conventions or international treaties, common legal standards are set for its member states. However, several conventions have also been opened for signature to non-member states. Important examples are the Convention on Cybercrime (signed for example, by Canada, Japan, South Africa and the United States), the Lisbon Recognition Convention on the recognition of study periods and degrees (signed for example, by Australia, Belarus, Canada, the Holy See, Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, New Zealand and the United States), the Anti-doping Convention (signed, for example, by Australia, Belarus, Canada and Tunisia) and the Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats (signed for example, by Burkina Faso, Morocco, Tunisia and Senegal as well as the European Community). Non-member states also participate in several partial agreements, such as the Venice Commission, the Group of States Against Corruption (GRECO), the European Pharmacopoeia Commission and the North-South Centre.\nInvitations to sign and ratify relevant conventions of the Council of Europe on a case-by-case basis are sent to three groups of non-member entities:\nEuropean Union.\nThe Council of Europe is not to be confused with the Council of the European Union (the \"Council of Ministers\") or the European Council. These belong to the European Union, which is separate from the Council of Europe, although they have shared the same European flag and anthem since the 1980s since they both work for European integration. Nor is the Council of Europe to be confused with the European Union itself.\nThe Council of Europe is an entirely separate body from the European Union. It is not controlled by it.\nCooperation between the European Union and the Council of Europe has recently been reinforced, notably on culture and education as well as on the international enforcement of justice and Human Rights.\nThe European Union is expected to accede to the European Convention on Human Rights (the Convention). There are also concerns about consistency in case law \u2013 the European Court of Justice (the EU's court in Luxembourg) is treating the Convention as part of the legal system of all EU member states in order to prevent conflict between its judgements and those of the European Court of Human Rights (the court in Strasbourg interpreting the Convention). Protocol No. 14 of the Convention is designed to allow the EU to accede to it and the EU Treaty of Lisbon contains a protocol binding the EU to join. The EU would thus be subject to its human rights law and external monitoring as its member states currently are.\nSchools of Political Studies.\nThe Council of Europe Schools of political studies were established to train future generations of political, economic, social and cultural leaders in countries in transition. With the participation of national and international experts, they run annual series of seminars and conferences on topics such as European integration, democracy, human rights, the rule of law and globalisation. The first School of Political Studies was created in Moscow in 1992. Since then, 20 other schools have been set up along the same lines and now form an Association; a genuine network now covering the whole of Eastern and South-Eastern Europe and the Caucasus, as well as some countries in the Southern Mediterranean region. The Council of Europe Schools of political studies is part of the Education Department which is part of the Directorate of Democratic Participation within the Directorate General of Democracy (\u201cDGII\u201d) of the Council of Europe. \nUnited Nations.\nThe beginning of co-operation between the CoE and the UN started with the agreement signed by the Secretariats of these institutions on 15 December 1951. On 17 October 1989, the General Assembly of the United Nations approved a resolution on granting observer status to the Council of Europe which was proposed by several member states of the CoE. Currently, the Council of Europe holds observer status with the United Nations and is regularly represented in the UN General Assembly. It has organised the regional UN conferences against racism and on women and co-operates with the United Nations at many levels, in particular in the areas of human rights, minorities, migration and counter-terrorism. In November 2016, the UN General Assembly adopted by consensus Resolution (A/Res/71/17) on Cooperation between the United Nations and the Council of Europe whereby it acknowledged the contribution of Council of Europe to the protection and strengthening of human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of law, welcomed the ongoing co-operation in a variety of fields.\nNon-governmental organisations.\nNon-governmental organisations (NGOs) can participate in the INGOs Conference of the Council of Europe and become observers to inter-governmental committees of experts. The Council of Europe drafted the European Convention on the Recognition of the Legal Personality of International Non-Governmental Organisations in 1986, which sets the legal basis for the existence and work of NGOs in Europe. Article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights protects the right to freedom of association, which is also a fundamental norm for NGOs. The rules for Consultative Status for INGOs appended to the resolution (93)38 \"On relation between the Council of Europe and non-governmental organisations\", adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 18 October 1993 at the 500th meeting of the Ministers' Deputies.\nOn 19 November 2003, the Committee of Ministers changed the consultative status into a participatory status, \"considering that it is indispensable that the rules governing the relations between the Council of Europe and NGOs evolve to reflect the active participation of international non-governmental organisations (INGOs) in the Organisation's policy and work programme\".\nOthers.\nOn 30 May 2018, the Council of Europe signed a memorandum of understanding with the European football confederation UEFA.\nThe Council of Europe also signed an agreement with FIFA in which the two agreed to strengthen future cooperation in areas of common interests. The deal which included cooperation between member states in the sport of football and safety and security at football matches was finalized in October 2018.\nCharacteristics.\nPrivileges and immunities.\nThe General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe grants the organisation certain privileges and immunities.\nThe working conditions of staff are governed by the Council's staff regulations, which are public. Salaries and emoluments paid by the Council of Europe to its officials are tax-exempt on the basis of Article\u00a018 of the General Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Council of Europe.\nSymbol and anthem.\nThe Council of Europe created, and has since 1955 used as its official symbol, the European Flag with 12 golden stars arranged in a circle on a blue background.\nIts musical anthem since 1972, the \"European Anthem\", is based on the \"Ode to Joy\" theme from Ludwig van Beethoven's ninth symphony.\nOn 5 May 1964, the 15th anniversary of its founding, the Council of Europe established 5 May as Europe Day.\nThe wide private and public use of the European Flag is encouraged to symbolise a European dimension. To avoid confusion with the European Union which subsequently adopted the same flag in the 1980s, as well as other European institutions, the Council of Europe often uses a modified version with a lower-case \"e\" surrounding the stars which are referred to as the \"Council of Europe Logo\".\nCriticism and controversies.\nThe Council of Europe has been accused of institutional corruption and of not having any meaningful purpose, being superfluous in its aims to other pan-European bodies, including the European Union and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). In 2013 \"The Economist\" agreed, saying that the \"Council of Europe's credibility is on the line\". Both Human Rights Watch and the European Stability Initiative have called on the Council of Europe to undertake concrete actions to show that it is willing and able to return to its \"original mission to protect and ensure human rights\".\nIssues have been raised regarding Azerbaijan's relationship to the Council of Europe, including allegations that Azerbaijan has, over a sustained period, provided bribes to Council members to vote down criticism of the authoritarian rule of the Aliyev regime and support motions advantageous to Azerbaijan. Azerbaijan joined the Council of Europe in 2001. Since September 2014 Human Rights Watch said that \"Azerbaijan's systematic crackdown on human rights defenders and other perceived government critics shows sheer contempt for its commitments to the Council of Europe\".\nIn 2017 Council member and Italian politician Luca Volont\u00e8 was accused by Italian prosecutors of receiving over 2.3 million euros in bribes in exchange for working for Azerbaijan in the parliamentary assembly, and that in 2013 he played a key role in orchestrating the defeat of a highly critical report on the abuse of political prisoners in Azerbaijan. The money was paid to Volont\u00e8 in monthly instalments of 100,000 euros, starting in 2013, via four anonymous offshore companies. The payments stopped in 2014 when Volont\u00e8's bank reported them as suspicious transactions to the Milan prosecutor's office. Arif Mammadov, former head of the Azerbaijan representation at the Council of Europe, has stated that Azerbaijan's delegation at the Council had 25 million dollars available to \"bribe members of the delegations and PACE generally\". \nFrom 2014, Russia's voting rights were temporarily suspended by the Council due to the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation from Ukraine. In response, Russia withheld its annual membership dues in the amount of 33 million euros, placing the institution under financial strain. Russia claimed that its suspension by the Council was unfair, and demanded the restoration of voting rights. European Council secretary-general Thorbj\u00f8rn Jagland organized a special committee to find a compromise with Russia in early 2018, a move that was criticized as giving in to alleged Russian pressure by Council members and academic observers, especially if voting sanctions were lifted. In May 2019, Russia's voting rights were restored after members of the human rights watchdog reached agreement to resolve dispute and the overwhelming majority of the Council voted in favour of the restoration."}
{"id": "5866", "revid": "1023093305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5866", "title": "Council of the European Union", "text": "The Council of the European Union, often referred to in the treaties and other official documents simply as the Council, and informally known as the Council of Ministers, is the third of the seven Institutions of the European Union (EU) as listed in the Treaty on European Union. It is one of three legislative bodies and together with the European Parliament serves to amend and approve the proposals of the European Commission, which holds legislative initiative.\nThe Council of the European Union and the European Council are the only EU institutions that are explicitly intergovernmental, that is, forums whose attendees express and represent the position of their member state's executive, be they ambassadors, ministers or heads of state/government.\nThe Council meets in 10 different configurations of national ministers (one per state). The precise membership of these configurations varies according to the topic under consideration; for example, when discussing agricultural policy the Council is formed by the national ministers whose portfolio includes this policy area (with the related European Commissioners contributing but not voting).\nComposition.\nThe Presidency of the Council rotates every six months among the governments of EU member states, with the relevant ministers of the respective country holding the Presidency at any given time ensuring the smooth running of the meetings and setting the daily agenda. The continuity between presidencies is provided by an arrangement under which three successive presidencies, known as \"Presidency trios\", share common political programmes. The Foreign Affairs Council (national foreign ministers) is however chaired by the Union's High Representative.\nIts decisions are made by qualified majority voting in most areas, unanimity in others, or just simple majority for procedural issues. Usually where it operates unanimously, it only needs to consult the Parliament. However, in most areas the ordinary legislative procedure applies meaning both Council and Parliament share legislative and budgetary powers equally, meaning both have to agree for a proposal to pass. In a few limited areas the Council may initiate new EU law itself.\nThe General Secretariat of the Council of the European Union, also known as \"Council Secretariat\", assists the Council of the European Union, the Presidency of the Council of the European Union, the European Council and the President of the European Council. The Secretariat is headed by the Secretary-General of the Council of the European Union. The Secretariat is divided into seven directorates-general, each administered by a director-general.\nHistory.\nThe Council first appeared in the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) as the \"Special Council of Ministers\", set up to counterbalance the High Authority (the supranational executive, now the Commission). The original Council had limited powers: issues relating only to coal and steel were in the Authority's domain, and the Council's consent was only required on decisions outside coal and steel. As a whole, the Council only scrutinised the High Authority (the executive). In 1957, the Treaties of Rome established two new communities, and with them two new Councils: the Council of the European Atomic Energy Community (EAEC) and the Council of the European Economic Community (EEC). However, due to objections over the supranational power of the Authority, their Councils had more powers; the new executive bodies were known as \"Commissions\".\nIn 1965 the Council was hit by the \"empty chair crisis\". Due to disagreements between French President Charles de Gaulle and the Commission's agriculture proposals, among other things, France boycotted all meetings of the Council. This halted the Council's work until the impasse was resolved the following year by the Luxembourg compromise. Although initiated by a gamble of the President of the Commission, Walter Hallstein, who later on lost the Presidency, the crisis exposed flaws in the Council's workings.\nUnder the Merger Treaty of 1967, the ECSC's Special Council of Ministers and the Council of the EAEC (together with their other independent institutions) were merged into the Council of the European Communities, which would act as a single Council for all three instututions. In 1993, the Council adopted the name 'Council of the European Union', following the establishment of the European Union by the Maastricht Treaty. That treaty strengthened the Council, with the addition of more intergovernmental elements in the three pillars system. However, at the same time the Parliament and Commission had been strengthened inside the Community pillar, curtailing the ability of the Council to act independently.\nThe Treaty of Lisbon abolished the pillar system and gave further powers to Parliament. It also merged the Council's High Representative with the Commission's foreign policy head, with this new figure chairing the foreign affairs Council rather than the rotating presidency. The European Council was declared a separate institution from the Council, also chaired by a permanent president, and the different Council configurations were mentioned in the treaties for the first time.\nThe development of the Council has been characterised by the rise in power of the Parliament, with which the Council has had to share its legislative powers. The Parliament has often provided opposition to the Council's wishes. This has in some cases led to clashes between both bodies with the Council's system of intergovernmentalism contradicting the developing parliamentary system and supranational principles.\nPowers and functions.\nThe primary purpose of the Council is to act as one of two vetoing bodies of the EU's legislative branch, the other being the European Parliament. Together they serve to amend, approve or disapprove the proposals of the European Commission, which has the sole power to propose laws. Jointly with the Parliament, the Council holds the budgetary power of the Union and has greater control than the Parliament over the more intergovernmental areas of the EU, such as foreign policy and macroeconomic co-ordination. Finally, before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon, it formally held the executive power of the EU which it conferred upon the European Commission. It is considered by some to be equivalent to an upper house of the EU legislature, although it's not described as such in the treaties. The Council represents the executive governments of the EU's member states and is based in the Europa building in Brussels.\nLegislative procedure.\nThe EU's legislative authority is divided between the Council, the Parliament and the Commission. As the relationships and powers of these institutions have developed, various legislative procedures have been created for adopting laws. In early times, the \"avis facultatif\" maxim was: \"The Commission proposes, and the Council disposes\"; but now the vast majority of laws are now subject to the ordinary legislative procedure, which works on the principle that consent from both the Council and Parliament are required before a law may be adopted.\nUnder this procedure, the Commission presents a proposal to Parliament and the Council. Following its first reading the Parliament may propose amendments. If the Council accepts these amendments then the legislation is approved. If it does not then it adopts a \"common position\" and submits that new version to the Parliament. At its second reading, if the Parliament approves the text or does not act, the text is adopted, otherwise the Parliament may propose further amendments to the Council's proposal. It may be rejected out right by an absolute majority of MEPs. If the Council still does not approve the Parliament's position, then the text is taken to a \"Conciliation Committee\" composed of the Council members plus an equal number of MEPs. If a Committee manages to adopt a joint text, it then has to be approved in a third reading by both the Council and Parliament or the proposal is abandoned.\nThe few other areas that operate the \"special legislative procedures\" are justice &amp; home affairs, budget and taxation and certain aspects of other policy areas: such as the fiscal aspects of environmental policy. In these areas, the Council or Parliament decide law alone. The procedure used also depends upon which type of institutional act is being used. The strongest act is a regulation, an act or law which is directly applicable in its entirety. Then there are directives which bind members to certain goals which they must achieve, but they do this through their own laws and hence have room to manoeuvre in deciding upon them. A decision is an instrument which is focused at a particular person or group and is directly applicable. Institutions may also issue recommendations and opinions which are merely non-binding declarations.\nThe Council votes in one of three ways; unanimity, simple majority, or qualified majority. In most cases, the Council votes on issues by qualified majority voting, meaning that there must be a minimum of 55% of member states agreeing (at least 15) who together represent at least 65% of the EU population. A 'blocking minority' can only be formed by at least 4 member states representing at least 35% of the EU population.\nResolutions.\nCouncil resolutions have no legal effect. Usually the Council's intention is to set out future work foreseen in a specific policy area or to invite action by the Commission. If a resolution covers a policy area which is not entirely within an area of EU competency, the resolution will be issued as a \"resolution of the Council and the representatives of the governments of the member states\". Examples are the Council Resolution of 26 September 1989 on the development of subcontracting in the Community and the Council Resolution of 26 November 2001 on consumer credit and indebtedness.\nForeign affairs.\nThe legal instruments used by the Council for the Common Foreign and Security Policy are different from the legislative acts. Under the CFSP they consist of \"common positions\", \"joint actions\", and \"common strategies\". Common positions relate to defining a European foreign policy towards a particular third-country such as the promotion of human rights and democracy in Myanmar, a region such as the stabilisation efforts in the African Great Lakes, or a certain issue such as support for the International Criminal Court. A common position, once agreed, is binding on all EU states who must follow and defend the policy, which is regularly revised. A joint action refers to a co-ordinated action of the states to deploy resources to achieve an objective, for example for mine clearing or to combat the spread of small arms. Common strategies defined an objective and commits the EUs resources to that task for four years.\nBudgetary authority.\nThe legislative branch officially holds the Union's budgetary authority. The EU's budget (which is around 155 billion euro) is subject to a form of the ordinary legislative procedure with a single reading giving Parliament power over the entire budget (prior to 2009, its influence was limited to certain areas) on an equal footing with the Council. If there is a disagreement between them, it is taken to a conciliation committee as it is for legislative proposals. But if the joint conciliation text is not approved, the Parliament may adopt the budget definitively. In addition to the budget, the Council coordinates the economic policy of members.\nOrganisation.\nThe Council's rules of procedure contain the provisions necessary for its organisation and functioning.\nPresidency.\nThe Presidency of the Council is not a single post, but is held by a member state's government. Every six months the presidency rotates among the states, in an order predefined by the Council's members, allowing each state to preside over the body. From 2007, every three member states co-operate for their combined eighteen months on a common agenda, although only one formally holds the presidency for the normal six-month period. For example, the President for the second half of 2007, Portugal, was the second in a trio of states alongside Germany and Slovenia with whom Portugal had been co-operating. The Council meets in various configurations (as outlined below) so its membership changes depending upon the issue. The person chairing the Council will always be the member from the state holding the Presidency. A delegate from the following Presidency also assists the presiding member and may take over work if requested. The exception however is the foreign affairs council, which has been chaired by the High Representative since the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty.\nThe role of the Presidency is administrative and political. On the administrative side it is responsible for procedures and organising the work of the Council during its term. This includes summoning the Council for meetings along with directing the work of COREPER and other committees and working groups. The political element is the role of successfully dealing with issues and mediating in the Council. In particular this includes setting the agenda of the council, hence giving the Presidency substantial influence in the work of the Council during its term. The Presidency also plays a major role in representing the Council within the EU and representing the EU internationally, for example at the United Nations.\nConfigurations.\nLegally speaking, the Council is a single entity (this means that technically any Council configuration can adopt decisions that fall within the remit of any other Council configuration) but it is in practice divided into several different council configurations (or \u2018(con)formations\u2019). Article 16(6) of the Treaty on European Union provides:\nEach council configuration deals with a different functional area, for example agriculture and fisheries. In this formation, the council is composed of ministers from each state government who are responsible for this area: the agriculture and fisheries ministers. The chair of this council is held by the member from the state holding the presidency (see section above). Similarly, the Economic and Financial Affairs Council is composed of national finance ministers, and they are still one per state and the chair is held by the member coming from the presiding country. The Councils meet irregularly throughout the year except for the three major configurations (top three below) which meet once a month. , there are ten formations:\nComplementing these, the Political and Security Committee (PSC) brings together ambassadors to monitor international situations and define policies within the CSDP, particularly in crises. The European Council is similar to a configuration of the Council and operates in a similar way, but is composed of the national leaders (heads of government or state) and has its own President, since 2019, Charles Michel. The body's purpose is to define the general \"impetus\" of the Union. The European Council deals with the major issues such as the appointment of the President of the European Commission who takes part in the body's meetings.\nEcofin's Eurozone component, the Euro group, is also a formal group with its own President. Its European Council counterpart is the Euro summit formalized in 2011 and the TSCG.\nFollowing the entry into force of a framework agreement between the EU and ESA there is a Space Council configuration\u2014a joint and concomitant meeting of the EU Council and of the ESA Council at ministerial level dealing with the implementation of the ESP adopted by both organisations.\nAdministration.\nThe General Secretariat of the Council provides the continuous infrastructure of the Council, carrying out preparation for meetings, draft reports, translation, records, documents, agendas and assisting the presidency. The Secretary General of the Council is head of the Secretariat. The Secretariat is divided into seven directorates-general, each administered by a director-general.\nThe Committee of Permanent Representatives (COREPER) is a body composed of representatives from the states (ambassadors, civil servants etc.) who meet each week to prepare the work and tasks of the Council. It monitors and co-ordinates work and deals with the Parliament on co-decision legislation. It is divided into two groups of the representatives (Coreper II) and their deputies (Coreper I). Agriculture is dealt with separately by the Special Committee on Agriculture (SCA). The numerous working groups submit their reports to the Council through Coreper or SCA.\nGovernments represented in the Council.\nThe Treaty of Lisbon mandated a change in voting system from 1 November 2014 for most cases to double majority Qualified Majority Voting, replacing the voting weights system. Decisions made by the council have to be taken by 55% of member states representing at least 65% of the EU's population.\nAlmost all members of the Council are members of a political party at national level, and most of these are members of a European-level political party. However the Council is composed to represent the Member States rather than political parties and the nature of coalition governments in a number of states means that party breakdown at different configuration of the Council vary depending on which domestic party was assigned the portfolio. However, the broad ideological alignment of the government in each state does influence the nature of the law the Council produces and the extent to which the link between domestic parties puts pressure on the members in the European Parliament to vote a certain way.\nLocation.\nBy a decision of the European Council at Edinburgh in December 1992, the Council has its seat in Brussels but in April, June, and October, it holds its meetings in Luxembourg City. Between 1952 and 1967 the ECSC Council held its Luxembourg City meetings in the Cercle Municipal on Place d\u2019Armes. Its secretariat moved on numerous occasions but between 1955 and 1967 it was housed in the Verlorenkost district of the city. In 1957, with the creation of two new Communities with their own Councils, discretion on location was given to the current Presidency. In practice this was to be in the Ch\u00e2teau of Val-Duchesse until the autumn of 1958, at which point it moved to 2 Rue Ravensteinstraat in Brussels.\nThe 1965 agreement (finalised by the Edinburgh agreement and annexed to the treaties) on the location of the newly merged institutions, the Council was to be in Brussels but would meet in Luxembourg City during April, June, and October. The ECSC secretariat moved from Luxembourg City to the merged body Council secretariat in the Ravenstein building of Brussels. In 1971 the Council and its secretariat moved into the Charlemagne building, next to the Commission's Berlaymont, but the Council rapidly ran out of space and administrative branch of the Secretariat moved to a building at 76 Rue Joseph II/Jozef II-straat and during the 1980s the language divisions moved out into the Nerviens, Fr\u00e8re Orban, and Guimard buildings.\nIn 1995 the Council moved into the Justus Lipsius building, across the road from Charlemagne. However, its staff was still increasing, so it continued to rent the Fr\u00e8re Orban building to house the Finnish and Swedish language divisions. Staff continued to increase and the Council rented, in addition to owning Justus Lipsius, the Kortenberg, Froissart, Espace Rolin, and Woluwe Heights buildings. Since acquiring the Lex building in 2008, the three aforementioned buildings are no longer in use by the Council services.\nWhen the Council is meeting in Luxembourg City, it meets in the Kirchberg Conference Centre, and its offices are based at the European Centre on the plateau du Kirchberg. The Council has also met occasionally in Strasbourg, in various other cities, and also outside the Union: for example in 1974 when it met in Tokyo and Washington, D. C. while trade and energy talks were taking place. Under the Council's present rules of procedures the Council can, in extraordinary circumstances, hold one of its meetings outside Brussels and Luxembourg.\nFrom 2017, both the Council of the European Union and the European Council adopted the purpose built Europa building as their official headquarters, although they continue to utilise the facilities afforded by the adjacent Justus Lipsius building. The focal point of the new building, the distinctive multi-storey \"lantern\" shaped structure in which the main meeting room is located, is utilised in both EU institutions' new official logos."}
{"id": "5867", "revid": "38758555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5867", "title": "Continental Europe", "text": "Mainland or continental Europe is the contiguous continent of Europe, excluding its surrounding islands. It can also be referred to ambiguously as the European continent, \u2013 which can conversely mean the whole of Europe \u2013 and, by some, simply as the Continent.\nThe old notion of Europe as a cultural and European unification term was centred on core Europe (\"Kerneuropa\"), the continental territory of the historical Carolingian Empire, corresponding to modern France, Italy, German-speaking Europe and the Benelux states (historical Austrasia). This historical core of \"Carolingian Europe\" was consciously invoked in the 1950s as the historical ethno-cultural basis for the prospective European integration (see also Multi-speed Europe).\nUsage.\nThe most common definition of Mainland Europe excludes these continental islands: the Greek Islands, Cyprus, Malta, Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica, the Balearic Islands, Great Britain and Ireland and surrounding islands, Novaya Zemlya and the Nordic archipelago, as well as nearby oceanic islands, including the Canary Islands, Madeira, the Azores, Iceland, the Faroe Islands, and Svalbard.\nThe Scandinavian Peninsula is sometimes also excluded, as even though it is technically part of \"mainland Europe\", the \"de facto\" connections to the rest of the continent are across the Baltic Sea or North Sea (rather than via the lengthy land route that involves travelling to the north of the peninsula where it meets Finland, and then south through north-east Europe).\nGreat Britain and Ireland.\nIn both Great Britain and Ireland, \"the Continent\" is widely and generally used to refer to the mainland of Europe. An amusing British newspaper headline supposedly once read, \"Fog in Channel; Continent Cut Off\". It has also been claimed that this was a regular weather forecast in Britain in the 1930s. In addition, the word \"Europe\" itself is also regularly used to mean Europe excluding the islands of Great Britain, Iceland, and Ireland (although the term is often used to refer to the European Union). The term \"mainland Europe\" is also sometimes used. Usage may reflect political or cultural allegiances. Pro-European UK citizens are much less likely to use \"Europe\" in ways that exclude the UK and Ireland.\nDerivatively, the adjective \"continental\" refers to the social practices or fashion of continental Europe. Examples include breakfast, topless sunbathing and, historically, long-range driving (before Britain had motorways) often known as \"Grand Touring\". Differences include electrical plugs, time zones for the most part, the use of left-hand traffic, and for the United Kingdom, currency and the continued use of imperial units (miles, yards, feet, inches, stone, lbs) alongside metric.\nBritain is physically connected to continental Europe through the undersea Channel Tunnel (the longest undersea tunnel in the world), which accommodates both the Getlink (passenger and vehicle use \u2013 vehicle required) and Eurostar (passenger use only) services. These services were established to transport passengers and vehicles through the tunnel on a 24/7 basis between England and continental Europe, while still maintaining passport and immigration control measures on both sides of the tunnel. This route is popular with refugees and migrants seeking to enter the UK.\nScandinavia.\nEspecially in Germanic studies, \"continental\" refers to the European continent excluding the Scandinavian peninsula, Britain, Ireland, and Iceland. The reason for this is that although the Scandinavian peninsula is attached to continental Europe, and accessible via a land route along the 66th parallel north, it is usually reached by sea.\n (\"the Continent\") is a vernacular Swedish expression that refers to an area excluding Sweden, Norway, and Finland but including Denmark (even the Danish archipelago which is technically not a part of continental Europe) and the rest of continental Europe. In Norway, similarly, one speaks about as a separate entity. In Denmark, Jutland is referred to as the mainland and thereby a part of continental Europe.\nThe Scandinavian peninsula is now connected to the Danish mainland (the Jutland peninsula) by several bridges and tunnels.\nMediterranean and Atlantic islands.\n\"The Continent\" may sometimes refer to the continental part of Italy (excluding Sardinia, Sicily, etc.), the continental part of Spain (excluding the Balearic islands, the Canary Islands, Alboran, etc.), the continental part of France (excluding Corsica, etc.), the continental part of Portugal (excluding the Madeira and Azores islands), or the continental part of Greece (excluding the Ionian Islands, the Aegean Islands, and Crete). The term is used from the perspective of the island residents of each country to describe the continental portion of their country or the continent (or mainland) as a whole.\nContinental France is also known as \"l'Hexagone\", \"the Hexagon\", referring to its approximate shape on a map. Continental Spain is referred to as Peninsular Spain."}
{"id": "5869", "revid": "1006658694", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5869", "title": "Category theory", "text": "Category theory formalizes mathematical structure and its concepts in terms of a labeled directed graph called a \"category\", whose nodes are called \"objects\", and whose labelled directed edges are called \"arrows\" (or morphisms). A category has two basic properties: the ability to compose the arrows associatively, and the existence of an identity arrow for each object. The language of category theory has been used to formalize concepts of other high-level abstractions such as sets, rings, and groups. Informally, category theory is a general theory of functions.\nSeveral terms used in category theory, including the term \"morphism\", are used differently from their uses in the rest of mathematics. In category theory, morphisms obey conditions specific to category theory itself.\nSamuel Eilenberg and Saunders Mac Lane introduced the concepts of categories, functors, and natural transformations from 1942\u201345 in their study of algebraic topology, with the goal of understanding the processes that preserve mathematical structure.\nCategory theory has practical applications in programming language theory, for example the usage of monads in functional programming. It may also be used as an axiomatic foundation for mathematics, as an alternative to set theory and other proposed foundations.\nBasic concepts.\nCategories represent abstractions of other mathematical concepts.\nMany areas of mathematics can be formalised by category theory as categories. Hence category theory uses abstraction to make it possible to state and prove many intricate and subtle mathematical results in these fields in a much simpler way.\nA basic example of a category is the category of sets, where the objects are sets and the arrows are functions from one set to another. However, the objects of a category need not be sets, and the arrows need not be functions. Any way of formalising a mathematical concept such that it meets the basic conditions on the behaviour of objects and arrows is a valid category\u2014and all the results of category theory apply to it.\nThe \"arrows\" of category theory are often said to represent a process connecting two objects, or in many cases a \"structure-preserving\" transformation connecting two objects. There are, however, many applications where much more abstract concepts are represented by objects and morphisms. The most important property of the arrows is that they can be \"composed\", in other words, arranged in a sequence to form a new arrow.\nApplications of categories.\nCategories now appear in many branches of mathematics, some areas of theoretical computer science where they can correspond to types or to database schemas, and mathematical physics where they can be used to describe vector spaces. Probably the first application of category theory outside pure mathematics was the \"metabolism-repair\" model of autonomous living organisms by Robert Rosen.\nUtility.\nCategories, objects, and morphisms.\nThe study of categories is an attempt to \"axiomatically\" capture what is commonly found in various classes of related mathematical structures by relating them to the \"structure-preserving functions\" between them. A systematic study of category theory then allows us to prove general results about any of these types of mathematical structures from the axioms of a category.\nConsider the following example. The class Grp of groups consists of all objects having a \"group structure\". One can proceed to prove theorems about groups by making logical deductions from the set of axioms defining groups. For example, it is immediately proven from the axioms that the identity element of a group is unique.\nInstead of focusing merely on the individual objects (e.g. groups) possessing a given structure, category theory emphasizes the morphisms \u2013 the structure-preserving mappings \u2013 \"between\" these objects; by studying these morphisms, one is able to learn more about the structure of the objects. In the case of groups, the morphisms are the group homomorphisms. A group homomorphism between two groups \"preserves the group structure\" in a precise sense; informally it is a \"process\" taking one group to another, in a way that carries along information about the structure of the first group into the second group. The study of group homomorphisms then provides a tool for studying general properties of groups and consequences of the group axioms.\nA similar type of investigation occurs in many mathematical theories, such as the study of continuous maps (morphisms) between topological spaces in topology (the associated category is called Top), and the study of smooth functions (morphisms) in manifold theory.\nNot all categories arise as \"structure preserving (set) functions\", however; the standard example is the category of homotopies between pointed topological spaces.\nIf one axiomatizes relations instead of functions, one obtains the theory of allegories.\nFunctors.\nA category is \"itself\" a type of mathematical structure, so we can look for \"processes\" which preserve this structure in some sense; such a process is called a functor.\nDiagram chasing is a visual method of arguing with abstract \"arrows\" joined in diagrams. Functors are represented by arrows between categories, subject to specific defining commutativity conditions. Functors can define (construct) categorical diagrams and sequences (cf. Mitchell, 1965). A functor associates to every object of one category an object of another category, and to every morphism in the first category a morphism in the second.\nAs a result, this defines a category \"of categories and functors\" \u2013 the objects are categories, and the morphisms (between categories) are functors.\nStudying categories and functors is not just studying a class of mathematical structures and the morphisms between them but rather the \"relationships between various classes of mathematical structures\". This fundamental idea first surfaced in algebraic topology. Difficult \"topological\" questions can be translated into \"algebraic\" questions which are often easier to solve. Basic constructions, such as the fundamental group or the fundamental groupoid of a topological space, can be expressed as functors to the category of groupoids in this way, and the concept is pervasive in algebra and its applications.\nNatural transformations.\nAbstracting yet again, some diagrammatic and/or sequential constructions are often \"naturally related\" \u2013 a vague notion, at first sight. This leads to the clarifying concept of natural transformation, a way to \"map\" one functor to another. Many important constructions in mathematics can be studied in this context. \"Naturality\" is a principle, like general covariance in physics, that cuts deeper than is initially apparent. An arrow between two functors is a natural transformation when it is subject to certain naturality or commutativity conditions.\nFunctors and natural transformations ('naturality') are the key concepts in category theory.\nCategories, objects, and morphisms.\nCategories.\nA \"category\" \"C\" consists of the following three mathematical entities:\nMorphisms.\nRelations among morphisms (such as ) are often depicted using commutative diagrams, with \"points\" (corners) representing objects and \"arrows\" representing morphisms.\nMorphisms can have any of the following properties. A morphism is a:\nEvery retraction is an epimorphism, and every section is a monomorphism. Furthermore, the following three statements are equivalent:\nFunctors.\nFunctors are structure-preserving maps between categories. They can be thought of as morphisms in the category of all (small) categories.\nA (covariant) functor \"F\" from a category \"C\" to a category \"D\", written , consists of:\nsuch that the following two properties hold:\nA contravariant functor is like a covariant functor, except that it \"turns morphisms around\" (\"reverses all the arrows\"). More specifically, every morphism in \"C\" must be assigned to a morphism in \"D\". In other words, a contravariant functor acts as a covariant functor from the opposite category \"C\"op to \"D\".\nNatural transformations.\nA \"natural transformation\" is a relation between two functors. Functors often describe \"natural constructions\" and natural transformations then describe \"natural homomorphisms\" between two such constructions. Sometimes two quite different constructions yield \"the same\" result; this is expressed by a natural isomorphism between the two functors.\nIf \"F\" and \"G\" are (covariant) functors between the categories \"C\" and \"D\", then a natural transformation \u03b7 from \"F\" to \"G\" associates to every object \"X\" in \"C\" a morphism in \"D\" such that for every morphism in \"C\", we have ; this means that the following diagram is commutative:\nThe two functors \"F\" and \"G\" are called \"naturally isomorphic\" if there exists a natural transformation from \"F\" to \"G\" such that \u03b7\"X\" is an isomorphism for every object \"X\" in \"C\".\nOther concepts.\nUniversal constructions, limits, and colimits.\nUsing the language of category theory, many areas of mathematical study can be categorized. Categories include sets, groups and topologies.\nEach category is distinguished by properties that all its objects have in common, such as the empty set or the product of two topologies, yet in the definition of a category, objects are considered atomic, i.e., we \"do not know\" whether an object \"A\" is a set, a topology, or any other abstract concept. Hence, the challenge is to define special objects without referring to the internal structure of those objects. To define the empty set without referring to elements, or the product topology without referring to open sets, one can characterize these objects in terms of their relations to other objects, as given by the morphisms of the respective categories. Thus, the task is to find \"universal properties\" that uniquely determine the objects of interest.\nNumerous important constructions can be described in a purely categorical way if the \"category limit\" can be developed and dualized to yield the notion of a \"colimit\".\nEquivalent categories.\nIt is a natural question to ask: under which conditions can two categories be considered \"essentially the same\", in the sense that theorems about one category can readily be transformed into theorems about the other category? The major tool one employs to describe such a situation is called \"equivalence of categories\", which is given by appropriate functors between two categories. Categorical equivalence has found numerous applications in mathematics.\nFurther concepts and results.\nThe definitions of categories and functors provide only the very basics of categorical algebra; additional important topics are listed below. Although there are strong interrelations between all of these topics, the given order can be considered as a guideline for further reading.\nHigher-dimensional categories.\nMany of the above concepts, especially equivalence of categories, adjoint functor pairs, and functor categories, can be situated into the context of \"higher-dimensional categories\". Briefly, if we consider a morphism between two objects as a \"process taking us from one object to another\", then higher-dimensional categories allow us to profitably generalize this by considering \"higher-dimensional processes\".\nFor example, a (strict) 2-category is a category together with \"morphisms between morphisms\", i.e., processes which allow us to transform one morphism into another. We can then \"compose\" these \"bimorphisms\" both horizontally and vertically, and we require a 2-dimensional \"exchange law\" to hold, relating the two composition laws. In this context, the standard example is Cat, the 2-category of all (small) categories, and in this example, bimorphisms of morphisms are simply natural transformations of morphisms in the usual sense. Another basic example is to consider a 2-category with a single object; these are essentially monoidal categories. Bicategories are a weaker notion of 2-dimensional categories in which the composition of morphisms is not strictly associative, but only associative \"up to\" an isomorphism.\nThis process can be extended for all natural numbers \"n\", and these are called \"n\"-categories. There is even a notion of \"\u03c9-category\" corresponding to the ordinal number \u03c9.\nHigher-dimensional categories are part of the broader mathematical field of higher-dimensional algebra, a concept introduced by Ronald Brown. For a conversational introduction to these ideas, see John Baez, 'A Tale of \"n\"-categories' (1996).\nHistorical notes.\nIn 1942\u201345, Samuel Eilenberg and Saunders Mac Lane introduced categories, functors, and natural transformations as part of their work in topology, especially algebraic topology. Their work was an important part of the transition from intuitive and geometric homology to homological algebra. Eilenberg and Mac Lane later wrote that their goal was to understand natural transformations. That required defining functors, which required categories.\nStanislaw Ulam, and some writing on his behalf, have claimed that related ideas were current in the late 1930s in Poland. Eilenberg was Polish, and studied mathematics in Poland in the 1930s. Category theory is also, in some sense, a continuation of the work of Emmy Noether (one of Mac Lane's teachers) in formalizing abstract processes; Noether realized that understanding a type of mathematical structure requires understanding the processes that preserve that structure (homomorphisms). Eilenberg and Mac Lane introduced categories for understanding and formalizing the processes (functors) that relate topological structures to algebraic structures (topological invariants) that characterize them.\nCategory theory was originally introduced for the need of homological algebra, and widely extended for the need of modern algebraic geometry (scheme theory). Category theory may be viewed as an extension of universal algebra, as the latter studies algebraic structures, and the former applies to any kind of mathematical structure and studies also the relationships between structures of different nature. For this reason, it is used throughout mathematics. Applications to mathematical logic and semantics (categorical abstract machine) came later.\nCertain categories called topoi (singular \"topos\") can even serve as an alternative to axiomatic set theory as a foundation of mathematics. A topos can also be considered as a specific type of category with two additional topos axioms. These foundational applications of category theory have been worked out in fair detail as a basis for, and justification of, constructive mathematics. Topos theory is a form of abstract sheaf theory, with geometric origins, and leads to ideas such as pointless topology.\nCategorical logic is now a well-defined field based on type theory for intuitionistic logics, with applications in functional programming and domain theory, where a cartesian closed category is taken as a non-syntactic description of a lambda calculus. At the very least, category theoretic language clarifies what exactly these related areas have in common (in some abstract sense).\nCategory theory has been applied in other fields as well. For example, John Baez has shown a link between Feynman diagrams in physics and monoidal categories. Another application of category theory, more specifically: topos theory, has been made in mathematical music theory, see for example the book \"The Topos of Music, Geometric Logic of Concepts, Theory, and Performance\" by Guerino Mazzola.\nMore recent efforts to introduce undergraduates to categories as a foundation for mathematics include those of William Lawvere and Rosebrugh (2003) and Lawvere and Stephen Schanuel (1997) and Mirroslav Yotov (2012)."}
{"id": "5870", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5870", "title": "Comic", "text": ""}
{"id": "5871", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5871", "title": "Cardiac arrhythmia/tachycardia", "text": ""}
{"id": "5872", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5872", "title": "Bradycardia", "text": "Bradycardia is a condition typically defined wherein an individual has a resting heart rate of under 60 beats per minute (BPM) in adults, although some studies use a heart rate of less than 50 BPM. Bradycardia typically does not cause symptoms until the rate drops below 50 BPM. When symptomatic, it may cause fatigue, weakness, dizziness, sweating, and at very low rates, fainting.\nDuring sleep, a slow heartbeat with rates around 40\u201350\u00a0BPM is common, and is considered normal. Highly trained athletes may also have athletic heart syndrome, a very slow resting heart rate that occurs as a sport adaptation and helps prevent tachycardia during training.\nThe term \"relative bradycardia\" is used to refer to a heart rate that, although not actually below 60\u00a0BPM, is still considered too slow for the individual's current medical condition.\nThe word \"bradycardia\" is from the Greek \u03b2\u03c1\u03b1\u03b4\u03cd\u03c2 \"bradys\" \"slow\", and \u03ba\u03b1\u03c1\u03b4\u03af\u03b1 \"kardia\" \"heart\".\nClassification.\nSinus.\nAtrial bradycardias are divided into three types. The first, respiratory sinus arrhythmia, is usually found in young and healthy adults. Heart rate increases during inhalation and decreases during exhalation. This is thought to be caused by changes in the vagal tone during respiration. If the decrease during exhalation drops the heart rate below 60\u00a0BPM on each breath, this type of bradycardia is usually deemed benign and a sign of good autonomic tone.\nThe second, sinus bradycardia, is a sinus rhythm of less than 60\u00a0BPM. It is a common condition found in both healthy individuals and those considered well-conditioned athletes. Studies have found that 50\u201385% of conditioned athletes have benign sinus bradycardia, as compared to 23% of the general population studied. The heart muscle of athletes has become conditioned to have a higher stroke volume, so requires fewer contractions to circulate the same volume of blood.\nThe third, sick sinus syndrome, covers conditions that include severe sinus bradycardia, sinoatrial block, sinus arrest, and bradycardia-tachycardia syndrome (atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, and paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia).\nAtrioventricular junction.\nAn AV-junctional rhythm, or atrioventricular nodal bradycardia, is usually caused by the absence of the electrical impulse from the sinus node. This usually appears on an electrocardiogram (EKG) with a normal QRS complex accompanied with an inverted P wave either before, during, or after the QRS complex.\nAn AV-junctional escape beat is a delayed heartbeat originating from an ectopic focus somewhere in the AV junction. It occurs when the rate of depolarization of the SA node falls below the rate of the AV node. This dysrhythmia also may occur when the electrical impulses from the SA node fail to reach the AV node because of SA or AV block. This is a protective mechanism for the heart, to compensate for an SA node that is no longer handling the pacemaking activity, and is one of a series of backup sites that can take over pacemaker function when the SA node fails to do so. This would present with a longer PR interval. An AV-junctional escape complex is a normal response that may result from excessive vagal tone on the SA node. Pathological causes include sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest, sinus exit block, or AV block.\nVentricular.\nIdioventricular rhythm, also known as atrioventricular bradycardia or ventricular escape rhythm, is a heart rate of less than 50 BPM. This is a safety mechanism when a lack of electrical impulse or stimuli from the atrium occurs. Impulses originating within or below the bundle of His in the AV node will produce a wide QRS complex with heart rates between 20 and 40 BPM. Those above the bundle of His, also known as junctional, will typically range between 40 and 60 BPM with a narrow QRS complex. In a third-degree heart block, about 61% take place at the bundle branch-Purkinje system, 21% at the AV node, and 15% at the bundle of His. AV block may be ruled out with an EKG indicating \"a 1:1 relationship between P waves and QRS complexes.\" Ventricular bradycardias occurs with sinus bradycardia, sinus arrest, and AV block. Treatment often consists of the administration of atropine and cardiac pacing.\nInfantile.\nFor infants, bradycardia is defined as a heart rate less than 100\u00a0BPM (normal is around 120\u2013160 BPM) . Premature babies are more likely than full-term babies to have apnea and bradycardia spells; their cause is not clearly understood. The spells may be related to centers inside the brain that regulate breathing which may not be fully developed. Touching the baby gently or rocking the incubator slightly will almost always get the baby to start breathing again, which increases the heart rate. Medications (theophylline or caffeine) can be used to treat these spells in babies if necessary. Neonatal intensive-care unit (NICU) standard practice is to electronically monitor the heart and lungs for this reason.\nCauses.\nThis arrhythmia can be underlain by several causes, which are best divided into cardiac and non-cardiac causes.\nNon-cardiac causes are usually secondary, and can involve recreational drug use or abuse; metabolic or endocrine issues, especially hypothyroidism; an electrolyte imbalance; neurologic factors; autonomic reflexes; situational factors such as prolonged bed rest; and autoimmunity.\nCardiac causes include acute or chronic ischemic heart disease, vascular heart disease, valvular heart disease, or degenerative primary electrical disease. Ultimately, the causes act by three mechanisms: depressed automaticity of the heart, conduction block, or escape pacemakers and rhythms.\nIn general, two types of problems result in bradycardias: disorders of the SA node, and disorders of the AV node.\nWith SA node dysfunction (sometimes called sick sinus syndrome), there may be disordered automaticity or impaired conduction of the impulse from the SA node into the surrounding atrial tissue (an \"exit block\"). Second-degree sinoatrial blocks can be detected only by use of a 12-lead EKG. It is difficult and sometimes impossible to assign a mechanism to any particular bradycardia, but the underlying mechanism is not clinically relevant to treatment, which is the same in both cases of sick sinus syndrome: a permanent pacemaker.\nAV conduction disturbances (AV block; primary AV block, secondary type I AV block, secondary type II AV block, tertiary AV block) may result from impaired conduction in the AV node, or anywhere below it, such as in the bundle of His. The clinical relevance pertaining to AV blocks is greater than that of SA blocks.\nBeta blocker medicines also can slow the heart rate and decrease how forcefully the heart contracts. Beta blockers may slow the heart rate to a dangerous level if prescribed with calcium channel blocker-type medications.\nBradycardia is also part of the mammalian diving reflex.\nDiagnosis.\nA diagnosis of bradycardia in adults is based on a heart rate less than 60 BPM, although some studies use a heart rate of less than 50 BPM. This is determined usually either by palpation or EKG. If symptoms occur, a determination of electrolytes may be helpful in determining the underlying cause.\nManagement.\nThe treatment of bradycardia is dependent on whether or not the person is stable or unstable. If oxygen saturations are low, supplemental oxygen should be provided.\nStable.\nEmergency treatment is not needed if the person is asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic.\nUnstable.\nIf a person is unstable, the initial recommended treatment is intravenous atropine. Doses less than 0.5\u00a0mg should not be used, as this may further decrease the rate. If this is not effective, intravenous inotrope infusion (dopamine, epinephrine) or transcutaneous pacing should be used. Transvenous pacing may be required if the cause of the bradycardia is not rapidly reversible.\nIn children, giving oxygen, supporting their breathing, and chest compressions are recommended.\nEpidemiology.\nThe US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported in 2011 that 15.2% of adult males and 6.9% of adult females had clinically-defined bradycardia (a resting pulse rate below 60 BPM)."}
{"id": "5873", "revid": "121745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5873", "title": "Canada Day", "text": "Canada Day () is the national day of Canada. A federal statutory holiday, it celebrates the anniversary of Canadian confederation which occurred on July 1, 1867, with the passing of the \"Constitution Act, 1867\" where the three separate colonies of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick were united into a single Dominion within the British Empire called Canada. Originally called Dominion Day (), the holiday was renamed in 1982 when the Canadian Constitution was patriated by the Canada Act 1982. Canada Day celebrations take place throughout the country, as well as in various locations around the world attended by Canadians living abroad.\nCommemoration.\nCanada Day is often informally referred to as \"Canada's birthday\", particularly in the popular press. However, the term \"birthday\" can be seen as an oversimplification, as Canada Day is the anniversary of only one important national milestone on the way to the country's full independence, namely the joining on July 1, 1867, of the colonies of Canada, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick into a wider British federation of four provinces (the colony of Canada being divided into the provinces of Ontario and Quebec upon Confederation). Canada became a \"kingdom in its own right\" within the British Empire commonly known as the \"Dominion of Canada\". Although still a British colony, Canada gained an increased level of political control and governance over its own affairs, the British parliament and Cabinet maintaining political control over certain areas, such as foreign affairs, national defence, and constitutional changes. Canada gradually gained increasing independence over the years, notably with the passage of the Statute of Westminster in 1931, until finally becoming completely independent with the passing of the \"Constitution Act, 1982\" which served to fully patriate the Canadian constitution.\nUnder the federal \"Holidays Act\", Canada Day is observed on July 1, unless that date falls on a Sunday, in which case July 2 is the statutory holiday. Celebratory events will generally still take place on July 1, even though it is not the legal holiday. If it falls on a weekend, businesses normally closed that day usually dedicate the following Monday as a day off.\nHistory.\nThe enactment of the \"British North America Act, 1867\" (today called the \"Constitution Act, 1867\"), which confederated Canada, was celebrated on July 1, 1867, with the ringing of the bells at the Cathedral Church of St. James in Toronto and \"bonfires, fireworks and illuminations, excursions, military displays and musical and other entertainments\", as described in contemporary accounts. On June 20 of the following year, Governor General the Viscount Monck issued a royal proclamation asking for Canadians to celebrate the anniversary of Confederation, However, the holiday was not established statutorily until May 15, 1879, when it was designated as \"Dominion Day\", alluding to the reference in the \"British North America Act\" to the country as a dominion. The holiday was initially not dominant in the national calendar; any celebrations were mounted by local communities and the governor general hosted a party at Rideau Hall. No larger celebrations were held until 1917, and then none again for a further decade\u2014the gold and diamond anniversaries of Confederation, respectively.\nIn 1946, Phil\u00e9as C\u00f4t\u00e9, a Quebec member of the House of Commons, introduced a private member's bill to rename Dominion Day as \"Canada Day\". The bill was passed quickly by the lower chamber but was stalled by the Senate, which returned it to the Commons with the recommendation that the holiday be renamed \"The National Holiday of Canada\", an amendment that effectively killed the bill.\nBeginning in 1958, the Canadian government began to orchestrate Dominion Day celebrations. That year, then Prime Minister John Diefenbaker requested that Secretary of State Ellen Fairclough put together appropriate events, with a budget of $14,000. Parliament was traditionally in session on July 1, but Fairclough persuaded Diefenbaker and the rest of the federal Cabinet to attend. Official celebrations thereafter consisted usually of Trooping the Colour ceremonies on Parliament Hill in the afternoon and evening, followed by a mass band concert and fireworks display. Fairclough, who became Minister of Citizenship and Immigration, later expanded the bills to include performing folk and ethnic groups. The day also became more casual and family oriented. Canada's centennial in 1967 is often seen as an important milestone in the history of Canadian nationalism and in Canada's maturing as a distinct, independent country, after which Dominion Day became more popular with average Canadians. Into the late 1960s, nationally televised, multi-cultural concerts held in Ottawa were added and the f\u00eate became known as \"Festival Canada\". After 1980, the Canadian government began to promote celebrating Dominion Day beyond the national capital, giving grants and aid to cities across the country to help fund local activities.\nSome Canadians were, by the early 1980s, informally referring to the holiday as \"Canada Day\", a practice that caused some controversy: Proponents argued that the name \"Dominion Day\" was a holdover from the colonial era, an argument given some impetus by the patriation of the Canadian constitution in 1982, and others asserted that an alternative was needed as the term does not translate well into French. Conversely, numerous politicians, journalists, and authors, such as Robertson Davies, decried the change at the time and some continue to maintain that it was illegitimate and an unnecessary break with tradition. Others claimed \"Dominion\" was widely misunderstood and conservatively inclined commenters saw the change as part of a much larger attempt by Liberals to \"re-brand\" or re-define Canadian history. Columnist Andrew Cohen called \"Canada Day\" a term of \"crushing banality\" and criticized it as \"a renunciation of the past [and] a misreading of history, laden with political correctness and historical ignorance\".\nThe holiday was officially renamed as a result of a private member's bill that was passed through the House of Commons on July 9, 1982, two years after its first reading. Only 12 Members of Parliament were present when the bill was taken up again, eight fewer than the necessary quorum; however, according to parliamentary rules, the quorum is enforceable only at the start of a sitting or when a member calls attention to it. The group passed the bill in five minutes, without debate, inspiring \"grumblings about the underhandedness of the process\". It met with stronger resistance in the Senate. Ernest Manning argued that the rationale for the change was based on a misperception of the name and George McIlraith did not agree with the manner in which the bill was passed, urging the government to proceed in a more \"dignified way\". However, the Senate did eventually pass the bill, regardless. With the granting of Royal Assent, the holiday's name was officially changed to Canada Day on October 27, 1982.\nAs the anniversary of Confederation, Dominion Day, and later Canada Day, was the date set for a number of important events, such as the first national radio network hookup by the Canadian National Railway (1927); the inauguration of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's cross-country television broadcast, with Governor General Vincent Massey's Dominion Day speech from Parliament Hill (1958); the flooding of the Saint Lawrence Seaway (1958); the first colour television transmission in Canada (1966); the inauguration of the Order of Canada (1967); and the establishment of \"O Canada\" as the country's national anthem (1980). During the 150th anniversary of Canada in 2017, the Bank of Canada released a commemorative $10 banknote for Canada's sesquicentennial, which was expected to be broadly available by Canada Day. Other events fell on the same day coincidentally, such as the first day of the Battle of the Somme in 1916\u2014shortly after which Newfoundland recognized July 1 as Memorial Day to commemorate the Newfoundland Regiment's heavy losses during the battle\u2014and the enactment of the \"Chinese Immigration Act\" in 1923\u2014leading Chinese-Canadians to refer to July 1 as \"Humiliation Day\" and boycott Dominion Day celebrations until the act was repealed in 1947.\nActivities.\nMost communities across the country will host organized celebrations for Canada Day, typically outdoor public events, such as parades, carnivals, festivals, barbecues, air and maritime shows, fireworks, and free musical concerts, as well as citizenship ceremonies. There is no standard mode of celebration for Canada Day; Jennifer Welsh, a professor of International Relations at the University of Oxford, said about this: \"Canada Day, like the country, is endlessly decentralized. There doesn't seem to be a central recipe for how to celebrate it\u2014chalk it up to the nature of the federation.\" However, the locus of the celebrations is the national capital, Ottawa, Ontario, where large concerts and cultural displays are held on Parliament Hill in an event largely referred to as the \"Noon Show\". Typically with the governor general and prime minister officiate, though the monarch or another member of the Royal Family may also attend or take the governor general's place. Smaller events are mounted in other parks around the city and in neighbouring Gatineau, Quebec.\nGiven the federal nature of the anniversary, celebrating Canada Day can be a cause of friction in the province of Quebec, where the holiday is overshadowed by Quebec's National Holiday, on June 24. For example, the federal government funds Canada Day events at the Old Port of Montreal\u2014an area run by a federal Crown corporation\u2014while the National Holiday parade is a grassroots effort that has been met with pressure to cease, even from federal officials. The nature of the event has also been met with criticism outside of Quebec, such as that given by \"Ottawa Citizen\" columnist David Warren, who said in 2007: \"The Canada of the government-funded paper flag-waving and painted faces\u2014the 'new' Canada that is celebrated each year on what is now called 'Canada Day'\u2014has nothing controversially Canadian about it. You could wave a different flag, and choose another face paint, and nothing would be lost.\"\nCanada Day also coincides with Quebec's Moving Day, when many fixed-lease apartment rental terms expire. The bill changing the province's moving day from May 1 to July 1 was introduced by a federalist member of the Quebec National Assembly, J\u00e9r\u00f4me Choquette, in 1973, in order not to affect children still in school in the month of May.\nInternational celebrations.\nCanadian expatriates will often organize Canada Day activities in their local area on or near the date of the holiday. Examples include \"Canada D'eh\", an annual celebration that takes place on June 30 in Hong Kong, at \"Lan Kwai Fong\", where an estimated attendance of 12,000 was reported in 2008; Canadian Forces' events on bases in Afghanistan; at Trafalgar Square outside Canada House in London, England; in Mexico, at the Royal Canadian Legion in Chapala, and at the Canadian Club in Ajijic. In China, Canada Day celebrations are held at the Bund Beach by the Canadian Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai and at Canadian International School in Beijing by the Canada China Business Council.\nSee also.\n&lt;br&gt;"}
{"id": "5874", "revid": "39606035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5874", "title": "Claudine (book series)", "text": "The Claudine series consists of four early novels by French authors Colette and Henry Gauthier-Villars, published 1900\u20131904. Written in diary form, they describe the growth to maturity of a young girl, Claudine. Aged fifteen at the beginning of the first book, \"Claudine \u00e0 l'\u00e9cole\", the series describes her education and experiences as she grows up. All the books are written in first-person with the first three having Claudine herself as the narrator. The last in the series, \"Claudine s'en va\", introduces a new narrator, Annie.\nThe novels were written in the late 19th century in collaboration with Colette's first husband, the writer Henry Gauthier-Villars, better known by his nom-de-plume \"Willy\". There has been much speculation over the degree of involvement of both Colette and Willy in the writing of the Claudine novels, particularly as Willy was known for often using ghostwriters. Consequently, although the novels were originally attributed to Willy only and published under his name alone, they were later published under both names. After the death of Willy, Colette went to court to challenge her former husband's involvement in any of the writing, and subsequently had his name removed from the books. This decision however was overturned after her death, as Willy's son from a prior relationship, Jacques Gauthier-Villars, successfully sued to have his father's name restored.\nThe \"Claudine\" novels are thought to be roughly autobiographical. Whilst the stories were shocking in their time, this affectionate portrayal of a forthright and self-assured French girl who blossoms into a charismatic adult is nowadays more likely to be regarded as chastely sensual."}
{"id": "5875", "revid": "457199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5875", "title": "Computer jargon", "text": ""}
{"id": "5876", "revid": "6908984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5876", "title": "Coronary artery disease", "text": "Coronary artery disease (CAD), also called coronary heart disease (CHD), ischemic heart disease (IHD), or simply heart disease, involves the reduction of blood flow to the heart muscle due to build-up of plaque (atherosclerosis) in the arteries of the heart. It is the most common of the cardiovascular diseases. Types include stable angina, unstable angina, myocardial infarction, and sudden cardiac death. A common symptom is chest pain or discomfort which may travel into the shoulder, arm, back, neck, or jaw. Occasionally it may feel like heartburn. Usually symptoms occur with exercise or emotional stress, last less than a few minutes, and improve with rest. Shortness of breath may also occur and sometimes no symptoms are present. In many cases, the first sign is a heart attack. Other complications include heart failure or an abnormal heartbeat.\nRisk factors include high blood pressure, smoking, diabetes, lack of exercise, obesity, high blood cholesterol, poor diet, depression, and excessive alcohol. A number of tests may help with diagnoses including: electrocardiogram, cardiac stress testing, coronary computed tomographic angiography, and coronary angiogram, among others.\nWays to reduce CAD risk include eating a healthy diet, regularly exercising, maintaining a healthy weight, and not smoking. Medications for diabetes, high cholesterol, or high blood pressure are sometimes used. There is limited evidence for screening people who are at low risk and do not have symptoms. Treatment involves the same measures as prevention. Additional medications such as antiplatelets (including aspirin), beta blockers, or nitroglycerin may be recommended. Procedures such as percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG) may be used in severe disease. In those with stable CAD it is unclear if PCI or CABG in addition to the other treatments improves life expectancy or decreases heart attack risk.\nIn 2015, CAD affected 110 million people and resulted in 8.9 million deaths. It makes up 15.6% of all deaths, making it the most common cause of death globally. The risk of death from CAD for a given age decreased between 1980 and 2010, especially in developed countries. The number of cases of CAD for a given age also decreased between 1990 and 2010. In the United States in 2010, about 20% of those over 65 had CAD, while it was present in 7% of those 45 to 64, and 1.3% of those 18 to 45; rates were higher among men than women of a given age.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe narrowing of coronary arteries reduces the supply of oxygen-rich blood flowing to the heart, which becomes more pronounced during strenuous activities during which the heart beats faster. For some, this causes severe symptoms while others experience no symptoms at all.\nThe most common symptom is chest pain or discomfort that occurs regularly with activity, after eating, or at other predictable times; this phenomenon is termed stable angina and is associated with narrowing of the arteries of the heart. Angina also includes chest tightness, heaviness, pressure, numbness, fullness, or squeezing. Angina that changes in intensity, character or frequency is termed unstable. Unstable angina may precede myocardial infarction. In adults who go to the emergency department with an unclear cause of pain, about 30% have pain due to coronary artery disease. Angina, shortness of breath, sweating, nausea or vomiting, and lightheadedness are signs of a heart attack, or myocardial infarction, and immediate emergency medical services are crucial.\nSymptoms in women.\nSymptoms in women can differ from those in men, and the most common symptom reported by women of all races is shortness of breath. Other symptoms more commonly reported by women than men are extreme fatigue, sleep disturbances, indigestion, and anxiety. However, some women do experience irregular heartbeat, dizziness, sweating, and nausea. Burning, pain, or pressure in the chest or upper abdomen that can travel to the arm or jaw can also be experienced in women, but it is less commonly reported by women than men. On average, women experience symptoms 10 years later than men. Women are less likely to recognize symptoms and seek treatment.\nRisk factors.\nCoronary artery disease has a number of well determined risk factors. These include high blood pressure, smoking, diabetes, lack of exercise, obesity, high blood cholesterol, poor diet, depression, family history, and excessive alcohol. About half of cases are linked to genetics. Smoking and obesity are associated with about 36% and 20% of cases, respectively. Smoking just one cigarette per day about doubles the risk of CAD. Lack of exercise has been linked to 7\u201312% of cases. Exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange may increase risk. Rheumatologic diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, and psoriatic arthritis are independent risk factors as well.\nJob stress appears to play a minor role accounting for about 3% of cases. In one study, women who were free of stress from work life saw an increase in the diameter of their blood vessels, leading to decreased progression of atherosclerosis. In contrast, women who had high levels of work-related stress experienced a decrease in the diameter of their blood vessels and significantly increased disease progression. Having a type A behavior pattern, a group of personality characteristics including time urgency, competitiveness, hostility, and impatience, is linked to an increased risk of coronary disease.\nBlood fats.\nDietary cholesterol does not appear to have a significant effect on blood cholesterol and thus recommendations about its consumption may not be needed. Saturated fat is still a concern.\nGenetics.\nThe heritability of coronary artery disease has been estimated between 40% and 60%. Genome-wide association studies have identified over 160 genetic susceptibility loci for coronary artery disease.\nPathophysiology.\nLimitation of blood flow to the heart causes ischemia (cell starvation secondary to a lack of oxygen) of the heart's muscle cells. The heart's muscle cells may die from lack of oxygen and this is called a myocardial infarction (commonly referred to as a heart attack). It leads to damage, death, and eventual scarring of the heart muscle without regrowth of heart muscle cells. Chronic high-grade narrowing of the coronary arteries can induce transient ischemia which leads to the induction of a ventricular arrhythmia, which may terminate into a dangerous heart rhythm known as ventricular fibrillation, which often leads to death.\nTypically, coronary artery disease occurs when part of the smooth, elastic lining inside a coronary artery (the arteries that supply blood to the heart muscle) develops atherosclerosis. With atherosclerosis, the artery's lining becomes hardened, stiffened, and accumulates deposits of calcium, fatty lipids, and abnormal inflammatory cells \u2013 to form a plaque. Calcium phosphate (hydroxyapatite) deposits in the muscular layer of the blood vessels appear to play a significant role in stiffening the arteries and inducing the early phase of coronary arteriosclerosis. This can be seen in a so-called metastatic mechanism of calciphylaxis as it occurs in chronic kidney disease and hemodialysis (Rainer Liedtke 2008). Although these people suffer from a kidney dysfunction, almost fifty percent of them die due to coronary artery disease. Plaques can be thought of as large \"pimples\" that protrude into the channel of an artery, causing a partial obstruction to blood flow. People with coronary artery disease might have just one or two plaques, or might have dozens distributed throughout their coronary arteries. A more severe form is \"chronic total occlusion\" (CTO) when a coronary artery is completely obstructed for more than 3 months.\nCardiac syndrome X is chest pain (angina pectoris) and chest discomfort in people who do not show signs of blockages in the larger coronary arteries of their hearts when an angiogram (coronary angiogram) is being performed. The exact cause of cardiac syndrome X is unknown. Explanations include microvascular dysfunction or epicardial atherosclerosis. For reasons that are not well understood, women are more likely than men to have it; however, hormones and other risk factors unique to women may play a role.\nDiagnosis.\nFor symptomatic people, stress echocardiography can be used to make a diagnosis for obstructive coronary artery disease. The use of echocardiography, stress cardiac imaging, and/or advanced non-invasive imaging is not recommended on individuals who are exhibiting no symptoms and are otherwise at low risk for developing coronary disease.\nThe diagnosis of \"Cardiac Syndrome X\" \u2013 the rare coronary artery disease that is more common in women, as mentioned, is a diagnosis of exclusion. Therefore, usually, the same tests are used as in any person with the suspected of having coronary artery disease:\nThe diagnosis of coronary disease underlying particular symptoms depends largely on the nature of the symptoms. The first investigation is an electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG), both for \"stable\" angina and acute coronary syndrome. An X-ray of the chest and blood tests may be performed.\nStable angina.\nIn \"stable\" angina, chest pain with typical features occurring at predictable levels of exertion, various forms of cardiac stress tests may be used to induce both symptoms and detect changes by way of electrocardiography (using an ECG), echocardiography (using ultrasound of the heart) or scintigraphy (using uptake of radionuclide by the heart muscle). If part of the heart seems to receive an insufficient blood supply, coronary angiography may be used to identify stenosis of the coronary arteries and suitability for angioplasty or bypass surgery.\nStable coronary artery disease (SCAD) is also often called stable ischemic heart disease (SIHD). A 2015 monograph explains that \"Regardless of the nomenclature, stable angina is the chief manifestation of SIHD or SCAD.\" There are U.S. and European clinical practice guidelines for SIHD/SCAD.\nAcute coronary syndrome.\nDiagnosis of acute coronary syndrome generally takes place in the emergency department, where ECGs may be performed sequentially to identify \"evolving changes\" (indicating ongoing damage to the heart muscle). Diagnosis is clear-cut if ECGs show elevation of the \"ST segment\", which in the context of severe typical chest pain is strongly indicative of an acute myocardial infarction (MI); this is termed a STEMI (ST-elevation MI) and is treated as an emergency with either urgent coronary angiography and percutaneous coronary intervention (angioplasty with or without stent insertion) or with thrombolysis (\"clot buster\" medication), whichever is available. In the absence of ST-segment elevation, heart damage is detected by cardiac markers (blood tests that identify heart muscle damage). If there is evidence of damage (infarction), the chest pain is attributed to a \"non-ST elevation MI\" (NSTEMI). If there is no evidence of damage, the term \"unstable angina\" is used. This process usually necessitates hospital admission and close observation on a coronary care unit for possible complications (such as cardiac arrhythmias \u2013 irregularities in the heart rate). Depending on the risk assessment, stress testing or angiography may be used to identify and treat coronary artery disease in patients who have had an NSTEMI or unstable angina.\nRisk assessment.\nThere are various risk assessment systems for determining the risk of coronary artery disease, with various emphasis on different variables above. A notable example is Framingham Score, used in the Framingham Heart Study. It is mainly based on age, gender, diabetes, total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, tobacco smoking and systolic blood pressure. When it comes to predicting risk in younger adults (18\u201339 years old), Framingham Risk Score remains below 10-12% for all deciles of baseline-predicted risk.\nPolygenic score is another way of risk assessment. In one study the relative risk of incident coronary events was 91% higher among participants at high genetic risk than among those at low genetic risk.\nPrevention.\nUp to 90% of cardiovascular disease may be preventable if established risk factors are avoided. Prevention involves adequate physical exercise, decreasing obesity, treating high blood pressure, eating a healthy diet, decreasing cholesterol levels, and stopping smoking. Medications and exercise are roughly equally effective. High levels of physical activity reduce the risk of coronary artery disease by about 25%.\nMost guidelines recommend combining these preventive strategies. A 2015 Cochrane Review found some evidence that counselling and education in an effort to bring about behavioral change might help in high-risk groups. However, there was insufficient evidence to show an effect on mortality or actual cardiovascular events.\nIn diabetes mellitus, there is little evidence that very tight blood sugar control improves cardiac risk although improved sugar control appears to decrease other problems such as kidney failure and blindness. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends \"low to moderate alcohol intake\" to reduce risk of coronary artery disease while high intake increases the risk.\nDiet.\nA diet high in fruits and vegetables decreases the risk of cardiovascular disease and death. Vegetarians have a lower risk of heart disease, possibly due to their greater consumption of fruits and vegetables. Evidence also suggests that the Mediterranean diet and a high fiber diet lower the risk.\nThe consumption of trans fat (commonly found in hydrogenated products such as margarine) has been shown to cause a precursor to atherosclerosis and increase the risk of coronary artery disease.\nEvidence does not support a beneficial role for omega-3 fatty acid supplementation in preventing cardiovascular disease (including myocardial infarction and sudden cardiac death). There is tentative evidence that intake of menaquinone (Vitamin K2), but not phylloquinone (Vitamin K1), may reduce the risk of CAD mortality.\nSecondary prevention.\nSecondary prevention is preventing further sequelae of already established disease. Effective lifestyle changes include:\nAerobic exercise, like walking, jogging, or swimming, can reduce the risk of mortality from coronary artery disease. Aerobic exercise can help decrease blood pressure and the amount of blood cholesterol (LDL) over time. It also increases HDL cholesterol which is considered \"good cholesterol\".\nAlthough exercise is beneficial, it is unclear whether doctors should spend time counseling patients to exercise. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force found \"insufficient evidence\" to recommend that doctors counsel patients on exercise but \"it did not review the evidence for the effectiveness of physical activity to reduce chronic disease, morbidity and mortality\", only the effectiveness of counseling itself. The American Heart Association, based on a non-systematic review, recommends that doctors counsel patients on exercise.\nPsychological symptoms are common in people with CHD, and while many psychological treatments may be offered following cardiac events, there is no evidence that they change mortality, the risk of revascularization procedures, or the rate of non-fatal myocardial infarction.\nTreatment.\nThere are a number of treatment options for coronary artery disease:\nMedications.\nIt is recommended that blood pressure typically be reduced to less than 140/90 mmHg. The diastolic blood pressure however should not be lower than 60 mmHg. Beta blockers are recommended first line for this use.\nAspirin.\nIn those with no previous history of heart disease, aspirin decreases the risk of a myocardial infarction but does not change the overall risk of death. It is thus only recommended in adults who are at increased risk for coronary artery disease where increased risk is defined as \"men older than 90 years of age, postmenopausal women, and younger persons with risk factors for coronary artery disease (for example, hypertension, diabetes, or smoking) who are at increased risk for heart disease and may wish to consider aspirin therapy\". More specifically, high-risk persons are \"those with a 5-year risk \u2265 3%\".\nAnti-platelet therapy.\nClopidogrel plus aspirin (dual anti-platelet therapy) reduces cardiovascular events more than aspirin alone in those with a STEMI. In others at high risk but not having an acute event, the evidence is weak. Specifically, its use does not change the risk of death in this group. In those who have had a stent, more than 12 months of clopidogrel plus aspirin does not affect the risk of death.\nSurgery.\nRevascularization for acute coronary syndrome has a mortality benefit. Percutaneous revascularization for \"stable\" ischaemic heart disease does not appear to have benefits over medical therapy alone. In those with disease in more than one artery, coronary artery bypass grafts appear better than percutaneous coronary interventions. Newer \"anaortic\" or no-touch off-pump coronary artery revascularization techniques have shown reduced postoperative stroke rates comparable to percutaneous coronary intervention. Hybrid coronary revascularization has also been shown to be a safe and feasible procedure that may offer some advantages over conventional CABG though it is more expensive.\nEpidemiology.\nAs of 2010, CAD was the leading cause of death globally resulting in over 7 million deaths. This increased from 5.2 million deaths from CAD worldwide in 1990. It may affect individuals at any age but becomes dramatically more common at progressively older ages, with approximately a tripling with each decade of life. Males are affected more often than females.\nIt is estimated that 60% of the world's cardiovascular disease burden will occur in the South Asian subcontinent despite only accounting for 20% of the world's population. This may be secondary to a combination of genetic predisposition and environmental factors. Organizations such as the Indian Heart Association are working with the World Heart Federation to raise awareness about this issue.\nCoronary artery disease is the leading cause of death for both men and women and accounts for approximately 600,000 deaths in the United States every year. According to present trends in the United States, half of healthy 40-year-old men will develop CAD in the future, and one in three healthy 40-year-old women. It is the most common reason for death of men and women over 20 years of age in the United States.\nSociety and culture.\nNames.\nOther terms sometimes used for this condition are \"hardening of the arteries\" and \"narrowing of the arteries\". In Latin it is known as \"morbus ischaemicus cordis\" (\"MIC\").\nSupport groups.\nThe Infarct Combat Project (ICP) is an international nonprofit organization founded in 1998 which tries to decrease ischemic heart diseases through education and research.\nIndustry influence on research.\nIn 2016 research into the archives of the Sugar Association, the trade association for the sugar industry in the US, had sponsored an influential literature review published in 1965 in the \"New England Journal of Medicine\" that downplayed early findings about the role of a diet heavy in sugar in the development of CAD and emphasized the role of fat; that review influenced decades of research funding and guidance on healthy eating.\nResearch.\nResearch efforts are focused on new angiogenic treatment modalities and various (adult) stem-cell therapies. A region on chromosome 17 was confined to families with multiple cases of myocardial infarction. Other genome-wide studies have identified a firm risk variant on chromosome 9 (9p21.3). However, these and other loci are found in intergenic segments and need further research in understanding how the phenotype is affected.\nA more controversial link is that between \"Chlamydophila pneumoniae\" infection and atherosclerosis. While this intracellular organism has been demonstrated in atherosclerotic plaques, evidence is inconclusive as to whether it can be considered a causative factor. Treatment with antibiotics in patients with proven atherosclerosis has not demonstrated a decreased risk of heart attacks or other coronary vascular diseases.\nSince the 1990s the search for new treatment options for coronary artery disease patients, particularly for so called \"no-option\" coronary patients, focused on usage of angiogenesis and (adult) stem cell therapies. Numerous clinical trials were performed, either applying protein (angiogenic growth factor) therapies, such as FGF-1 or VEGF, or cell therapies using different kinds of adult stem cell populations. Research is still going on \u2013 with first promising results particularly for FGF-1 and utilization of endothelial progenitor cells.\nMyeloperoxidase has been proposed as a biomarker.\nDietary changes can decrease coronary artery disease. For example, data supports benefit from a plant-based diet and aggressive lipid lowering to improve heart disease."}
{"id": "5877", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5877", "title": "CORAL66", "text": ""}
{"id": "5879", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5879", "title": "Caesium", "text": "Caesium (IUPAC spelling) (also spelled cesium in American English) is a chemical element with the symbol\u00a0Cs and atomic number\u00a055. It is a soft, silvery-golden alkali metal with a melting point of , which makes it one of only five elemental metals that are liquid at or near room temperature. Caesium has physical and chemical properties similar to those of rubidium and potassium. The most reactive of all metals, it is pyrophoric and reacts with water even at . It is the least electronegative element, with a value of 0.79 on the Pauling scale. It has only one stable isotope, caesium-133. Caesium is mined mostly from pollucite, while the radioisotopes, especially caesium-137, a fission product, are extracted from waste produced by nuclear reactors.\nThe German chemist Robert Bunsen and physicist Gustav Kirchhoff discovered caesium in 1860 by the newly developed method of flame spectroscopy. The first small-scale applications for caesium were as a \"getter\" in vacuum tubes and in photoelectric cells. In 1967, acting on Einstein's proof that the speed of light is the most constant dimension in the universe, the International System of Units used two specific wave counts from an emission spectrum of caesium-133 to co-define the second and the metre. Since then, caesium has been widely used in highly accurate atomic clocks.\nSince the 1990s, the largest application of the element has been as caesium formate for drilling fluids, but it has a range of applications in the production of electricity, in electronics, and in chemistry. The radioactive isotope caesium-137 has a half-life of about 30 years and is used in medical applications, industrial gauges, and hydrology. Nonradioactive caesium compounds are only mildly toxic, but the pure metal's tendency to react explosively with water means that caesium is considered a hazardous material, and the radioisotopes present a significant health and ecological hazard in the environment.\nCharacteristics.\nPhysical properties.\nOf all elements that are solid at room temperature, caesium is the softest: it has a hardness of 0.2 Mohs. It is a very ductile, pale metal, which darkens in the presence of trace amounts of oxygen. When in the presence of mineral oil (where it is best kept during transport), it loses its metallic lustre and takes on a duller, grey appearance. It has a melting point of , making it one of the few elemental metals that are liquid near room temperature. Mercury is the only stable elemental metal with a known melting point lower than caesium. In addition, the metal has a rather low boiling point, , the lowest of all metals other than mercury. Its compounds burn with a blue or violet colour.\nCaesium forms alloys with the other alkali metals, gold, and mercury (amalgams). At temperatures below , it does not alloy with cobalt, iron, molybdenum, nickel, platinum, tantalum, or tungsten. It forms well-defined intermetallic compounds with antimony, gallium, indium, and thorium, which are photosensitive. It mixes with all the other alkali metals (except lithium); the alloy with a molar distribution of 41% caesium, 47% potassium, and 12% sodium has the lowest melting point of any known metal alloy, at . A few amalgams have been studied: is black with a purple metallic lustre, while CsHg is golden-coloured, also with a metallic lustre.\nThe golden colour of caesium comes from the decreasing frequency of light required to excite electrons of the alkali metals as the group is descended. For lithium through rubidium this frequency is in the ultraviolet, but for caesium it enters the blue\u2013violet end of the spectrum; in other words, the plasmonic frequency of the alkali metals becomes lower from lithium to caesium. Thus caesium transmits and partially absorbs violet light preferentially while other colours (having lower frequency) are reflected; hence it appears yellowish.\nChemical properties.\nCaesium metal is highly reactive and very pyrophoric. It ignites spontaneously in air, and reacts explosively with water even at low temperatures, more so than the other alkali metals (first group of the periodic table). It reacts with ice at temperatures as low as . Because of this high reactivity, caesium metal is classified as a hazardous material. It is stored and shipped in dry, saturated hydrocarbons such as mineral oil. It can be handled only under inert gas, such as argon. However, a caesium-water explosion is often less powerful than a sodium-water explosion with a similar amount of sodium. This is because caesium explodes instantly upon contact with water, leaving little time for hydrogen to accumulate. Caesium can be stored in vacuum-sealed borosilicate glass ampoules. In quantities of more than about , caesium is shipped in hermetically sealed, stainless steel containers.\nThe chemistry of caesium is similar to that of other alkali metals, in particular rubidium, the element above caesium in the periodic table. As expected for an alkali metal, the only common oxidation state is +1. Some small differences arise from the fact that it has a higher atomic mass and is more electropositive than other (nonradioactive) alkali metals. Caesium is the most electropositive chemical element. The caesium ion is also larger and less \"hard\" than those of the lighter alkali metals.\nCompounds.\nMost caesium compounds contain the element as the cation , which binds ionically to a wide variety of anions. One noteworthy exception is the caeside anion (), and others are the several suboxides (see section on oxides below).\nSalts of Cs+ are usually colourless unless the anion itself is coloured. Many of the simple salts are hygroscopic, but less so than the corresponding salts of lighter alkali metals. The phosphate, acetate, carbonate, halides, oxide, nitrate, and sulfate salts are water-soluble. Double salts are often less soluble, and the low solubility of caesium aluminium sulfate is exploited in refining Cs from ores. The double salt with antimony (such as ), bismuth, cadmium, copper, iron, and lead are also poorly soluble.\nCaesium hydroxide (CsOH) is hygroscopic and strongly basic. It rapidly etches the surface of semiconductors such as silicon. CsOH has been previously regarded by chemists as the \"strongest base\", reflecting the relatively weak attraction between the large Cs+ ion and OH\u2212; it is indeed the strongest Arrhenius base; however, a number of compounds such as \"n\"-butyllithium, sodium amide, sodium hydride, caesium hydride, etc., which cannot be dissolved in water as reacting violently with it but rather only used in some anhydrous polar aprotic solvents, are far more basic on the basis of the Br\u00f8nsted\u2013Lowry acid\u2013base theory.\nA stoichiometric mixture of caesium and gold will react to form yellow caesium auride (Cs+Au\u2212) upon heating. The auride anion here behaves as a pseudohalogen. The compound reacts violently with water, yielding caesium hydroxide, metallic gold, and hydrogen gas; in liquid ammonia it can be reacted with a caesium-specific ion exchange resin to produce tetramethylammonium auride. The analogous platinum compound, red caesium platinide (Cs2Pt), contains the platinide ion that behaves as a pseudochalcogen.\nComplexes.\nLike all metal cations, Cs+ forms complexes with Lewis bases in solution. Because of its large size, Cs+ usually adopts coordination numbers greater than 6, the number typical for the smaller alkali metal cations. This difference is apparent in the 8-coordination of CsCl. This high coordination number and softness (tendency to form covalent bonds) are properties exploited in separating Cs+ from other cations in the remediation of nuclear wastes, where 137Cs+ must be separated from large amounts of nonradioactive K+.\nHalides.\nCaesium fluoride (CsF) is a hygroscopic white solid that is widely used in organofluorine chemistry as a source of fluoride anions. Caesium fluoride has the halite structure, which means that the Cs+ and F\u2212 pack in a cubic closest packed array as do Na+ and Cl\u2212 in sodium chloride. Notably, caesium and fluorine have the lowest and highest electronegativities, respectively, among all the known elements.\nCaesium chloride (CsCl) crystallizes in the simple cubic crystal system. Also called the \"caesium chloride structure\", this structural motif is composed of a primitive cubic lattice with a two-atom basis, each with an eightfold coordination; the chloride atoms lie upon the lattice points at the edges of the cube, while the caesium atoms lie in the holes in the centre of the cubes. This structure is shared with CsBr and CsI, and many other compounds that do not contain Cs. In contrast, most other alkaline halides have the sodium chloride (NaCl) structure. The CsCl structure is preferred because Cs+ has an ionic radius of 174\u00a0pm and 181\u00a0pm.\nOxides.\nMore so than the other alkali metals, caesium forms numerous binary compounds with oxygen. When caesium burns in air, the superoxide is the main product. The \"normal\" caesium oxide () forms yellow-orange hexagonal crystals, and is the only oxide of the anti- type. It vaporizes at , and decomposes to caesium metal and the peroxide at temperatures above . In addition to the superoxide and the ozonide , several brightly coloured suboxides have also been studied. These include , , , (dark-green), CsO, , as well as . The latter may be heated in a vacuum to generate . Binary compounds with sulfur, selenium, and tellurium also exist.\nIsotopes.\nCaesium has 39 known isotopes, ranging in mass number (i.e. number of nucleons in the nucleus) from 112 to 151. Several of these are synthesized from lighter elements by the slow neutron capture process (S-process) inside old stars and by the R-process in supernova explosions. The only stable caesium isotope is 133Cs, with 78 neutrons. Although it has a large nuclear spin (+), nuclear magnetic resonance studies can use this isotope at a resonating frequency of 11.7\u00a0MHz.\nThe radioactive 135Cs has a very long half-life of about 2.3\u00a0million years, the longest of all radioactive isotopes of caesium. 137Cs and 134Cs have half-lives of 30 and two years, respectively. 137Cs decomposes to a short-lived 137mBa by beta decay, and then to nonradioactive barium, while 134Cs transforms into 134Ba directly. The isotopes with mass numbers of 129, 131, 132 and 136, have half-lives between a day and two weeks, while most of the other isotopes have half-lives from a few seconds to fractions of a second. At least 21 metastable nuclear isomers exist. Other than 134mCs (with a half-life of just under 3\u00a0hours), all are very unstable and decay with half-lives of a few minutes or less.\nThe isotope 135Cs is one of the long-lived fission products of uranium produced in nuclear reactors. However, this fission product yield is reduced in most reactors because the predecessor, 135Xe, is a potent neutron poison and frequently transmutes to stable 136Xe before it can decay to 135Cs.\nThe beta decay from 137Cs to 137mBa is a strong emission of gamma radiation. 137Cs and 90Sr are the principal medium-lived products of nuclear fission, and the prime sources of radioactivity from spent nuclear fuel after several years of cooling, lasting several hundred years. Those two isotopes are the largest source of residual radioactivity in the area of the Chernobyl disaster. Because of the low capture rate, disposing of 137Cs through neutron capture is not feasible and the only current solution is to allow it to decay over time.\nAlmost all caesium produced from nuclear fission comes from the beta decay of originally more neutron-rich fission products, passing through various isotopes of iodine and xenon. Because iodine and xenon are volatile and can diffuse through nuclear fuel or air, radioactive caesium is often created far from the original site of fission. With nuclear weapons testing in the 1950s through the 1980s, 137Cs was released into the atmosphere and returned to the surface of the earth as a component of radioactive fallout. It is a ready marker of the movement of soil and sediment from those times.\nOccurrence.\nCaesium is a relatively rare element, estimated to average 3\u00a0parts per million in the Earth's crust. It is the 45th most abundant element and the 36th among the metals. Nevertheless, it is more abundant than such elements as antimony, cadmium, tin, and tungsten, and two orders of magnitude more abundant than mercury and silver; it is 3.3% as abundant as rubidium, with which it is closely associated, chemically.\nDue to its large ionic radius, caesium is one of the \"incompatible elements\". During magma crystallization, caesium is concentrated in the liquid phase and crystallizes last. Therefore, the largest deposits of caesium are zone pegmatite ore bodies formed by this enrichment process. Because caesium does not substitute for potassium as readily as rubidium does, the alkali evaporite minerals sylvite (KCl) and carnallite () may contain only 0.002% caesium. Consequently, caesium is found in few minerals. Percentage amounts of caesium may be found in beryl () and avogadrite (), up to 15\u00a0wt% Cs2O in the closely related mineral pezzottaite (), up to 8.4\u00a0wt% Cs2O in the rare mineral londonite (), and less in the more widespread rhodizite. The only economically important ore for caesium is pollucite , which is found in a few places around the world in zoned pegmatites, associated with the more commercially important lithium minerals, lepidolite and petalite. Within the pegmatites, the large grain size and the strong separation of the minerals results in high-grade ore for mining.\nThe world's most significant and richest known source of caesium is the Tanco Mine at Bernic Lake in Manitoba, Canada, estimated to contain 350,000\u00a0metric tons of pollucite ore, representing more than two-thirds of the world's reserve base. Although the stoichiometric content of caesium in pollucite is 42.6%, pure pollucite samples from this deposit contain only about 34% caesium, while the average content is 24\u00a0wt%. Commercial pollucite contains more than 19% caesium. The Bikita pegmatite deposit in Zimbabwe is mined for its petalite, but it also contains a significant amount of pollucite. Another notable source of pollucite is in the Karibib Desert, Namibia. At the present rate of world mine production of 5 to 10\u00a0metric tons per year, reserves will last for thousands of years.\nProduction.\nMining and refining pollucite ore is a selective process and is conducted on a smaller scale than for most other metals. The ore is crushed, hand-sorted, but not usually concentrated, and then ground. Caesium is then extracted from pollucite primarily by three methods: acid digestion, alkaline decomposition, and direct reduction.\nIn the acid digestion, the silicate pollucite rock is dissolved with strong acids, such as hydrochloric (HCl), sulfuric (), hydrobromic (HBr), or hydrofluoric (HF) acids. With hydrochloric acid, a mixture of soluble chlorides is produced, and the insoluble chloride double salts of caesium are precipitated as caesium antimony chloride (), caesium iodine chloride (), or caesium hexachlorocerate (). After separation, the pure precipitated double salt is decomposed, and pure CsCl is precipitated by evaporating the water.\nThe sulfuric acid method yields the insoluble double salt directly as caesium alum (). The aluminium sulfate component is converted to insoluble aluminium oxide by roasting the alum with carbon, and the resulting product is leached with water to yield a solution.\nRoasting pollucite with calcium carbonate and calcium chloride yields insoluble calcium silicates and soluble caesium chloride. Leaching with water or dilute ammonia () yields a dilute chloride (CsCl) solution. This solution can be evaporated to produce caesium chloride or transformed into caesium alum or caesium carbonate. Though not commercially feasible, the ore can be directly reduced with potassium, sodium, or calcium in vacuum can produce caesium metal directly.\nMost of the mined caesium (as salts) is directly converted into caesium formate (HCOO\u2212Cs+) for applications such as oil drilling. To supply the developing market, Cabot Corporation built a production plant in 1997 at the Tanco mine near Bernic Lake in Manitoba, with a capacity of per year of caesium formate solution. The primary smaller-scale commercial compounds of caesium are caesium chloride and nitrate.\nAlternatively, caesium metal may be obtained from the purified compounds derived from the ore. Caesium chloride and the other caesium halides can be reduced at with calcium or barium, and caesium metal distilled from the result. In the same way, the aluminate, carbonate, or hydroxide may be reduced by magnesium.\nThe metal can also be isolated by electrolysis of fused caesium cyanide (CsCN). Exceptionally pure and gas-free caesium can be produced by thermal decomposition of caesium azide , which can be produced from aqueous caesium sulfate and barium azide. In vacuum applications, caesium dichromate can be reacted with zirconium to produce pure caesium metal without other gaseous products.\nThe price of 99.8% pure caesium (metal basis) in 2009 was about , but the compounds are significantly cheaper.\nHistory.\nIn 1860, Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff discovered caesium in the mineral water from D\u00fcrkheim, Germany. Because of the bright blue lines in the emission spectrum, they derived the name from the Latin word \"caesius\", meaning sky-blue. Caesium was the first element to be discovered with a spectroscope, which had been invented by Bunsen and Kirchhoff only a year previously.\nTo obtain a pure sample of caesium, of mineral water had to be evaporated to yield of concentrated salt solution. The alkaline earth metals were precipitated either as sulfates or oxalates, leaving the alkali metal in the solution. After conversion to the nitrates and extraction with ethanol, a sodium-free mixture was obtained. From this mixture, the lithium was precipitated by ammonium carbonate. Potassium, rubidium, and caesium form insoluble salts with chloroplatinic acid, but these salts show a slight difference in solubility in hot water, and the less-soluble caesium and rubidium hexachloroplatinate ((Cs,Rb)2PtCl6) were obtained by fractional crystallization. After reduction of the hexachloroplatinate with hydrogen, caesium and rubidium were separated by the difference in solubility of their carbonates in alcohol. The process yielded of rubidium chloride and of caesium chloride from the initial 44,000\u00a0litres of mineral water.\nFrom the caesium chloride, the two scientists estimated the atomic weight of the new element at 123.35 (compared to the currently accepted one of 132.9). They tried to generate elemental caesium by electrolysis of molten caesium chloride, but instead of a metal, they obtained a blue homogeneous substance which \"neither under the naked eye nor under the microscope showed the slightest trace of metallic substance\"; as a result, they assigned it as a subchloride (). In reality, the product was probably a colloidal mixture of the metal and caesium chloride. The electrolysis of the aqueous solution of chloride with a mercury cathode produced a caesium amalgam which readily decomposed under the aqueous conditions. The pure metal was eventually isolated by the German chemist Carl Setterberg while working on his doctorate with Kekul\u00e9 and Bunsen. In 1882, he produced caesium metal by electrolysing caesium cyanide, avoiding the problems with the chloride.\nHistorically, the most important use for caesium has been in research and development, primarily in chemical and electrical fields. Very few applications existed for caesium until the 1920s, when it came into use in radio vacuum tubes, where it had two functions; as a getter, it removed excess oxygen after manufacture, and as a coating on the heated cathode, it increased the electrical conductivity. Caesium was not recognized as a high-performance industrial metal until the 1950s. Applications for nonradioactive caesium included photoelectric cells, photomultiplier tubes, optical components of infrared spectrophotometers, catalysts for several organic reactions, crystals for scintillation counters, and in magnetohydrodynamic power generators. Caesium also was, and still is, used as a source of positive ions in secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS).\nSince 1967, the International System of Measurements has based the primary unit of time, the second, on the properties of caesium. The International System of Units (SI) defines the second as the duration of 9,192,631,770 cycles at the microwave frequency of the spectral line corresponding to the transition between two hyperfine energy levels of the ground state of caesium-133. The 13th General Conference on Weights and Measures of 1967 defined a second as: \"the duration of 9,192,631,770 cycles of microwave light absorbed or emitted by the hyperfine transition of caesium-133 atoms in their ground state undisturbed by external fields\".\nApplications.\nPetroleum exploration.\nThe largest present-day use of nonradioactive caesium is in caesium formate drilling fluids for the extractive oil industry. Aqueous solutions of caesium formate (HCOO\u2212Cs+)\u2014made by reacting caesium hydroxide with formic acid\u2014were developed in the mid-1990s for use as oil well drilling and completion fluids. The function of a drilling fluid is to lubricate drill bits, to bring rock cuttings to the surface, and to maintain pressure on the formation during drilling of the well. Completion fluids assist the emplacement of control hardware after drilling but prior to production by maintaining the pressure.\nThe high density of the caesium formate brine (up to 2.3\u00a0g/cm3, or 19.2\u00a0pounds per gallon), coupled with the relatively benign nature of most caesium compounds, reduces the requirement for toxic high-density suspended solids in the drilling fluid\u2014a significant technological, engineering and environmental advantage. Unlike the components of many other heavy liquids, caesium formate is relatively environment-friendly. Caesium formate brine can be blended with potassium and sodium formates to decrease the density of the fluids to that of water (1.0\u00a0g/cm3, or 8.3\u00a0pounds per gallon). Furthermore, it is biodegradable and may be recycled, which is important in view of its high cost (about $4,000\u00a0per barrel in 2001). Alkali formates are safe to handle and do not damage the producing formation or downhole metals as corrosive alternative, high-density brines (such as zinc bromide solutions) sometimes do; they also require less cleanup and reduce disposal costs.\nAtomic clocks.\nCaesium-based atomic clocks use the electromagnetic transitions in the hyperfine structure of caesium-133 atoms as a reference point. The first accurate caesium clock was built by Louis Essen in 1955 at the National Physical Laboratory in the UK. Caesium clocks have improved over the past half-century and are regarded as \"the most accurate realization of a unit that mankind has yet achieved.\" These clocks measure frequency with an error of 2 to 3\u00a0parts in 1014, which corresponding to an accuracy of 2\u00a0nanoseconds per day, or one second in 1.4\u00a0million\u00a0years. The latest versions are more accurate than 1 part in 1015, about 1 second in 20\u00a0million years. The caesium standard is the primary standard for standards-compliant time and frequency measurements. Caesium clocks regulate the timing of cell phone networks and the Internet.\nSI Units.\nThe second, symbol s, is the SI unit of time. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the caesium frequency , the unperturbed ground-state hyperfine transition frequency of the caesium-133 atom, to be when expressed in the unit Hz, which is equal to s\u22121.\nElectric power and electronics.\nCaesium vapour thermionic generators are low-power devices that convert heat energy to electrical energy. In the two-electrode vacuum tube converter, caesium neutralizes the space charge near the cathode and enhances the current flow.\nCaesium is also important for its photoemissive properties, converting light to electron flow. It is used in photoelectric cells because caesium-based cathodes, such as the intermetallic compound , have a low threshold voltage for emission of electrons. The range of photoemissive devices using caesium include optical character recognition devices, photomultiplier tubes, and video camera tubes. Nevertheless, germanium, rubidium, selenium, silicon, tellurium, and several other elements can be substituted for caesium in photosensitive materials.\nCaesium iodide (CsI), bromide (CsBr) and caesium fluoride (CsF) crystals are employed for scintillators in scintillation counters widely used in mineral exploration and particle physics research to detect gamma and X-ray radiation. Being a heavy element, caesium provides good stopping power with better detection. Caesium compounds may provide a faster response (CsF) and be less hygroscopic (CsI).\nCaesium vapour is used in many common magnetometers.\nThe element is used as an internal standard in spectrophotometry. Like other alkali metals, caesium has a great affinity for oxygen and is used as a \"getter\" in vacuum tubes. Other uses of the metal include high-energy lasers, vapour glow lamps, and vapour rectifiers.\nCentrifugation fluids.\nThe high density of the caesium ion makes solutions of caesium chloride, caesium sulfate, and caesium trifluoroacetate () useful in molecular biology for density gradient ultracentrifugation. This technology is used primarily in the isolation of viral particles, subcellular organelles and fractions, and nucleic acids from biological samples.\nChemical and medical use.\nRelatively few chemical applications use caesium. Doping with caesium compounds enhances the effectiveness of several metal-ion catalysts for chemical synthesis, such as acrylic acid, anthraquinone, ethylene oxide, methanol, phthalic anhydride, styrene, methyl methacrylate monomers, and various olefins. It is also used in the catalytic conversion of sulfur dioxide into sulfur trioxide in the production of sulfuric acid. \nCaesium fluoride enjoys a niche use in organic chemistry as a base and as an anhydrous source of fluoride ion. Caesium salts sometimes replace potassium or sodium salts in organic synthesis, such as cyclization, esterification, and polymerization. Caesium has also been used in thermoluminescent radiation dosimetry : When exposed to radiation, it acquires crystal defects that, when heated, revert with emission of light proportionate to the received dose. Thus, measuring the light pulse with a photomultiplier tube can allow the accumulated radiation dose to be quantified.\nNuclear and isotope applications.\nCaesium-137 is a radioisotope commonly used as a gamma-emitter in industrial applications. Its advantages include a half-life of roughly 30 years, its availability from the nuclear fuel cycle, and having 137Ba as a stable end product. The high water solubility is a disadvantage which makes it incompatible with large pool irradiators for food and medical supplies. It has been used in agriculture, cancer treatment, and the sterilization of food, sewage sludge, and surgical equipment. Radioactive isotopes of caesium in radiation devices were used in the medical field to treat certain types of cancer, but emergence of better alternatives and the use of water-soluble caesium chloride in the sources, which could create wide-ranging contamination, gradually put some of these caesium sources out of use. Caesium-137 has been employed in a variety of industrial measurement gauges, including moisture, density, levelling, and thickness gauges. It has also been used in well logging devices for measuring the electron density of the rock formations, which is analogous to the bulk density of the formations.\nCaesium-137 has been used in hydrologic studies analogous to those with tritium. As a daughter product of fission bomb testing from the 1950s through the mid-1980s, caesium-137 was released into the atmosphere, where it was absorbed readily into solution. Known year-to-year variation within that period allows correlation with soil and sediment layers. Caesium-134, and to a lesser extent caesium-135, have also been used in hydrology to measure the caesium output by the nuclear power industry. While they are less prevalent than either caesium-133 or caesium-137, these bellwether isotopes are produced solely from anthropogenic sources.\nOther uses.\nCaesium and mercury were used as a propellant in early ion engines designed for spacecraft propulsion on very long interplanetary or extraplanetary missions. The fuel was ionized by contact with a charged tungsten electrode. But corrosion by caesium on spacecraft components has pushed development in the direction of inert gas propellants, such as xenon, which are easier to handle in ground-based tests and do less potential damage to the spacecraft. Xenon was used in the experimental spacecraft Deep Space 1 launched in 1998. Nevertheless, field-emission electric propulsion thrusters that accelerate liquid metal ions such as caesium have been built.\nCaesium nitrate is used as an oxidizer and pyrotechnic colorant to burn silicon in infrared flares, such as the LUU-19 flare, because it emits much of its light in the near infrared spectrum. Caesium may have been developed to reduce the radar signature of exhaust plumes in the Lockheed A-12 CIA reconnaissance aircraft. Caesium and rubidium have been added as a carbonate to glass because they reduce electrical conductivity and improve stability and durability of fibre optics and night vision devices. Caesium fluoride or caesium aluminium fluoride are used in fluxes formulated for brazing aluminium alloys that contain magnesium.\nMagnetohydrodynamic (MHD) power-generating systems were researched, but failed to gain widespread acceptance. Caesium metal has also been considered as the working fluid in high-temperature Rankine cycle turboelectric generators.\nCaesium salts have been evaluated as antishock reagents following the administration of arsenical drugs. Because of their effect on heart rhythms, however, they are less likely to be used than potassium or rubidium salts. They have also been used to treat epilepsy.\nCaesium-133 can be laser cooled and used to probe fundamental and technological problems in quantum physics. It has a particularly convenient Feshbach spectrum to enable studies of ultracold atoms requiring tunable interactions.\nHealth and safety hazards.\nNonradioactive caesium compounds are only mildly toxic, and nonradioactive caesium is not a significant environmental hazard. Because biochemical processes can confuse and substitute caesium with potassium, excess caesium can lead to hypokalemia, arrhythmia, and acute cardiac arrest. But such amounts would not ordinarily be encountered in natural sources.\nThe median lethal dose (LD50) for caesium chloride in mice is 2.3\u00a0g per kilogram, which is comparable to the LD50 values of potassium chloride and sodium chloride. The principal use of nonradioactive caesium is as caesium formate in petroleum drilling fluids because it is much less toxic than alternatives, though it is more costly.\nCaesium metal is one of the most reactive elements and is highly explosive in the presence of water. The hydrogen gas produced by the reaction is heated by the thermal energy released at the same time, causing ignition and a violent explosion. This can occur with other alkali metals, but caesium is so potent that this explosive reaction can be triggered even by cold water.\nIt is highly pyrophoric: the autoignition temperature of caesium is , and it ignites explosively in air to form caesium hydroxide and various oxides. Caesium hydroxide is a very strong base, and will rapidly corrode glass.\nThe isotopes 134 and 137 are present in the biosphere in small amounts from human activities, differing by location. Radiocaesium does not accumulate in the body as readily as other fission products (such as radioiodine and radiostrontium). About 10% of absorbed radiocaesium washes out of the body relatively quickly in sweat and urine. The remaining 90% has a biological half-life between 50 and 150 days. Radiocaesium follows potassium and tends to accumulate in plant tissues, including fruits and vegetables. Plants vary widely in the absorption of caesium, sometimes displaying great resistance to it. It is also well-documented that mushrooms from contaminated forests accumulate radiocaesium (caesium-137) in the fungal sporocarps. Accumulation of caesium-137 in lakes has been a great concern after the Chernobyl disaster. Experiments with dogs showed that a single dose of 3.8 millicuries (140\u00a0MBq, 4.1\u00a0\u03bcg of caesium-137) per kilogram is lethal within three weeks; smaller amounts may cause infertility and cancer. The International Atomic Energy Agency and other sources have warned that radioactive materials, such as caesium-137, could be used in radiological dispersion devices, or \"dirty bombs\"."}
{"id": "5880", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5880", "title": "Comment (computing)", "text": ""}
{"id": "5881", "revid": "39309315", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5881", "title": "Century", "text": "A century is a period of 100 years. Centuries are numbered ordinally in English and many other languages. The word \"century\" comes from the Latin \"centum\", meaning \"one hundred\". \"Century\" is sometimes abbreviated as c.\nA centennial or centenary is a hundredth anniversary, or a celebration of this, typically the remembrance of an event which took place a hundred years earlier.\nStart and end of centuries.\nAlthough a century can mean any arbitrary period of 100 years, there are two viewpoints on the nature of standard centuries. One is based on strict construction, while the other is based on popular perception. \nAccording to the strict construction, the 1st century AD began with AD 1 and ended with AD 100, the 2nd century spanning the years 101 to 200, with the same pattern continuing onward. In this model, the \"n\"-th century starts with the year that ends with \"01\", and ends with the year that ends with \"00\"; for example, the years 1901 to 2000, in strict usage, comprise the 20th century.\nIn popular perception and practice, centuries are structured by grouping years based on sharing the 'hundreds' digit(s). In this model, the 'n' -th century starts with the year that ends in \"00\" and ends with the year ending in \"99\"; for example, the years 1900 to 1999, in popular culture, comprise the 20th century. (This is similar to the grouping of \"0-to-9 decades\" which share the 'tens' digit.) The astronomical year numbering and ISO 8601 systems both contain a year zero, so the first century begins with the year zero, rather than the year one.\nAlternative naming systems.\nInformally, years may be referred to in groups based on the hundreds part of the year. In this system, the years 1900\u20131999 are referred to as the \"nineteen hundreds\" (\"1900s\"). Aside from English usage, this system is used in Swedish, Danish, Norwegian, Icelandic, Finnish and Hungarian. The Swedish \"nittonhundratalet\" (or \"1900-talet\"), Danish \"nittenhundredetallet\" (or \"1900-tallet\"), Norwegian \"nittenhundretallet\" (or \" 1900-tallet\"), Finnish \"tuhatyhdeks\u00e4nsataaluku\" (or \"1900-luku\") and Hungarian \"ezerkilencsz\u00e1zas \u00e9vek\" (or \"1900-as \u00e9vek\") refer unambiguously to the years 1900\u20131999.\nItalian also has a similar system, but it only expresses the hundreds and omits the word for \u201cthousand\u201d. This system mainly functions from the 11th to the 20th century: \nThese terms are often used in other languages when referring to the history of Italy.\nSimilar dating units in other calendar systems.\nWhile the century has been commonly used in the West, other cultures and calendars have utilized differently sized groups of years in a similar manner. The Hindu calendar, in particular, summarizes its years into groups of 60, while the Aztec calendar considers groups of 52."}
{"id": "5882", "revid": "41783728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5882", "title": "Cardiff", "text": "Cardiff (; ), the capital city of Wales is officially known as the City and County of Cardiff. It is the United Kingdom's eleventh-largest city, the main commercial centre of Wales, and the base for the Senedd (Welsh Parliament), most national cultural institutions and most of the Welsh media. At the 2011 census, the unitary authority area population was put at 346,090, and the wider urban area at 479,000. In 2011 it ranked sixth in the world in a \"National Geographic\" magazine list of alternative tourist destinations. It is the most popular destination in Wales with 21.3 million visitors in 2017. Cardiff is county town of the historic county of Glamorgan and in 1974\u20131996 of South Glamorgan. It belongs to the Eurocities network of the largest European cities. A small town until the early 19th century, its prominence as a port for coal when mining began in the region helped its expansion. In 1905 it was ranked as a city and in 1955 proclaimed capital of Wales. The population in the 2011 Census was 346,100. Cardiff Built-up Area covers a larger area outside the county boundary, including the towns of Dinas Powys and Penarth.\nMarked development resumed in the 1980s. A new waterfront area at Cardiff Bay contains the Senedd building (the Welsh Parliament) and the Wales Millennium Centre arts complex. Work continues at Cardiff Bay and in the centre, on projects such as Cardiff International Sports Village, BBC drama village, and a new business district. Sporting venues include the Principality Stadium \u2013 the national stadium and home of the Wales national rugby union team \u2013 Sophia Gardens for Glamorgan County Cricket Club), Cardiff City Stadium for Cardiff City F.C. and the Wales football team), Cardiff International Sports Stadium, home of Cardiff Amateur Athletic Club), Cardiff Arms Park for Cardiff Blues and Cardiff RFC rugby union teams, and Ice Arena Wales for Cardiff Devils ice hockey team. It hosted the 1958 British Empire and Commonwealth Games and was dubbed European City of Sport for its role in international sporting events in 2009 and again in 2014. The Principality Stadium hosted 11 football matches during the 2012 Summer Olympics, including the opening event and the men's bronze medal match.\nEtymology.\n (the Welsh name of the city) derives from the Middle Welsh . The change from to shows the colloquial alteration of Welsh \"f\" and \"dd\" , and was perhaps also driven by folk etymology ( is Welsh for 'day' whereas * has no obvious meaning). This sound change had probably first occurred in the Middle Ages; both forms were current in the Tudor period. has its origins in post-Roman Brythonic words meaning \"the fort of the Taff\". The fort probably refers to that established by the Romans. is Welsh for \"fort\" and is in effect a form of (Taff), the river which flows by Cardiff Castle, with the showing consonant mutation to and the vowel showing affection as a result of a (lost) genitive case ending.\nThe anglicised \"Cardiff\" is derived from , with the Welsh \"f\" borrowed as \"ff\" , as also happens in \"Taff\" (from Welsh ) and \"Llandaff\" (from Welsh ).\nThe antiquarian William Camden (1551\u20131623) suggested that the name Cardiff may derive from * (\"the Fort of Didius\"), a name supposedly given in honour of , governor of a nearby province at the time when the Roman fort was established. Although some sources repeat this theory, it has been rejected on linguistic grounds by modern scholars such as Professor Pierce.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nArchaeological evidence from sites in and around Cardiff: the St Lythans burial chamber near Wenvoe, (approximately to the west of Cardiff city centre); the Tinkinswood burial chamber, near St. Nicholas (about west of Cardiff city centre), the Cae'rarfau Chambered Tomb, Creigiau (about northwest of Cardiff city centre) and the Gwern y Cleppa Long Barrow, near Coedkernew, Newport (about northeast of Cardiff city centre), all show that people had settled in the area by at least around 6000\u00a0BC, during the early Neolithic; about 1,500 years before either Stonehenge or the Great Pyramid of Giza was completed. A group of five Bronze Age tumuli is at the summit of the Garth (), within the county's northern boundary. Four Iron Age hill fort and enclosure sites have been identified within Cardiff's present-day county boundaries, including Caerau Hillfort, an enclosed area of .\nUntil the Roman conquest of Britain, Cardiff was part of the territory of the Silures \u2013 a Celtic British tribe that flourished in the Iron Age \u2013 whose territory included the areas that would become known as Breconshire, Monmouthshire and Glamorgan. The fort established by the Romans near the mouth of the River Taff in AD\u00a075, in what would become the north western boundary of the centre of Cardiff, was built over an extensive settlement that had been established by the Romans in the 50s\u00a0AD. The fort was one of a series of military outposts associated with \"Isca Augusta\" (Caerleon) that acted as border defences. The fort may have been abandoned in the early 2nd century as the area had been subdued. However, by this time a civilian settlement, or \"vicus\", was established. It was likely made up of traders who made a living from the fort, ex-soldiers and their families. A Roman villa has been discovered at Ely. Contemporary with the Saxon Shore forts of the 3rd and 4th centuries, a stone fortress was established at Cardiff. Similar to the shore forts, the fortress was built to protect Britannia from raiders. Coins from the reign of Gratian indicate that Cardiff was inhabited until at least the 4th century; the fort was abandoned towards the end of the 4th century, as the last Roman legions left the province of Britannia with Magnus Maximus.\nLittle is known of the fort and civilian settlement in the period between the Roman departure from Britain and the Norman Conquest. The settlement probably shrank in size and may even have been abandoned. In the absence of Roman rule, Wales was divided into small kingdoms; early on, Meurig ap Tewdrig emerged as the local king in Glywysing (which later became Glamorgan). The area passed through his family until the advent of the Normans in the 11th century.\nNorman occupation and Middle Ages.\nIn 1081 William I, King of England, began work on the castle keep within the walls of the old Roman fort. Cardiff Castle has been at the heart of the city ever since. The castle was substantially altered and extended during the Victorian period by John Crichton-Stuart, 3rd Marquess of Bute, and the architect William Burges. Original Roman work can, however, still be distinguished in the wall facings.\nA town grew up under the castle, consisting mainly of settlers from England. Cardiff had a population of between 1,500 and 2,000 in the Middle Ages \u2013 a normal size for a Welsh town in the period. It was the centre of the Norman Marcher Lordship of Glamorgan. By the end of the 13th century, Cardiff was the only town in Wales with a population exceeding 2,000, although it remained relatively small compared with notable towns in England and continued to be contained within its walls, which were begun as a wooden palisade in the early 12th century. It was of sufficient size and importance to receive a series of charters, notably in 1331 from William La Zouche, Lord of Glamorgan through marriage with the de Clare family, Edward III in 1359, then Henry IV in 1400, and later Henry VI.\nIn 1404, Owain Glynd\u0175r burned Cardiff and took possession of the Castle. As many of the buildings were made of timber and tightly packed within the town walls, much of Cardiff was destroyed. Ironically given the treatment of Cardiff by Glynd\u0175r, his statue was erected in Cardiff Town Hall in the early 20th century, reflecting the complex, often conflicting cultural identity of Cardiff as capital of Wales. It was soon rebuilt on the same street plan and began to flourish again. Besides serving an important political role in the governance of the fertile south Glamorgan coastal plain, Cardiff was a busy port in the Middle Ages and declared a staple port in 1327.\nCounty town of Glamorganshire.\nIn 1536, the Laws in Wales Acts 1535\u20131542 led to the creation of Glamorganshire and Cardiff was made the county town. It also became part of Kibbor hundred. Around the same time the Herberts became the most powerful family in the area. In 1538, Henry VIII closed Cardiff's Dominican and Franciscan friaries, whose remains were used as building materials. A writer in this period noted: \"The River Taff runs under the walls of his honours castle and from the north part of the town to the south part where there is a fair quay and a safe harbour for shipping.\"\nCardiff became a Free Borough in 1542 and further Royal Charters were granted to it by Elizabeth I in 1600 and James I in 1608. In 1573, it was made a head port for collection of customs duties. Pembrokeshire historian George Owen described Cardiff in 1602 as \"the fayrest towne in Wales yett not the welthiest\". It gained a second Royal Charter in 1608.\nA disastrous flood in the Bristol Channel on 30 January 1607 (now believed to have been a tidal wave) changed the course of the River Taff and ruined St Mary's Parish Church, which was replaced by a chapel of ease dedicated to St John the Baptist.\nDuring the Second English Civil War St Fagans, just to the west of the town, the Battle of St Fagans, between Royalist rebels and a New Model Army detachment, was a decisive victory for the Parliamentarians that allowed Oliver Cromwell to conquer Wales. It was the last major battle in Wales, with about 200, mostly Royalist soldiers killed.\nCardiff was at peace throughout the ensuing century. In 1766, John Stuart, 1st Marquess of Bute married into the Herbert family and was later created Baron Cardiff. In 1778, he began renovating Cardiff Castle. A racecourse, printing press, bank and coffee house opened in the 1790s and Cardiff gained a stagecoach service to London. Despite these improvements, Cardiff's position in the Welsh urban hierarchy declined over the 18th century. Iolo Morganwg called it \"an obscure and inconsiderable place\" and the 1801 census found a population of only 1,870, making it only the 25th largest town in Wales, well behind Merthyr and Swansea.\nBuilding the docks.\nIn 1793, John Crichton-Stuart, 2nd Marquess of Bute was born. He spent his life building the Cardiff docks and was later hailed as \"the creator of modern Cardiff\". A twice-weekly boat service between Cardiff and Bristol opened in 1815, and in 1821, the Cardiff Gas Works was established.\nAfter the Napoleonic Wars Cardiff suffered some social and industrial unrest, starting with the trial and hanging of Dic Penderyn in 1831.\nThe town grew rapidly from the 1830s onwards, when the Marquess of Bute built a dock, which eventually linked to the Taff Vale Railway. Cardiff became the main port for coal exports from the Cynon, Rhondda, and Rhymney valleys, and grew in population at a rate of nearly 80 per cent per decade between 1840 and 1870. Much of this was due to migration from within and outside Wales: in 1841, a quarter of Cardiff's population were English-born and more than 10 per cent born in Ireland. By the 1881 census, Cardiff had overtaken Merthyr and Swansea to become the largest town in Wales. Cardiff's status as the premier town in South Wales was confirmed when it was chosen as the site for the University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire in 1883.\nA permanent military presence was established with the completion of Maindy Barracks in 1877.\nCardiff faced a challenge in the 1880s when David Davies of Llandinam and the Barry Railway Company promoted rival docks at Barry. These had the advantage of being accessible in all tides: David Davies claimed his venture would cause \"grass to grow in the streets of Cardiff\". From 1901 coal exports from Barry surpassed those from Cardiff, but the administration of the coal trade remained centred on Cardiff, in particular its Coal Exchange, where the price of coal on the British market was determined and the first million-pound deal was struck in 1907. The city also strengthened its industrial base when the owners of the Dowlais Ironworks in Merthyr (who would later form part of Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds) built a steelworks close to the docks at East Moors, which Lord Bute opened on 4 February 1891.\nCounty Borough of Cardiff.\nCardiff became a county borough on 1 April 1889 under the Local Government Act 1888. The town had grown rapidly and had a population of over 123,000. It retained its county borough status until 1974.\nCity and capital city status.\nKing Edward VII granted Cardiff city status on 28 October 1905. It acquired a Roman Catholic cathedral in 1916. Later, more national institutions came to the city, including the National Museum of Wales, the Welsh National War Memorial, and the University of Wales Registry Building, but it was denied the National Library of Wales, partly because the library's founder, Sir John Williams, considered Cardiff to have \"a non-Welsh population\".\nAfter a brief post-war boom, Cardiff docks entered a prolonged decline in the interwar period. By 1936, trade was at less than half its value in 1913, reflecting the slump in demand for Welsh coal. Bomb damage in the Cardiff Blitz of World War II included the devastation of Llandaff Cathedral, and in the immediate postwar years, the city's link with the Bute family came to an end.\nThe city was recognised as the capital city of Wales on 20 December 1955, in a written reply by the Home Secretary, Gwilym Lloyd George. Caernarfon had also vied for the title. Welsh local authorities had been divided: only 76 out of 161 chose Cardiff in a 1924 poll organised by the \"South Wales Daily News\". The subject was not debated again until 1950, and meanwhile Cardiff took steps to promote its \"Welshness\". The stalemate between Cardiff and cities such as Caernarfon and Aberystwyth was not broken until Cardiganshire County Council decided to support Cardiff; and in a new local authority vote, 134 out of 161 voted for Cardiff.\nCardiff therefore celebrated two important anniversaries in 2005. The Encyclopedia of Wales notes that the decision to recognise the city as the capital of Wales \"had more to do with the fact that it contained marginal Conservative constituencies than any reasoned view of what functions a Welsh capital should have.\" Although the city hosted the Commonwealth Games in 1958, Cardiff only became a centre of national administration with the establishment of the Welsh Office in 1964, which later prompted the creation of various other public bodies such as the Arts Council of Wales and the Welsh Development Agency, most of which were based in Cardiff.\nThe East Moors Steelworks closed in 1978 and Cardiff lost population in the 1980s, consistent with a wider pattern of counter-urbanisation in Britain. However, it recovered to become one of the few cities outside London where population grew in the 1990s. During this period the Cardiff Bay Development Corporation was promoting the redevelopment of south Cardiff; an evaluation of the regeneration of Cardiff Bay published in 2004 concluded that the project had \"reinforced the competitive position of Cardiff\" and \"contributed to a massive improvement in the quality of the built environment, although it had \"failed \"to attract the major inward investors originally anticipated.\"\nIn the 1997 Welsh devolution referendum, Cardiff voters rejected the establishment of the National Assembly for Wales by 55.4% to 44.2% on a 47% turnout, which Denis Balsom partly ascribed to a general preference in Cardiff and some other parts of Wales for a British rather than exclusively Welsh identity. The relative lack of local support for the Assembly and difficulties between the Welsh Office and Cardiff Council in acquiring the originally preferred venue, Cardiff City Hall, encouraged other local authorities to bid to house the Assembly. However, the Assembly was eventually located at T\u0177 Hywel in Cardiff Bay in 1999. In 2005, a new debating chamber on an adjacent site, designed by Richard Rogers, was opened.\nGovernment.\nSenedd Cymru (the Welsh Parliament) has been based in Cardiff Bay since its formation in 1999 as the National Assembly for Wales. The Senedd building was opened on 1 March 2006 by The Queen. The Members of the Senedd (MSs), the Senedd Commission and ministerial support staff are based in Cardiff Bay. Cardiff elects four constituency Senedd Members (MS) to the Senedd; the constituencies for the Senedd are the same as for the UK Parliament. All of the city's electors have an extra vote for the South Wales Central regional members; this system increases proportionality to the Senedd. The most recent Senedd general election was held on 5 May 2016.\nIn the Senedd Cardiff is represented by Jenny Rathbone (Labour) in Cardiff Central, Julie Morgan (Labour) in Cardiff North, Vaughan Gething (Labour) in Cardiff South and Penarth and First Minister of Wales Mark Drakeford (Labour) in Cardiff West.\nAt Westminster, Cardiff is represented by four Labour MPs: Jo Stevens in Cardiff Central, Anna McMorrin in Cardiff North, Stephen Doughty in Cardiff South and Penarth, and Kevin Brennan in Cardiff West.\nThe Welsh Government is headquartered in Cardiff's Cathays Park, where most of its civil servants are based, with smaller numbers in other central locations: Cathays, Canton, and Cardiff Bay. There are other Welsh Government offices in other parts of Wales, such as Llandudno and Aberystwyth, and there are international offices.\nLocal government.\nBetween 1889 and 1974 Cardiff was a county borough governed by Cardiff County Borough Council (known as Cardiff City Council after 1905). Between 1974 and 1996, Cardiff was governed by Cardiff City Council, a district council of South Glamorgan. Since local government reorganisation in 1996, Cardiff has been governed by the City and County Council of Cardiff, based at County Hall in Atlantic Wharf, Cardiff Bay. Voters elect 75 councillors every four years.\nBetween the 2004 and 2012 local elections, no individual political party held a majority on Cardiff County Council. The Liberal Democrats held the largest number of seats and Cllr Rodney Berman was Leader of the council. The Liberal Democrats and Plaid Cymru formed a partnership administration. In the 2012 elections the Labour Party achieved an outright majority, after gaining an additional 33 seats across the city.\nCardiff is divided into communities, several with their own community council and the rest governed directly by Cardiff City Council. Elections are held every five years. The last contested elections would have been held at the same time as the 2017 Cardiff Council election had there been more candidates standing than available seats. Those with community councils are:\nGeography.\nThe centre of Cardiff is relatively flat and bounded by hills to the east, north and west. Its location influenced its development as the world's largest coal port, notably its proximity and easy access to the coalfields of the South Wales Valleys. The highest point in the local authority area is Garth Hill, above sea level.\nCardiff is built on reclaimed marshland on a bed of Triassic stones. This reclaimed marshland stretches from Chepstow to the Ely Estuary, which is the natural boundary of Cardiff and the Vale of Glamorgan. Triassic landscapes of this part of the world are usually shallow and low-lying, consistent with the flatness of the centre of Cardiff. The classic Triassic marl, sand and conglomerate rocks are used predominantly throughout Cardiff as building materials. Many of these Triassic rocks are purplish, especially the coastal marl found near Penarth. One of the Triassic rocks used in Cardiff is \"Radyr Stone\", a freestone which as its name suggests is quarried in the Radyr district. Cardiff has also imported some materials for buildings: Devonian sandstones (the Old Red Sandstone) from the Brecon Beacons has been used. Most famously, the buildings of Cathays Park, the civic centre in the centre of the city, are built of Portland stone from Dorset. A widely used building stone in Cardiff is the yellow-grey Liassic limestone rock of the Vale of Glamorgan, including the rare \"Sutton Stone\", a conglomerate of lias limestone and carboniferous limestone.\nCardiff is bordered to the west by the rural district of the Vale of Glamorgan, also known as the Garden of Cardiff, to the east by the city of Newport; to the north by the South Wales Valleys, and to the south by the Severn Estuary and Bristol Channel. The River Taff winds through the city centre and together with the River Ely flows into the freshwater Cardiff Bay. A third river, the Rhymney, flows through the east of the city directly into the Severn Estuary.\nCardiff lies near the Glamorgan Heritage Coast, stretching westward from Penarth and Barry \u2013 commuter towns of Cardiff \u2013 with striped yellow-blue Jurassic limestone cliffs. The Glamorgan coast is the only part of the Celtic Sea with exposed Jurassic (blue lias) geology. This stretch of coast with its reefs, sandbanks and serrated cliffs was a ship graveyard; many ships sailing to Cardiff during the industrial era were wrecked on this hostile coastline during west/south-westerly gales. Smuggling, deliberate shipwrecking and attacks on ships were also common.\nCityscape.\n\"Inner Cardiff\" consists of the wards of Plasnewydd, Gabalfa, Roath, Cathays, Adamsdown and Splott ward on the north and east of the city centre, and Butetown, Grangetown, Riverside and Canton to the south and west. The inner-city areas to the south of the A4161 road, known as the \"Southern Arc\", are with the exception of Cardiff Bay some of the poorest districts of Wales, with low levels of economic activity. On the other hand, Gabalfa, Plasnewydd and Cathays north of the 'arc' have large student populations, and Pontcanna (north of Riverside and alongside Canton) is a favourite for students and young professionals. Penylan, to the north east of Roath Park, is an affluent area popular with older parents and the retired.\nTo the west lie Ely, Caerau and Fairwater, which have some of the largest housing estates in the United Kingdom. With the exception of some outlying privately built estates at Michaelston-super-Ely and 1930s developments near Waun-Gron Road, this is an economically disadvantaged area with high numbers of unemployed households. Culverhouse Cross is a more affluent western area of the city. Heath, Birchgrove, Gabalfa, Mynachdy, Llandaff North, Llandaff, Llanishen, Radyr, Whitchurch &amp; Tongwynlais, Rhiwbina, Thornhill, Lisvane and Cyncoed lie in an arc from the north-west to the north-east of the centre. Lisvane, Cyncoed, Radyr and Rhiwbina contain some of the most expensive housing in Wales.\nFurther east lie the wards of Pontprennau and Old St Mellons, Rumney, Pentwyn, Llanrumney, Llanedeyrn and Trowbridge. The last four are largely public housing stock, although much new private housing is being built in Trowbridge. Pontprennau is the newest \"suburb\" of Cardiff, while Old St Mellons has a history going back to the 11th-century Norman Conquest. The region that may be called \"Rural Cardiff\" contains the villages of St Fagans, Creigiau, Pentyrch, Tongwynlais and Gwaelod-y-garth. In 2017, plans were approved for a new suburb of 7,000 homes between Radyr and St Fagans, known as Plasd\u0175r. St Fagans, home to the Museum of Welsh Life, is protected from further development.\nSince 2000, there has been a marked change of scale and building height in Cardiff, with the development of the city centre's first purpose-built high-rise apartments. Tall buildings have been built in the city centre and Cardiff Bay, and more are planned.\nClimate.\nCardiff, in the north temperate zone, has a maritime climate (K\u00f6ppen: Cfb) marked by mild weather that is often cloudy, wet and windy. Summers tend to be warm and sunny, with average maxima between . Winters are fairly wet, but rainfall rarely excessive and frost rare. Spring and autumn feel similar and the temperatures tend to stay above \u2013 also the average annual daytime temperature. Rain is unpredictable at any time of year, although showers tend to be shorter in summer.\nThe northern part of the county, being higher and inland, tends to be cooler and wetter than the city centre.\nCardiff's maximum and minimum monthly temperatures average (July) and (February).For Wales, the temperatures average (July) and (February).\nCardiff has 1,518 hours of sunshine in an average year (Wales 1,388.7 hours). Cardiff is sunniest in July, with an average 203.4 hours during the month (Wales 183.3 hours), and least sunny in December with 44.6 hours (Wales 38.5 hours).\nCardiff experiences less rainfall than average for Wales. It falls on 146 days in an average year, with total annual rainfall of . Monthly rainfall patterns show that from October to January, average monthly rainfall in Cardiff exceeds each month, the wettest month being December with and the driest from April to June, with average monthly rainfall fairly consistent between .\nDemography.\nAfter a period of decline in the 1970s and 1980s, Cardiff's population is growing again. It reached 346,100 in the 2011 census, compared to a 2001 census figure of 305,353. Between mid\u22122007 and mid\u20132008, Cardiff was the fastest-growing local authority in Wales, with growth of 1.2%. According to 2001 census data, Cardiff was the 21st largest urban area. The Cardiff Larger Urban Zone (a Eurostat definition including the Vale of Glamorgan and a number of local authorities in the Valleys) has 841,600 people, the 10th largest LUZ in the UK. The Cardiff and South Wales Valleys metropolitan area has a population of nearly 1.1 million.\nOfficial census estimates of the city's total population have been disputed. The city council published two articles arguing that the 2001 census seriously under-reported the population of Cardiff, and in particular the ethnic minority population of some inner city areas.\nThe Welsh Government's official mid-year estimate of the population of the Cardiff local authority area in 2019 was 366,903. At the 2011, census the official population of the Cardiff Built Up Area (BUA) was put at 447,287. The BUA is not contiguous with the local authority boundary and aggregates data at a lower level; for Cardiff this includes the urban part of Cardiff, Penarth/Dinas Powys, Caerphilly and Pontypridd.\nCardiff has an ethnically diverse population due to past trading connections, post-war immigration and large numbers of foreign students who attend university in the city. The ethnic make-up of Cardiff's population at the 2011 census was: 84.7% White, 1.6% mixed White and Black African/Caribbean, 0.7% mixed White and Asian, 0.6% mixed other, 8.1% Asian, 2.4% Black, 1.4% Arab and 0.6% other ethnic groups. This means almost 53,000 people from a non-white ethnic group reside in the city. This diversity, especially that of the city's long-established African and Arab communities, has been celebrated in cultural exhibitions and events, along with a number of books published on this subject.\nHealth.\nThere are seven NHS hospitals in the city, the largest being the University Hospital of Wales, which is the third largest hospital in the UK and deals with most accidents and emergencies. The University Dental Hospital, which provides emergency treatment, is also located on this site. Llandough Hospital is located in the south of the city.\nSt. David's Hospital, the city's newest hospital, built behind the former building, is located in Canton and provides services for the elderly and children. Cardiff Royal Infirmary is on Newport Road, near the city centre. The majority of this hospital was closed in 1999, but the west wing remained open for clinic services, genitourinary medicine and rehabilitation treatment. Rookwood Hospital and the Velindre Cancer Centre are also located within Cardiff. They are administered by the Cardiff and Vale University Health Board, with the exception of Velindre, which is run by a separate trust. Spire Healthcare, a private hospital, is in Pontprennau.\nLanguage.\nCardiff has a chequered linguistic history with Welsh, English, Latin, Norse and Norman French preponderant at different times. Welsh was the majority language in Cardiff from the 13th century until the city's explosive growth in the Victorian era. As late as 1850, five of the 12 Anglican churches within the current city boundaries conducted their services exclusively in Welsh, while only two worshipped exclusively in English. By 1891, the percentage of Welsh speakers had fallen to 27.9% and only Lisvane, Llanedeyrn and Creigiau remained as majority Welsh-speaking communities. The Welsh language became grouped around a small cluster of chapels and churches, the most notable of which is Tabernacl in the city centre, one of four UK churches chosen to hold official services to commemorate the new millennium.\nThe city's first Welsh-language school (Ysgol Gymraeg Bryntaf) was established in the 1950s. Welsh has since regained ground. Aided by Welsh-medium education and migration from other parts of Wales, there are now many more Welsh speakers: their numbers doubled between the 1991 and 2011 censuses, from 18,071 (6.6%) to 36,735 (11.1%) residents aged three years and above. The LSOA (Lower Layer Super Output Area) with the highest percentage of Welsh speakers in the city centre is found in Canton, at 25.5%. The LSOA with the highest percentage of Welsh speakers in the whole of Cardiff is Whitchurch, at 26%.\nCardiff City Council adopted a five-year Welsh-language strategy in 2017, aimed at increasing the number of Welsh speakers (aged 3+) in Cardiff by 15.9%, from 36,735 in 2011 to 42,584 residents by the 2021 Census. The ONS estimated that in December 2020, 89,900 (24.8%) of Cardiff's population could speak Welsh.\nIn addition to English and Welsh, the diversity of Cardiff's population (including foreign students) means that many other languages are spoken. One study has found that Cardiff has speakers of at least 94 languages, with Somali, Urdu, Bengali and Arabic being the most commonly spoken foreign ones.\nThe modern Cardiff accent is distinct from that of nearby South Wales Valleys. It is marked primarily by:\nLanguage schools.\nDue to its diversity and large student population, more people now come to the city to learn English. Foreign students from Arab states and other European countries are a common sight on the streets of Cardiff. The British Council has an office in the city centre and there are six accredited schools in the area.\nReligion.\nSince 1922, Cardiff has included Llandaff within its boundary, along with the Anglican Llandaff Cathedral, the parish church of Llandaff and the seat of the Bishop of Llandaff, head of the Church in Wales and the Diocese of Llandaff.\nThere is a Roman Catholic cathedral in the city. Since 1916, Cardiff has been the seat of a Catholic archbishop, but there appears to have been a fall in the estimated Catholic population, with numbers in 2006 around 25,000 fewer than in 1980. Likewise, the Jewish population appears to have fallen \u2013 there are two synagogues in Cardiff, one in Cyncoed and one in Moira Terrace, as opposed to seven at the turn of the 20th century. There are several nonconformist chapels, an early 20th century Greek Orthodox church and 11 mosques. In the 2001 census, 66.9% of Cardiff's population described itself as Christian, a percentage point below the Welsh and UK averages.\nThe oldest of the non-Christian communities in Wales is Judaism. Jews were not permitted to live in England and Wales between the 1290 Edict of Expulsion and the 17th century. A Welsh Jewish community was re-established in the 18th century. There was once a fairly substantial Jewish population in South Wales, most of which has disappeared. The Orthodox Jewish community congregations are consolidated in the Cardiff United Synagogue in Cyncoed, which was dedicated by Chief Rabbi Jonathan Sacks in 2003. The Cardiff Reform Synagogue is in Adamsdown.\nCardiff's Muslim population is much above the Welsh average and the longest established in the UK, being started by Yemeni and Somali sailors settling in the 19th century. Cardiff now has over 11,000 Muslims with various national affiliations \u2013 nearly 52 per cent of the Muslim population in Wales.\nThe proportion of Cardiff residents declaring themselves Hindu, Sikh and Jewish were all considerably higher than the Welsh averages, but lower than the UK figures. The city has had a Hindu community since Indian immigrants settled in the 1950s and 1960s. The first Hindu temple in the city was opened in Grangetown on 6 April 1979 on the site of an abandoned synagogue. The 25th anniversary of the founding was celebrated in September 2007 with a parade of over 3,000 people through the city centre, including Hindus from across the United Kingdom and members of Cardiff's other religious communities. There are over 2,000 Hindus in Cardiff, worshiping at three temples.\nIn the 2001 census 18.8% of the city's population stated they had no religion, while 8.6% did not state a religion.\nEconomy.\nAs the capital city of Wales, Cardiff is the main engine of growth in the Welsh economy. Though the population of Cardiff is about 10% of the Welsh population, the economy of Cardiff makes up nearly 20% of Welsh GDP and 40% of the city's workforce are daily in-commuters from the surrounding South Wales area.\nIndustry has played a major part in Cardiff's development for many centuries. The main catalyst for its transformation from a small town into a big city was the demand for coal required in making iron and later steel, brought to sea by packhorse from Merthyr Tydfil. This was first achieved by building a canal from Merthyr (510 feet above sea-level) to the Taff Estuary at Cardiff. Eventually the Taff Vale Railway replaced the canal barges and massive marshalling yards sprang up as new docks were developed in Cardiff \u2013 all prompted by the soaring worldwide demand for coal from the South Wales valleys. At its peak, Cardiff's port area, known as Tiger Bay, became the busiest port in the world and \u2013 for some time \u2013 the world's most important coal port. In the years leading up to the First World War, more than 10 million tonnes of coal was exported annually from Cardiff Docks. In 1907, Cardiff's Coal Exchange was the first host to a business deal for a million pounds Sterling. After a period of decline, Cardiff's port has started to grow again \u2013 over 3 million tonnes of cargo passed through the docks in 2007.\nCardiff today is the main finance and business services centre in Wales, with strong representation of finance and business services in the local economy. This sector, combined with the public administration, education and health sectors, have accounted for about 75% of Cardiff's economic growth since 1991. The city was recently placed seventh overall in the top 50 European cities in the fDI 2008 Cities of the Future list published by the fDi magazine, and ranked seventh in terms of attracting foreign investment. Notable companies such as Legal &amp; General, Admiral Insurance, HBOS, Zurich, ING Direct, The AA, Principality Building Society, 118118, British Gas, Brains, SWALEC Energy and BT, all operate large national or regional headquarters and contact centres in the city, some of them based in Cardiff's office towers such as Capital Tower and Brunel House. Other major employers include NHS Wales and Senedd Cymru. On 1 March 2004, Cardiff was granted Fairtrade City status.\nCardiff is one of the most popular tourist destinations in the United Kingdom, receiving 18.3 million visitors in 2010 and generating \u00a3852 million for the city's economy. One result is that one in five employees in Cardiff is based in the distribution, hotels and restaurants sector, highlighting the growing retail and tourism industries in the city. The city has many hotels of varying sizes and standards, providing almost 9,000 available beds.\nCardiff is home to the Welsh media and a large media sector with BBC Cymru Wales, S4C and ITV Wales all having studios in the city. There is a large independent TV production industry sector of over 600 companies, employing around 6,000, with a turnover estimated at \u00a3350 million. Just to the north-west of the city, in Rhondda Cynon Taff, the first completely new film studios in the UK for 30 years are being built, to be named Valleywood. The studios are set to be the biggest in the UK. In 2011 the BBC completed the Roath Lock studios in Cardiff Bay to film dramas such as \"Casualty\", \"Doctor Who\", and \"Pobol y Cwm\".\nCardiff has several regeneration projects, such as St David's 2 Centre and surrounding areas of the city centre, and the \u00a31.4 billion International Sports Village in Cardiff Bay, which played a part in the London 2012 Olympics. It features the only Olympic-standard swimming pool in Wales, the Cardiff International Pool, which opened on 12 January 2008.\nAccording to the Welsh Rugby Union, the Principality Stadium contributed \u00a31 billion to the Welsh economy in the ten years after it opened in 1999, with around 85% of that staying in the Cardiff area.\nShopping.\nMost of Cardiff's shopping portfolio is in the city centre around Queen Street, St Mary Street and High Street, with large suburban retail parks in Cardiff Bay, Culverhouse Cross, Leckwith, Newport Road and Pontprennau, together with markets in the city centre and Splott. A \u00a3675 million regeneration programme for Cardiff's St. David's Centre was completed in 2009, providing a total of of shopping space, making it one of the largest shopping centres in the United Kingdom. The centre was named the international shopping centre of the year in 2010 by Retail Leisure International (RLI).\nThe Castle Quarter is a commercial area in the north of the city centre, which includes some of Cardiff's Victorian and Edwardian arcades: Castle Arcade, Morgan Arcade and Royal Arcade, and principal shopping streets: St Mary Street, High Street, The Hayes, and Queen Street.\nTransport.\nRail.\nCardiff Central railway station is the largest railway station in Wales, with nine platforms coping with over 12.5 million passengers a year. It provides direct services to Bridgend and Newport, long-distance, cross-Wales services to Wrexham and Holyhead, and services to Bristol, Birmingham, Manchester and London.\nCardiff Queen Street railway station is the second busiest in Wales and the hub for the Valley Lines services that connect the South Wales Valleys and the Cardiff suburbs with the city centre on the former site of Temperance Town. It is located at the eastern end of the city centre and also provides services to Cardiff Bay. Cardiff has a suburban rail system known as the Valleys &amp; Cardiff Local Routes, operated by Transport for Wales. There are eight lines that serve 20 stations in the city, 26 in the wider urban area (including Taffs Well, Penarth and Dinas Powys) and more than 60 in the South Wales valleys and the Vale of Glamorgan.\nAir.\nDomestic and international air links to Cardiff and South &amp; West Wales are provided from Cardiff Airport (CWL), the only international airport in Wales. The airport lies in the village of Rhoose, west of the city. There are regular bus services linking the airport with Cardiff Central bus station, and a train service from Rhoose Cardiff International Airport railway station to Cardiff Central.\nRoad and bus.\nThe M4 motorway connects Cardiff with Swansea to the west and Newport and London to the east, with four junctions on the M4, including one with the A48(M). The A470 provides an important link from the city to the Heads of the Valleys road. When completed, the A4232 \u2013 also known as the Peripheral Distributor Road \u2013 will form part of the Cardiff ring-road system, along with the M4 motorway between junctions 30 and 33.\nCardiff has a comprehensive bus network, whose providers include the municipal bus company Cardiff Bus (routes within the city and to Newport, Barry and Penarth), NAT Group (cross-city and to Cardiff Airport), Stagecoach South Wales (to the South Wales Valleys) and First Cymru (to Cowbridge and Bridgend). National Express and Megabus provides direct services to major cities such as Bristol, London, Newcastle upon Tyne and Manchester\nCycle.\nThe Taff Trail is a walking and cycle path running for between Cardiff Bay and Brecon in the Brecon Beacons National Park. It runs through Bute Park, Sophia Gardens and many other green areas within Cardiff. It is possible to cycle the entire distance of the Trail almost completely off-road, as it largely follows the River Taff and many of the disused railways of the Glamorganshire valleys.\nNextbike have operated a public bike-hire scheme in the city since March 2018.\nWater.\nThe Aquabus water taxi runs every hour between the city centre (Taff Mead Embankment) and Cardiff Bay (Mermaid Quay), and between Cardiff Bay and Penarth Cardiff Bay Barrage. Throughout the year, Cardiff Waterbus sail between the Pierhead on The Waterfront and the Penarth end of the Cardiff Bay Barrage with short sightseeing cruises.\nBetween March and October boats depart from Cardiff Bay for Flat Holm Island. The \"PS Waverley\" and \"MV Balmoral\" sail from Britannia Quay (in Roath Basin) to various destinations in the Bristol Channel.\nTelecommunications.\n029 is the current telephone dialling code for Cardiff, as well as for the neighbouring towns of Penarth, Dinas Powys and Caerphilly. The dialling code is optional when dialling within the area: one can dial between any two phones within the 029 code using only the eight-digit local number.\nPrior to the Big Number Change on 22 April 2000 the area had shorter, six-digit local numbers with an area code of 01222. This was 0222 before May 1995, derived from 0 (indicating it was a trunk call) 22 (CA on a telephone pad, for CArdiff) and 2 (as 220 was used for CAmbridge and 221 for BAth). Before the introduction of automated trunk call dialling, non-local numbers were accessed through a system of manual telephone exchanges, in common with rest if the United Kingdom.\nThere remains a common misconception that local numbers are still six digits long and that the code is 02920, even though there are newer Cardiff numbers in the ranges (029) 21xx xxxx and (029) 22xx xxxx.\nEducation.\nCardiff is home to four major institutions of higher education: Cardiff University, Cardiff Metropolitan University, University of South Wales and the Royal Welsh College of Music &amp; Drama.\nCardiff University was founded by a royal charter in 1883 as the University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire, is a member of the Russell Group of leading research led universities, having most of its campus in Cathays and the city centre. Cardiff Metropolitan University (formerly UWIC) has campuses in the Llandaff, Cyncoed and city centre areas, and is part of the confederal University of Wales. The Royal Welsh College of Music &amp; Drama is a conservatoire established in 1949 and is based in the grounds of Cardiff Castle. The University of South Wales's Cardiff campus, Atrium, is home to the Cardiff School of Creative &amp; Cultural Industries and is located in the city centre.\nThe total number of higher education students in the city is around 43,900. The city also has two further education colleges: Cardiff and Vale College and St David's College. The former is the result of a merger, completed in August 2011, between Coleg Glan Hafren and Barry College. Further education is also offered at most high schools in the city.\nCardiff has three state nursery schools (one bilingual), 98 state primary schools (two bilingual, fifteen Welsh medium), and 19 state secondary schools (three Welsh medium). There are also several independent schools in the city, including St John's College, Llandaff Cathedral School, Cardiff Sixth Form College, Kings Monkton School and Howell's School, a single-sex girls' school (until sixth form). In 2013 Cardiff Sixth Form College came top of the independent senior schools in the UK, which were based on the percentage of A* and A at Advanced Level. Also in the top 100 were St John's College and Howell's School.\nNotable schools include Whitchurch High School (the largest secondary school in Wales), Fitzalan High School (one of the most multi-cultural state schools in the UK), and Ysgol Gyfun Gymraeg Glantaf (the largest Welsh medium secondary school in Wales).\nAs well as academic institutions, Cardiff is also home to other educational and learning organisations such as Techniquest, a hands-on science discovery centre that now has franchises throughout Wales, and is part of the Wales Gene Park in collaboration with Cardiff University, NHS Wales and the Welsh Development Agency (WDA). Cardiff is also home of the largest regional office of the International Baccalaureate Organisation (IBO). This office is home to the organisation's curriculum and assessment centre, which is responsible for overseeing the creation and grading of various IBDP assessments.\nLandmarks and attractions.\nCardiff has many landmark buildings such as the Principality Stadium, Pierhead Building the Welsh National Museum and the Senedd building, the home of the Welsh Parliament. Cardiff is also famous for Cardiff Castle, St David's Hall, Llandaff Cathedral and the Wales Millennium Centre.\nCardiff Castle is a major tourist attraction in the city and is situated in the heart of the city centre. The National History Museum at St Fagans in Cardiff is a large open-air museum housing dozens of buildings from throughout Welsh history that have been moved to the site in Cardiff. The Civic Centre in Cathays Park comprises a collection of Edwardian buildings such as the City Hall, National Museum and Gallery of Wales, Cardiff Crown Court, and buildings forming part of Cardiff University, together with more modern civic buildings. These buildings are laid out around the Queen Alexandra Gardens, a formal park which contains the Welsh National War Memorial and a number of other, smaller memorials.\nIn addition to Cardiff Castle, Castell Coch (\"Red Castle\") is located in Tongwynlais, in the north of the city. The current castle is an elaborately decorated Victorian folly designed by William Burges for the Marquess and built in the 1870s, as an occasional retreat. However, the Victorian castle stands on the footings of a much older medieval castle possibly built by Ifor Bach, a regional baron with links to Cardiff Castle also. The exterior has become a popular location for film and television productions. It rarely fulfilled its intended role as a retreat for the Butes, who seldom stayed there. For the Marquess, the pleasure had been in its creation, a pleasure lost following Burges's death in 1881.\nCardiff claims the largest concentration of castles of any city in the world. As well as Cardiff Castle and Castell Coch, there are the remains of two motte-and-bailey castles in Morganstown and Rhiwbina, known as Morganstown Castle Mound and Twmpath Castle or Twmpath Motte () respectively. Twmpath being a Welsh word for a small mound), which along with a castle at Whitchurch (known as Treoda and destroyed by housing in the 1960s) formed an arc of fortifications which divided the Norman lordship from the Welsh lordship of Senghenydd. Further up the Cefn Cibwr ridge on the boundary with Caerphilly there is also another ruined castle, known as Morgraig Castle (). Archaeological evidence suggests this castle was never finished, and it is debated whether the fortification was of Norman or Welsh origin. The concentration of castles indicates the moveable nature of the border between the Norman lordship of Glamorgan, centred at Cardiff, and its Welsh neighbours to the north.\nThere is also the ruined Llandaff Bishop's Palace, also known as Llandaff Castle, which was the home of the medieval bishops, which was destroyed about 1403\u20131404 by the Welsh leader Owain Glynd\u0175r. Now only the ruined gatehouse remains. Not strictly a castle in the historical sense, Saint Fagans Castle is a preserved 17th-century manor house, once the seat of the Earls of Plymouth.\nOther major tourist attractions are the Cardiff Bay regeneration sites, which include the recently opened Wales Millennium Centre and the Senedd, and many other cultural and sites of interest, including the Cardiff Bay Barrage and the famous Coal Exchange. The New Theatre was founded in 1906 and refurbished in the 1980s. Until the opening of the Wales Millennium Centre in 2004, it was the premier venue in Wales for touring theatre and dance companies. Other venues popular for concerts and sporting events include Motorpoint Arena, St David's Hall and the Principality Stadium. Cardiff Story, a museum documenting the city's history, has been open to the public since the spring of 2011.\nCardiff has over 1,000 listed buildings, ranging from the more prominent buildings such as the castles, to smaller buildings, houses and structures. Cathedral Road was developed by the 3rd Marquis of Bute and is lined by fine villas, some backing on to Sophia Gardens.\nCardiff has walks of special interest for tourists and ramblers alike, such as the Centenary Walk, which runs for within Cardiff city centre. This route passes through many of Cardiff's landmarks and historic buildings. The Animal Wall, designed by William Burges in 1866, marks the south edge of Bute Park on Castle Street. It bears 15 carved animal statues.\nCulture and recreation.\nCardiff has many cultural sites varying from the historical Cardiff Castle and out of town Castell Coch to the more modern Wales Millennium Centre and Cardiff Bay. Cardiff was a finalist in the European Capital of Culture 2008. In recent years Cardiff has grown in stature as a tourist destination, with recent accolades including Cardiff being voted the eighth favourite UK city by readers of the \"Guardian\". The city was also listed as one of the top 10 destinations in the UK on the official British tourist boards website Visit Britain, and US travel guide Frommers have listed Cardiff as one of 13 top destinations worldwide for 2008. Annual events in Cardiff that have become regular appearances in Cardiff's calendar include Sparks in the Park, The Great British Cheese Festival, Cardiff Mardi Gras, Cardiff Winter Wonderland, Cardiff Festival and Made in Roath.\nMusic and performing arts.\nA large number of concerts are held in the city, the larger ones at St David's Hall, the Motorpoint Arena (previously known as the Cardiff International Arena) and occasionally the Principality Stadium. A number of festivals are also held in Cardiff, the largest being the Cardiff Big Weekend Festival, held annually in the city centre in the summer and playing host to free musical performances (from artists such as Ash, Jimmy Cliff, Cerys Matthews, the Fun Loving Criminals, Soul II Soul and the Magic Numbers), fairground rides and cultural events such as a Children's Festival that takes place in the grounds of Cardiff Castle. The annual festival claims to be the UK's largest free outdoor festival, attracting over 250,000 visitors in 2007.\nCardiff hosted the National Eisteddfod in 1883, 1899, 1938, 1960, 1978, 2008 and 2018. Cardiff is unique in Wales in having two permanent stone circles used by the Gorsedd of Bards during Eisteddfodau. The original circle stands in Gorsedd Gardens in front of the National Museum while its 1978 replacement is situated in Bute Park. Since 1983, Cardiff has hosted the BBC Cardiff Singer of the World competition, a world-renowned event on the opera calendar which is held every two years. The city also hosts smaller events.\nA number of performing arts venues are located within the city. The largest and most prominent of these is the Wales Millennium Centre, which hosts performances of opera, ballet, dance, comedy and musicals, and (as of autumn 2008) is home to the BBC National Orchestra of Wales. St David's Hall (which hosts the Singer of the World competition) has regular performances of classical music and ballet as well as music of other genres. The largest of Cardiff's theatres is the New Theatre, situated in the city centre just off Queen Street. Other such venues include the Sherman Theatre, Chapter Arts Centre and the Gate Arts Centre.\nThe Cardiff music scene is established and wide-ranging: home to the BBC National Orchestra of Wales and the Welsh National Opera; has produced several leading acts; has acted as a springboard for Welsh bands to become famous. Acts hailing from Cardiff include Charlotte Church, Shirley Bassey, Iwan Rheon, the Oppressed, Kids In Glass Houses, Los Campesinos, the Hot Puppies, the School, We're No Heroes, Budgie and Shakin' Stevens. Also, performers such as the Automatic, Manic Street Preachers, Lostprophets, Super Furry Animals, Catatonia and Bullet for My Valentine have links with the city and are associated with the Cardiff music scene. In 2010, Cardiff was named the UK's second \"most musical\" city by PRS for Music.\nVisual arts.\nCardiff has held a photomarathon in the city each year since 2004, in which photographers compete to take the best 12 pictures of 12 previously unknown topics in 12 hours. An exhibition of winners and other entries is held in June/July each year.\nRecreation.\nCardiff has strong nightlife. Most clubs and bars are situated in the city centre, especially St Mary Street. More recently Cardiff Bay has built up a strong night scene, with many modern bars and restaurants. The Brewery Quarter on St Mary Street is a recently developed venue for bars and restaurant with a central courtyard. Charles Street is also a popular part of the city.\nCardiff is known for its extensive parks and other green spaces covering around 10% of the city's total area. Cardiff's main park, Bute Park (which was formerly the castle grounds) extends northwards from the top of one of Cardiff's main shopping street (Queen Street); when combined with the adjacent Llandaff Fields and Pontcanna Fields to the north-west it produces a massive open space skirting the River Taff. Other popular parks include Roath Park in the north, donated to the city by the 3rd Marquess of Bute in 1887, which includes a popular boating lake; Victoria Park, Cardiff's first official park; and Thompson's Park, formerly home to an aviary removed in the 1970s. Wild open spaces include Howardian Local Nature Reserve, of the lower Rhymney valley in Penylan noted for its Orchids, and Forest Farm Country Park, over along the River Taff in Whitchurch.\nCardiff is one of the top ten retail destinations in the UK with Queen Street and St. Mary Street as the two main shopping streets with the three shopping arcades, St. David's Centre, Queens Arcade and the Capitol Centre. The current expansion of St. David's Centre as part of the St David's 2 project has made it one of the largest shopping centres in the UK. As well as the modern shopping arcades, the city is home to Victorian shopping centres, such as High Street Arcade, Castle Arcade, Wyndham Arcade, Royal Arcade and Morgan Arcade. Also of note is The Hayes, home to Spillers Records, the world's oldest record shop. Cardiff has a number of markets, including the vast Victorian indoor Cardiff Central Market and the newly established Riverside Community Market, which specialises in locally produced organic produce. Several out-of-town retail parks exist, such as Newport Road, Culverhouse Cross, Cardiff Gate and Cardiff Bay.\nMedia.\nCardiff is the Welsh base for the main national broadcasters (BBC Cymru Wales, ITV Wales and S4C). A locally based television station, \"Made in Cardiff\", is also based in the city centre. Major filming studios in Cardiff include the BBC's Roath Lock Studios and Pinewood Studios Wales.\nSeveral contemporary television programmes and films are filmed in and/or set in Cardiff such as \"Casualty\", \"Doctor Who\", \"Merlin\", \"The Sarah Jane Adventures\", \"Torchwood\", \"The Valleys\", \"Upstairs Downstairs\" and \"Sherlock\".\nThe main local newspaper is the \"South Wales Echo\"; the national paper is the \"Western Mail\". Both are based in Park Street in the city centre. \"Capital Times\", \"Echo Extra\" and the South Wales edition of \"Metro\" are also based and distributed in the city. There are several magazines, including \"Primary Times\" and a monthly \"papur bro\", and a Welsh-language community newsletter called \"Y Dinesydd\" (The Citizen). Radio stations serving the city and based in Cardiff include Capital FM (South Wales), Heart (South and West Wales), BBC Radio Wales, BBC Radio Cymru, Nation Radio, Radio Cardiff, Smooth Radio (Wales) and Xpress Radio.\nThe Principality Stadium was one of the first six British landmarks to be fully mapped on Google Street View as a 360-degree virtual tour.\nSport.\nCardiff hosts many high-profile sporting events at local, national and international level and in recognition of the city's commitment to sport for all was awarded the title of European Capital of Sport 2014. Organised sports have been held in the city since the early 19th century. national home sporting fixtures are nearly always played in the city. All Wales' multi-sports agencies and many of the country's sports governing bodies have their headquarters in Cardiff and the city's many top quality venues have attracted world-famous sports events, sometimes unrelated to Cardiff or to Wales. In 2008/09, 61% of Cardiff residents regularly participated in sport and active recreation, the highest percentage in ll 22 local authorities in Wales.\nRugby union fans around the world have long been familiar with the old National Stadium, Cardiff Arms Park, and its successor the Principality Stadium, which hosted the FA Cup for six years (from 2001 to 2006) it took to rebuild Wembley Stadium. In 2009, Cardiff hosted the first Ashes cricket test between England and Australia to be held in Wales. Cardiff hosted eight football matches of the London 2012 Olympics.\nCardiff City F.C. (founded 1899 as Riverside AFC) played their home games at Ninian Park from 1910 until the end of the 2008\u201309 season. The club's new home is the Cardiff City Stadium, which they initially rented to the Cardiff Blues, the city's professional rugby union team, the Blues returning to the Arms Park in 2012. Cardiff City have played in the English Football League since the 1920\u201321 season, climbing to Division 1 after one season. Cardiff City are the only non-English team to have won the FA Cup, beating Arsenal in the 1927 final at Wembley Stadium. They were runners up to Portsmouth in the 2008 final, losing 1\u20130 at the new Wembley Stadium.&lt;ref name=\"1927 3\"&gt;"}
