{"id": "7893", "revid": "1020557570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7893", "title": "Dale Earnhardt", "text": "Ralph Dale Earnhardt Sr. (; April 29, 1951 \u2013 February 18, 2001) was an American professional stock car driver and team owner, who raced from 1975 to 2001 in the former NASCAR Winston Cup Series (now called the NASCAR Cup Series), most notably driving the No. 3 Chevrolet for Richard Childress Racing. The third child of racing driver Ralph Earnhardt and Martha Earnhardt, he began his career in 1975 in the World 600. Earnhardt won a total of 76 Winston Cup races over the course of his 4 decade career, including four Winston 500s (1990, 1994, 1999, and 2000) and the 1998 Daytona 500. He also earned seven Winston Cup championships, a record held with Richard Petty and Jimmie Johnson. His aggressive driving style earned him the nicknames \"The Intimidator\", \"The Man in Black\", and \"Ironhead\". He is regarded as one of the greatest drivers in NASCAR history. \nOn February 18, 2001, Earnhardt died in a sudden last-lap crash during the Daytona 500, an event that is regarded in the racing industry as being a crucial moment in improving safety in all aspects of car racing, especially NASCAR. Earnhardt has been inducted into numerous halls of fame, including the NASCAR Hall of Fame inaugural class in 2010.\nBiography.\nEarly and personal life.\nOf German ancestry, Dale Earnhardt was born on April 29, 1951, in the Charlotte suburb of Kannapolis, North Carolina, as the third child of Martha (\"n\u00e9e\" Coleman) and Ralph Earnhardt. Earnhardt's father was one of the best short-track drivers in North Carolina at the time and won his first and only NASCAR Sportsman Championship in 1956 at Greenville Pickens Speedway in Greenville, South Carolina. In 1963 at the age of 12, Dale Earnhardt secretly drove his father\u2019s car in one of his races and had a near victory against one of his father's closest competitors. In 1972, he raced his father at Metrolina Speedway in a race with cars from semi mod and sportsman divisions. Although Ralph did not want his son to pursue a career as a race car driver, Dale dropped out of school to pursue his dreams. Ralph was a hard teacher for Dale, and after Ralph died of a heart attack at his home in 1973 at age 45, it took many years before Dale felt as though he had finally \"proven\" himself to his father. Earnhardt had four siblings: two brothers, Danny and Randy (died 2013); and two sisters, Cathy and Kaye (died 2015)\nIn 1968, at the age of 17, Earnhardt married his first wife, Latane Brown. With her, Earnhardt fathered his first son, Kerry, a year later. Earnhardt and Brown divorced in 1970. In 1971, Earnhardt married his second wife, Brenda Gee, the daughter of NASCAR car builder Robert Gee. In his marriage with Gee, Earnhardt had two more children: a daughter, Kelley King Earnhardt, in 1972, and a son, Dale Earnhardt Jr., in 1974. Not long after Dale Jr. was born, Earnhardt and Gee divorced. Earnhardt then married his third and final wife, Teresa Houston, in 1982. She gave birth to their daughter, Taylor Nicole Earnhardt, in 1988. Taylor and her husband, Brandon Putnam, are professional rodeo performers.\nNASCAR career.\nEarly Winston Cup career (1975\u20131978).\nEarnhardt began his professional career in the NASCAR Winston Cup Series in 1975, making his points race debut at Charlotte Motor Speedway in North Carolina in the longest race on the Cup circuit\u2014the 1975 World 600. He had made his Grand National debut in 1974 in an unofficial invitational exhibition race at Metrolina Speedway, where with eight laps to go he got under Richard Childress and spun out when battling for third. He drove the No. 8 Ed Negre Dodge Charger and finished 22nd in that race, just one spot ahead of his future car owner, Richard Childress. Earnhardt competed in eight more races until 1979.\nRod Osterlund Racing (1979\u20131980).\nWhen he joined car owner Rod Osterlund Racing in a season that included a rookie class of future stars including Earnhardt, Harry Gant, and Terry Labonte in his rookie season, Earnhardt won one race at Bristol, captured four poles, scored eleven Top 5s and seventeen Top 10s, and finished seventh in the points standings despite missing four races due to a broken collarbone, winning Rookie of the Year honors.\nDuring his sophomore season, Earnhardt, now with 20-year-old Doug Richert as his crew chief, began the season winning the Busch Clash. With wins at Atlanta, Bristol, Nashville, Martinsville, and Charlotte, Earnhardt won his first Winston Cup points championship. He is the only driver in NASCAR Winston Cup history to follow a Rookie of the Year title with a NASCAR Winston Cup Championship the next season. He was also the third driver in NASCAR history to win both the Rookie of the Year and Winston Cup Series championship, following David Pearson (1960, 1966) and Richard Petty (1959, 1964). Nine drivers have since joined this exclusive club: Rusty Wallace (1984, 1989), Alan Kulwicki (1986, 1992), Jeff Gordon (1993, 1995), Tony Stewart (1999, 2002), Matt Kenseth (2000, 2003), Kevin Harvick (2001, 2014), Kyle Busch (2005, 2015), Joey Logano (2009, 2018), and Chase Elliott (2016, 2020).\nRod Osterlund Racing, Stacy Racing, and Richard Childress Racing (1981).\n1981 would prove to be tumultuous for the defending Winston Cup champion. Sixteen races into the season, Rod Osterlund suddenly sold his team to Jim Stacy, an entrepreneur from Kentucky who entered NASCAR in 1977. After just four races, Earnhardt fell out with Stacy and left the team. Earnhardt finished out the year driving Pontiacs for Richard Childress Racing and managed to place seventh in the final points standings. Earnhardt departed RCR at the end of the season, citing a lack of chemistry.\nBud Moore Engineering (1982\u20131983).\nThe following year, at Childress's suggestion, Earnhardt joined car owner Bud Moore for the 1982 and 1983 seasons driving the No. 15 Wrangler Jeans-sponsored Ford Thunderbird (the only full-time Ford ride in his career). During the 1982 season, Earnhardt struggled. Although he won at Darlington, he failed to finish 15 races and completed the season 12th in points, the worst of his career. He also suffered a broken kneecap at Pocono Raceway when he flipped after contact with Tim Richmond. In 1983, Earnhardt rebounded and won his first of 12 Twin 125 Daytona 500 qualifying races. He won at Nashville and at Talladega, finishing eighth in the points standings.\nReturn to Richard Childress Racing (1984\u20132001).\n1984\u20131985.\nAfter the 1983 season, Earnhardt returned to Richard Childress Racing, replacing Ricky Rudd in the No. 3. Rudd went to Bud Moore's No. 15, replacing Earnhardt. Wrangler sponsored both drivers at their respective teams. During the 1984 and 1985 seasons, Earnhardt went to victory lane six times, at Talladega, Atlanta, Richmond, Bristol (twice), and Martinsville, where he finished fourth and eighth in the season standings respectively.\n1986\u20131987.\nThe 1986 season saw Earnhardt win his second career Winston Cup Championship and the first owner's championship for Richard Childress Racing. He won five races and had 16 top-fives and 23 top-10s. Earnhardt successfully defended his championship the following year, going to victory lane 11 times and winning the championship by 489 points over Bill Elliott. In the process, Earnhardt set a NASCAR modern-era record of four consecutive wins and won five of the first seven races. In the 1987 season, he earned the nickname \"The Intimidator\", due in part to the 1987 Winston All-Star Race. During this race, Earnhardt was briefly forced into the infield grass but kept control of his car and returned to the track without giving up his lead. The maneuver is now referred to as the \"Pass in the Grass\", even though Earnhardt did not pass anyone while he was off the track. After The Winston, an angry fan sent Bill France Jr. a letter threatening to kill Earnhardt at Pocono, Watkins Glen, or Dover, prompting the FBI to provide security for Earnhardt on the three tracks. The investigation was closed after the races at the three tracks finished without incident.\n1988\u20131989.\nThe 1988 season saw Earnhardt racing with a new sponsor, GM Goodwrench, after Wrangler Jeans dropped its sponsorship in 1987. During this season, he changed the color of his paint scheme from blue and yellow to the signature black in which the No. 3 car was painted for the rest of his life. He won three races in 1988, finishing third in the points standings behind Bill Elliott in first and Rusty Wallace in second. The following year, Earnhardt won five races, but a late spin out at North Wilkesboro arguably cost him the 1989 championship, as Rusty Wallace edged him out for it. It was his first season for the GM Goodwrench Chevrolet Lumina.\n1990\u20131995.\nThe 1990 season started for Earnhardt with victories in the Busch Clash and his heat of the Gatorade Twin 125's. Near the end of the Daytona 500, he had a dominant forty-second lead when the final caution flag came out with a handful of laps to go. When the green flag waved, Earnhardt was leading Derrike Cope. On the final lap, Earnhardt ran over a piece of metal, which was later revealed as a bell housing, in turn 3, cutting down a tire. Cope, in an upset, won the race while Earnhardt finished fifth after leading 155 of the 200 laps. The No. 3 Goodwrench-sponsored Chevy team took the flat tire that cost them the win and hung it on the shop wall as a reminder of how close they had come to winning the Daytona 500. Earnhardt won nine races that season and won his fourth Winston Cup title, beating Mark Martin by 26 points. He also became the first multiple winner of the annual all-star race, The Winston. The 1991 season saw Earnhardt win his fifth Winston Cup championship. This season, he scored four wins and won the championship by 195 points over Ricky Rudd. One of his wins came at North Wilkesboro, in a race where Harry Gant had a chance to set a single-season record by winning his fifth consecutive race, breaking a record held by Earnhardt. Late in the race, Gant lost his brakes, which gave Earnhardt the chance he needed to make the pass for the win and maintain his record.\nEarnhardt's only win of the 1992 season came at Charlotte, in the Coca-Cola 600, ending a 13-race win streak by Ford teams. Earnhardt finished a career-low 12th in the points for the second time in his career, and the only time he had finished that low since joining Richard Childress Racing. He still made the trip to the annual Awards Banquet with Rusty Wallace but did not have the best seat in the house. Wallace stated he and Earnhardt had to sit on the backs of their chairs to see, and Earnhardt said, \"This sucks, I should have gone hunting.\" At the end of the year, longtime crew chief Kirk Shelmerdine left to become a driver. Andy Petree took over as crew chief. Hiring Petree turned out to be beneficial, as Earnhardt returned to the front in 1993. He once again came close to a win at the Daytona 500 and dominated Speedweeks before finishing second to Dale Jarrett on a last-lap pass. Earnhardt scored six wins en route to his sixth Winston Cup title, including wins in the first prime-time Coca-Cola 600 and The Winston, both at Charlotte, and the Pepsi 400 at Daytona. He beat Rusty Wallace for the championship by 80 points. On November 14, 1993, after the season-ending Hooters 500 at Atlanta, the race winner Wallace and 1993 series champion Earnhardt ran a dual Polish Victory Lap together while carrying #28 and #7 flags commemorating 1992 Daytona 500 winner Davey Allison and 1992 NASCAR Winston Cup Series champion Alan Kulwicki respectively, who both had died in separate plane accidents during the season. \nIn 1994, Earnhardt achieved a feat that he himself had believed to be impossible\u2014he scored his seventh Winston Cup championship, tying Richard Petty. He was very consistent, scoring four wins, and after Ernie Irvan was sidelined due to a near-deadly crash at Michigan (the two were neck-and-neck at the top of the points up until the crash), won the title by over 400 points over Mark Martin. Earnhardt sealed the deal at Rockingham by winning the race over Rick Mast. It was his final NASCAR championship and his final season for the GM Goodwrench Chevrolet Lumina. Earnhardt started off the 1995 season by finishing second in the Daytona 500 to Sterling Marlin. He won five races in 1995, including his first road course victory at Sears Point. He also won the Brickyard 400 at Indianapolis Motor Speedway, a win he called the biggest of his career. But in the end, Earnhardt lost the championship to Jeff Gordon by 34 points. The GM Goodwrench racing team changed to Chevrolet Monte Carlos.\n1996\u20131999.\n1996 for Earnhardt started just like it had done in 1993\u2014he dominated Speedweeks, only to finish second in the Daytona 500 to Dale Jarrett for the second time. He won early in the year, scoring consecutive victories at Rockingham and Atlanta. On July 28 in the DieHard 500 at Talladega, he was second in points and looking for his eighth season title, despite the departure of crew chief Andy Petree. Late in the race, Ernie Irvan lost control of his No. 28 Havoline-sponsored Ford Thunderbird, made contact with the No. 4 Kodak-sponsored Chevy Monte Carlo of Sterling Marlin, and ignited a crash that saw Earnhardt's No. 3 Chevrolet hit the tri-oval wall nearly head-on at almost 200\u00a0mph. After hitting the wall, Earnhardt's car flipped and slid across the track, in front of race traffic. His car was hit in the roof and windshield. This accident, as well as a similar accident that led to the death of Russell Phillips at Charlotte, led NASCAR to mandate the \"Earnhardt Bar\", a metal brace located in the center of the windshield that reinforces the roof in case of a similar crash. This bar is also required in NASCAR-owned United SportsCar Racing and its predecessors for road racing.\nRain delays had canceled the live telecast of the race, and most fans first learned of the accident during the night's sports newscasts. Video of the crash showed what appeared to be a fatal incident, but once medical workers arrived at the car, Earnhardt climbed out and waved to the crowd, refusing to be loaded onto a stretcher despite a broken collarbone, sternum, and shoulder blade. Although the incident looked like it would end his season early, Earnhardt refused to stay out of the car. The next week at Indianapolis, he started the race but exited the car on the first pit stop, allowing Mike Skinner to take the wheel. When asked, Earnhardt said that vacating the No. 3 car was the hardest thing he had ever done. The following weekend at Watkins Glen, he drove the No. 3 Goodwrench Chevrolet to the fastest time in qualifying, earning the \"True Grit\" pole. T-shirts emblazoned with Earnhardt's face were quickly printed up, brandishing the caption, \"It Hurt So Good\". Earnhardt led for most of the race and looked to have victory in hand, but fatigue took its toll and he ended up sixth behind race winner Geoff Bodine. Earnhardt did not win again in 1996 but still finished fourth in the standings behind Terry Labonte, Jeff Gordon, and Dale Jarrett. David Smith departed as crew chief of the No. 3 team and RCR at the end of the year for personal reasons, and he was replaced by Larry McReynolds.\nIn 1997, Earnhardt went winless for only the second time in his career. The only (non-points) win came during Speedweeks at Daytona in the Twin 125-mile qualifying race, his record eighth-straight win in the event. Once again in the hunt for the Daytona 500 with 10 laps to go, Earnhardt was taken out of contention by a late crash which sent his car upside down on the backstretch. He hit the low point of his year when he blacked out early in the Mountain Dew Southern 500 at Darlington in September, causing him to hit the wall. Afterward, he was disoriented, and it took several laps before he could find his pit stall. When asked, Earnhardt complained of double vision which made it difficult to pit. Mike Dillon (Richard Childress's son-in-law) was brought in to relieve Earnhardt for the remainder of the race. Earnhardt was evaluated at a local hospital and cleared to race the next week, but the cause of the blackout and double vision was never determined. Despite no wins, the Richard Childress Racing team finished the season fifth in the final standings. \nOn February 15, 1998, Earnhardt finally won the Daytona 500 in his 20th attempt after failing to win in his previous 19 attempts. He began the season by winning his Twin 125-mile qualifier race for the ninth straight year, and the week before was the first to drive around the track under the newly installed lights, for coincidentally 20 laps. On race day, he showed himself to be a contender early. Halfway through the race, however, it seemed that Jeff Gordon had the upper hand. But by lap 138, Earnhardt had taken the lead and thanks to a push by teammate Mike Skinner, he maintained it. Earnhardt made it to the caution-checkered flag before Bobby Labonte. Afterwards, there was a large show of respect for Earnhardt, in which every crew member of every team lined pit road to shake his hand as he made his way to victory lane. Earnhardt then drove his No. 3 into the infield grass, starting a trend of post-race celebrations. He spun the car twice, throwing grass and leaving tire tracks in the shape of a No. 3 in the grass. He then spoke about the victory, saying, \"I have had a lot of great fans and people behind me all through the years and I just can't thank them enough. The Daytona 500 is ours. We won it, we won it, we won it!\" The rest of the season did not go as well, and the Daytona 500 was his only victory that year. Despite that, he did almost pull off a Daytona sweep, where he was one of the contenders for the win in the first nighttime Pepsi 400, but a pit stop late in the race in which a rogue tire cost him the race win. He slipped to 12th in the point standings halfway through the season, and Richard Childress decided to make a crew chief change, taking Mike Skinner's crew chief Kevin Hamlin and putting him with Earnhardt while giving Skinner Larry McReynolds (Earnhardt's crew chief). Earnhardt finished the 1998 season eighth in the final points standings.\nBefore the 1999 season, fans began discussing Earnhardt's age and speculating that with his son, Dale Jr., making his Winston Cup debut, Earnhardt might be contemplating retirement. Earnhardt swept both races for the year at Talladega, leading some to conclude that his talent had become limited to the restrictor plate tracks, which require a unique skill set and an exceptionally powerful racecar to win. But halfway through the year, Earnhardt began to show some of the old spark. In the August race at Michigan, he led laps late in the race and nearly pulled off his first win on a non-restrictor-plate track since 1996. One week later, he provided NASCAR with one of its most controversial moments. At the Bristol night race, Earnhardt found himself in contention to win his first short track race since Martinsville in 1995. When a caution came out with 15 laps to go, leader Terry Labonte got hit from behind by the lapped car of Darrell Waltrip. His spin put Earnhardt in the lead with five cars between him and Labonte with five laps to go. Labonte had four fresh tires, and Earnhardt was driving on old tires, which made Earnhardt's car considerably slower. Labonte caught Earnhardt and passed him coming to the white flag, but Earnhardt drove hard into turn two, bumping Labonte and spinning him around. Earnhardt collected the win while spectators booed and made obscene gestures. \"I didn't mean to turn him around, I just wanted to rattle his cage,\" Earnhardt said of the incident. He finished seventh in the standings that year.\n2000.\nIn the 2000 season, Earnhardt had a resurgence, which was commonly attributed to neck surgery he underwent to correct a lingering injury from his 1996 Talladega crash. He scored what were considered the two most exciting wins of the year\u2014winning by 0.010 seconds over Bobby Labonte at Atlanta, then gaining seventeen positions in the final four laps to win at Talladega, claiming his only No Bull million-dollar bonus along with his record 10th win at the track. Earnhardt also had second-place runs at Richmond and Martinsville, tracks where he had struggled through the late 1990s. On the strength of those performances, Earnhardt got to second in the standings. However, poor performances at the road course of Watkins Glen, where he wrecked coming out of the chicane, a wreck with Kenny Irwin Jr. while leading the spring race at Bristol, and mid-pack runs at intermediate tracks like Charlotte and Dover in a season dominated by the Ford Taurus in those tracks from Roush, Yates, and Penske, coupled with Bobby Labonte's extreme consistency, denied Earnhardt an eighth championship title. Earnhardt finished 2000 with two wins, 13 top fives, 24 top tens, an average finish of 9.4, and was the only driver besides Labonte to finish the season with zero DNF's.\nDeath.\nDuring the Daytona 500 at Daytona International Speedway on February 18, 2001, Earnhardt was killed in a three-car crash on the final lap of the race. He collided with Ken Schrader after making small contact with Sterling Marlin and hit the outside wall head-on. He had been blocking Schrader on the outside and Marlin on the inside at the time of the crash. Earnhardt's and Schrader's cars both slid off the track's asphalt banking into the infield grass just inside of turn 4. Seconds later, his driver Michael Waltrip won the race, with his teammate and son Dale Earnhardt Jr. finishing second. Earnhardt's death was officially pronounced at the Halifax Medical Center at 5:16 PM Eastern Standard Time (22:16 UTC); he was 49 years old. NASCAR president Mike Helton confirmed Earnhardt's death in a statement to the press. An autopsy conducted on February 19, 2001, concluded that Earnhardt sustained a fatal basilar skull fracture. Days later, on February 22, public funeral services were held at the Calvary Church in Charlotte, North Carolina.\nAftermath.\nAfter Earnhardt's death, two investigations led by the police and NASCAR commenced; nearly every detail of the crash was made public. The allegations of seatbelt failure resulted in Bill Simpson's resignation from the company bearing his name, which manufactured the seatbelts used in Earnhardt's car and nearly every other NASCAR driver's car. NASCAR implemented rigorous safety improvements, such as mandating the HANS device, which Earnhardt refused to wear after finding it restrictive and uncomfortable. Several press conferences were held in the days following Earnhardt's death. After driver Sterling Marlin and his relatives received hate mail and death threats from angry fans, Waltrip and Earnhardt Jr. absolved him of any responsibility. Richard Childress made a public pledge that the number 3 would never again adorn the side of a black race car with a GM Goodwrench sponsorship. Childress, who holds the rights from NASCAR to the No. 3, placed a moratorium on using it; the number returned for the 2014 season, this time not sponsored by GM Goodwrench (which was rebranded GM Certified Service in 2011), driven by Childress's grandson Austin Dillon.\nAt this time, his team was re-christened as the No. 29 team. Childress' second-year Busch Series driver Kevin Harvick was named as Earnhardt's replacement, beginning with the 2001 Dura Lube 400 at North Carolina Speedway. Special pennants bearing the No. 3 were distributed to everyone at the track to honor Earnhardt, and the Childress team wore blank uniforms out of respect, something which disappeared quickly and was soon replaced by the previous GM Goodwrench Service Plus uniforms. Harvick's car always displayed the Earnhardt stylized number 3 on the \"B\" posts (metal portion on each side of the car to the rear of the front windows) above the number 29 until the end of 2013, when he departed for Stewart-Haas Racing.\nFans began honoring Earnhardt by holding three fingers aloft on the third lap of every race, a black screen of No. 3 in the beginning of \"NASCAR Thunder 2002\" before the EA Sports logo, and the television coverage of \"NASCAR on Fox\" and \"NASCAR on NBC\" went silent for each third lap from Rockingham to the following year's race there in honor of Earnhardt, unless on-track incidents brought out the caution flag on the third lap. Three weeks after Earnhardt's death, Harvick, driving a car that had been prepared for Earnhardt, scored his first career Cup win at Atlanta. On the final lap of the 2001 Cracker Barrel Old Country Store 500, he beat Jeff Gordon by .006 seconds (the margin being 0.004 of a second closer than Earnhardt had won over Bobby Labonte at the same race a year ago) in an identical photo finish, and the images of Earnhardt's longtime gas man Danny \"Chocolate\" Myers crying after the victory, Harvick's tire-smoking burnout on the frontstretch with three fingers held aloft outside the driver's window; and the Fox television call by Mike Joy, Larry McReynolds, and Darrell Waltrip concluding with \"Just like a year ago [with Earnhardt and Bobby Labonte], but he [Harvick] is gonna get him though...Gordon got loose... it's Harvick! Harvick by inches!\" are memorable to many NASCAR fans. The win was also considered cathartic for a sport whose epicenter had been ripped away. Harvick would win another race at the inaugural event at Chicagoland en route to a ninth-place finish in the final points, and won Rookie of the Year honors along with the 2001 NASCAR Busch Series Championship.\nDale Earnhardt, Inc. won five races in the 2001 season, beginning with Steve Park's victory in the race at Rockingham just one week after Earnhardt's death. Earnhardt Jr. and Waltrip finished first and second in the series' return to Daytona in July for the Pepsi 400, a reverse of the finish in the Daytona 500. Earnhardt Jr. also won the fall races at Dover (first post 9/11 race) and Talladega and came to an eighth-place points finish.\nEarnhardt's remains were interred at his estate in Mooresville, North Carolina after a private funeral service on February 21, 2001.\nNo. 3 car.\nEarnhardt drove the No. 3 car for the majority of his career, spanning the latter half of the 1981 season, and then again from 1984 until his death in 2001. Although he had other sponsors during his career, his No. 3 is associated in fans' minds with his last sponsor GM Goodwrench and his last color scheme\u00a0\u2014 a predominantly black car with bold red and silver trim. The black and red No. 3 continues to be one of the most famous logos in North American motor racing.\nA common misconception was that Richard Childress Racing \"owned the rights\" to the No. 3 in NASCAR competition (fueled by the fact that Kevin Harvick's car had a little No. 3 as an homage to Earnhardt from 2001-2013 and the usage of the No. 3 on the Camping World Truck Series truck of Ty Dillon when he ran in that series), but in fact NASCAR, and no specific team, owns the rights to this or any other number. According to established NASCAR procedures, Richard Childress Racing had priority over other teams if they chose to reuse the number, which they did when Austin Dillon was promoted to the Cup series in 2014. While Richard Childress Racing owns the stylized No. 3 logos used during Earnhardt's lifetime (and used presently with Dillon), those rights would hypothetically not prevent a future racing team from using a different No. 3 design (also, a new No. 3 team would most likely, in any case, need to create logos which fit with their sponsor's logos).\nIn 2004, ESPN released a made-for-TV movie entitled \"\", which used a new (but similarly colored) No. 3 logo. The movie was a sympathetic portrayal of Earnhardt's life, but the producers were sued for using the No. 3 logo. In December 2006, the ESPN lawsuit was settled, but details were not released to the public.\nDale Earnhardt Jr. made two special appearances in 2002 in a No. 3 Busch Series car: these appearances were at the track where his father died (Daytona) and the track where he made his first Winston Cup start (Charlotte). Earnhardt Jr. won the first of those two races, which was the season-opening event at Daytona. He also raced a No. 3 sponsored by Wrangler on July 2, 2010, for Richard Childress Racing at Daytona. In a green-white-checker finish he outran Joey Logano to win his second race in the No. 3.\nOtherwise, the No. 3 was missing from the national touring series until September 5, 2009, when Austin Dillon, the 19-year-old grandson of Richard Childress, debuted an RCR-owned No. 3 truck in the Camping World Truck Series. Dillon and his younger brother Ty Dillon drove the No. 3 in various lower level competitions for several years, including the Camping World East Series. In 2012, Austin Dillon began driving in the Nationwide Series full-time, using the No. 3; he had previously used the No. 33 while driving in that series part-time.\nRichard Childress Racing entered a No. 3 in the Daytona truck race on February 13, 2010, painted identically to when Earnhardt drove it, but with a sponsorship from Bass Pro Shops. It was driven by Austin Dillon. It was involved in a wreck almost identical to that which took the life of Earnhardt: being spun out, colliding with another vehicle, and being turned into the outside wall in turn number four. He walked away unscathed. Dillon again returned to a No. 3 marked racecar when he started fifth in the 2012 Daytona Nationwide Series opener in an Advocare sponsored black Chevrolet Impala. On December 11, 2013, RCR announced that Austin Dillon would drive the No. 3 car in the upcoming 2014 Sprint Cup season, bringing the number back to the series for the first time in 13 years.\nOnly the former International Race of Champions actually retired the No. 3, which they did in a rule change effective in 2004. Until the series folded in 2007, anyone wishing to use the No. 3 again had to use No. 03 instead.\nFormula One driver Daniel Ricciardo chose the number \"3\" as his permanent racing number when F1's rules changed to allow drivers to choose their own numbers for 2014 and stated on Twitter that part of the reason for his choice was that he was a fan of Earnhardt's, while his helmet design features the number stylized in the same way.\nLegacy.\n\"Earnhardt Tower\", a seating section at Daytona International Speedway was opened and named in his honor a month before his death at the track.\nEarnhardt has several roads named after him, including a street in his hometown Kannapolis. Dale Earnhardt Boulevard (originally Earnhardt Road) is marked as Exit 60 off Interstate 85, northeast of Charlotte. Dale Earnhardt Drive is also the start of The Dale Journey Trail, a self-guided driving tour of landmarks in the lives of Earnhardt and his family. The North Carolina Department of Transportation switched the designation of a road between Kannapolis and Mooresville near the headquarters of DEI (that used to be called NC 136) with NC 3, which was in Currituck County. In addition, Exit 72 off Interstate 35W, one of the entrances to Texas Motor Speedway, is named \"Dale Earnhardt Way\".\nBetween the 2004 and 2005 JGTC (renamed Super GT from 2005) season, Hasemi Sport competed in the series with a sole black G'Zox-sponsored Nissan 350Z with the same number and letterset as Earnhardt on the roof.\nDuring the NASCAR weekend races at Talladega Superspeedway on April 29, 2006\u00a0\u2013 May 1, 2006, the DEI cars competed in identical special black paint schemes on Dale Earnhardt Day, which is held annually on his birthday\u2014April 29. Martin Truex Jr., won the Aaron's 312 in the black car, painted to reflect Earnhardt's Intimidating Black No. 3 NASCAR Busch Grand National series car. In the Nextel Cup race on May 1, No. 8 Dale Earnhardt Jr.; No. 1 Martin Truex Jr.; and No. 15 Paul Menard competed in cars with the same type of paint scheme.\nOn June 18, 2006, at Michigan for the 3M Performance 400, Earnhardt Jr. ran a special vintage Budweiser car to honor his father and his grandfather Ralph Earnhardt. He finished third after rain caused the race to be cut short. The car was painted to resemble Ralph's 1956 dirt cars, and carried 1956-era Budweiser logos to complete the throwback look.\nIn the summer of 2007, Dale Earnhardt, Inc. (DEI) with the Dale Earnhardt Foundation, announced it will fund an annual undergraduate scholarship at Clemson University in Clemson, South Carolina for students interested in motorsports and automotive engineering. Scholarship winners are also eligible to work at DEI in internships. The first winner was William Bostic, a senior at Clemson majoring in mechanical engineering.\nIn 2008, on the 50th anniversary of the first Daytona 500 race, DEI and RCR teamed up to make a special COT sporting Earnhardt's 1998 Daytona 500 paint scheme to honor the tenth anniversary of his Daytona 500 victory. In a tribute to all previous Daytona 500 winners, the winning drivers appeared in a lineup on stage, in chronological order. The throwback No. 3 car stood in the infield, in the approximate position Earnhardt would have taken in the processional. The throwback car featured the authentic 1998-era design on a current-era car, a concept similar to modern throwback jerseys in other sports. The car was later sold in 1:64 and 1:24 scale models.\nThe Intimidator 305 roller coaster has been open since April 2, 2010, at Kings Dominion in Doswell, Virginia. Named after Earnhardt, the ride's trains are modeled after his black-and-red Chevrolet.\n Another Intimidator was built at Carowinds, in Charlotte, North Carolina, which opened on March 27, 2010. The entrance to both roller coasters feature signage that shows Earnhardt's legacy along with one of his cars.\nAtlanta Braves assistant coach Ned Yost was a friend of Earnhardt, and Richard Childress. When Yost was named Milwaukee Brewers manager, he changed jersey numbers, from No. 5 to No. 3 in Earnhardt's honor. (No. 3 is retired by the Braves in honor of outfielder Dale Murphy, so Yost could not make the change while in Atlanta.) When Yost was named Kansas City Royals assistant coach, he wore No. 2 for the 2010 season, even when he was named manager in May 2010, but for the 2011 season, he switched back to No. 3.\nDuring the third lap of the 2011 Daytona 500 (a decade since Earnhardt's death), the commentators on FOX fell silent while fans raised three fingers in a similar fashion to the tributes throughout 2001.\nThe north entrance to New Avondale City Center in Arizona will bear the name Dale Earnhardt Drive. Avondale is where Earnhardt won a Cup race in 1990.\nHis helmet from the 1998 season is at the National Museum of American History in the Smithsonian museum in Washington D.C.\nWeedeater, a sludge metal band from North Carolina, paid tribute to Earnhardt on their 2003 album \"Sixteen Tons\", with the song \"No. 3\". The song is played with audio clips from television broadcasts about Earnhardt mixed in the background. He is also mentioned in a 2001 song composed by John Hiatt entitled \"The Tiki Bar Is Open,\" along with his legendary race number. \nOn February 28, 2016, after winning the Folds of Honor QuikTrip 500 at Atlanta Motor Speedway, during his victory lap, driver Jimmie Johnson held his hand out of his window, with three fingers extended in tribute to Earnhardt. This was following Johnson's 76th Cup Series win, which tied the career mark of Earnhardt's. This is also the track where Earnhardt claimed his sixth Winston Cup Series title."}
{"id": "7896", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7896", "title": "List of games based on Dune", "text": "A number of games have been published based on the \"Dune\" universe created by Frank Herbert.\nVideo games.\nTo date, there have been five licensed \"Dune\"-related video games released. There have also been many \"Dune\"-based MUDs (Multi-User Dimension) and browser-based online games, all created and run by fans.\n\"Dune\" (1992).\n1992's \"Dune\" from Cryo Interactive/Virgin Interactive blends adventure with strategy. Loosely following the story of the 1965 novel \"Dune\" and using many visual elements from the 1984 film of the same name by David Lynch, the game casts the player as Paul Atreides, with the ultimate goal of driving the Harkonnens from the planet Dune and taking control of its valuable export, the spice. Key to success is the management of spice mining, military forces, and ecology as the player amasses allies and skills. One aspect of the game allows the player to terraform Arrakis from a desert into a fertile and green planet, at the cost of sandworm habitat and reduced melange spice production.\n\"Dune II\" (1992).\n\"Dune II: The Building of a Dynasty\", later retitled \"Dune II: Battle for Arrakis\" for the Mega Drive/Genesis port, was released in December 1992 from Westwood Studios/Virgin Interactive. Often considered to be the first \"mainstream modern real-time strategy game\", \"Dune II\" established many conventions of the genre. Only loosely connected to the plot of the novels or films, the game pits three interplanetary houses \u2014 the Atreides, the Harkonnens, and the Ordos \u2014 against each other for control of the planet Arrakis and its valuable spice, all while fending off the destructive natural forces of the harsh desert planet itself.\n\"Dune 2000\" (1998).\n\"Dune 2000\", a 1998 remake of \"Dune II\" from Intelligent Games/Westwood Studios/Virgin Interactive, added improved graphics and live-action cutscenes. Though gameplay is similar to its predecessor, \"Dune 2000\" features an enhanced storyline and functionality.\n\"Emperor: Battle for Dune\" (2001).\n\"Emperor: Battle for Dune\" (Intelligent Games/Westwood Studios/Electronic Arts) was released on June 12, 2001. A sequel to \"Dune 2000\", the real-time strategy game features 3D graphics and live-action cutscenes, and casts players as Atreides, Harkonnens, or Ordos.\n\"Frank Herbert's Dune\" (2001).\nReleased in 2001 by Cryo Interactive/DreamCatcher Interactive, \"Frank Herbert's Dune\" is a 3D video game based on the 2000 Sci Fi Channel miniseries of the same name. As Paul Muad'Dib Atreides, the player must become leader of the Fremen, seize control of Dune, and defeat the evil Baron Harkonnen. The game was not a commercial or critical success, and Cryo subsequently filed for bankruptcy in July 2002.\n\"Dune Generations\" (2001, cancelled).\nIn 2001, Cryonetworks disclosed information about \"Dune Generations\", an online, 3D real-time strategy game set in the \"Dune\" universe. An official website for the upcoming game featured concept images, a brief background story and description of the persistent gameworld, and a list of frequently asked questions. The game would be constructed using Cryo's own online multimedia development framework SCOL.\nWithin \"the infrastructure of a permanent and massive multiplayer world that exists online\", \"Dune Generations\" would let players assume control of a dynasty in the \"Dune\" universe, with the goal of first mastering the natural resources of their own homeworlds and ultimately rising in power and influence through conflicts and alliances with other player dynasties. Each of the three available dynasty types - traders, soldiers, or mercenaries - would provide a different playing experience, all with the long-term goal of gaining control of Arrakis and its valuable spice.\nA preview video trailer was released in November 2001. The game was still in the alpha testing stage in February 2002, and the project was ultimately halted after Cryo filed for bankruptcy in July.\n\"Dune Wars\" mod for \"Civilization IV\".\nThe \"Dune Wars\" mod is a total conversion of \"\" to the \"Dune\" setting. The mod was featured by Tom Chick in the relaunched Tom vs Bruce series. In 2015 an updated version of the mod called \"Dune Wars: Revival\" was released.\nOnline games.\nDuneMUSH.\n\"Dune II\" was an unlicensed, online multiplayer MUSH active in the early 1990s."}
{"id": "7897", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7897", "title": "Dune/Videogames", "text": ""}
{"id": "7898", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7898", "title": "Dune computer and video games", "text": ""}
{"id": "7900", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7900", "title": "List of Dune characters", "text": "\"Dune\" is a science fiction media franchise that originated with the 1965 novel \"Dune\" by American author Frank Herbert. \"Dune\" is frequently cited as the best-selling science fiction novel in history, and won the 1966 Hugo Award as well as the inaugural Nebula Award for Best Novel. Herbert wrote five sequels before his death in 1986. \"Dune\" was adapted into a 1984 film, and a 2000 television miniseries. The first two sequels were presented as a miniseries in 2003.\nSince 1999, Herbert's son Brian Herbert and science fiction author Kevin J. Anderson have published eleven prequel novels, as well as two which complete the original \"Dune\" series.\nFrank Herbert works.\nFrank Herbert's \"Dune\" was published in 1965, and he wrote five sequels before his death in 1986: \"Dune Messiah\" (1969), \"Children of Dune\" (1976), \"God Emperor of Dune\" (1981), \"Heretics of Dune\" (1984), and \"\" (1985). \"Dune\" follows Paul, the scion of House Atreides, as his family is thrown into the dangerous political intrigues centered on the desert planet Arrakis, only known source of the oracular spice melange, the most important and valuable substance in the universe. The series spans 5,000 years, focusing on Paul's various descendants.\nBrian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson works.\nSince 1999, Herbert's son Brian Herbert and author Kevin J. Anderson have published eleven prequel novels, collected in the series \"Prelude to Dune\" (1999\u20132001), \"Legends of Dune\" (2002\u20132004), \"Heroes of Dune\" (2008\u20132009), and \"Great Schools of Dune\" (2012\u20132016). They have also released two novels\u2014\"Hunters of Dune\" (2006) and \"Sandworms of Dune\" (2007)\u2014which complete the original series.\nTitans and Neo-Cymeks.\nTitans:\nNeo-Cymeks:"}
{"id": "7901", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7901", "title": "Vladimir Harkonnen", "text": "The Baron Vladimir Harkonnen ( or ) is a fictional character from the \"Dune\" franchise created by Frank Herbert. He is primarily featured in the 1965 novel \"Dune\" and is also a prominent character in the \"Prelude to Dune\" prequel trilogy (1999\u20132001) by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson. The character is brought back as a ghola in the Herbert/Anderson sequels which conclude the original series, \"Hunters of Dune\" (2006) and \"Sandworms of Dune\" (2007).\nBaron Harkonnen is portrayed by Kenneth McMillan in David Lynch's 1984 film \"Dune\". Ian McNeice plays the role in the 2000 Sci-Fi Channel miniseries \"Frank Herbert's Dune\" and its sequel, 2003's \"Children of Dune\". Harkonnen will be portrayed by Stellan Skarsg\u00e5rd in the 2021 Denis Villeneuve film \"Dune\".\nConception.\nFrank Herbert wanted a harsh-sounding name for the antagonistic family opposing House Atreides in \"Dune\". He came across the name \"H\u00e4rk\u00f6nen\" in a California telephone book and thought that it sounded \"Soviet\", though it is in fact Finnish. In earlier drafts of \"Dune\", the character was called \"Valdemar Hoskanner\".\nDescription.\nHerbert's \"Appendix IV: The Almanak en-Ashraf (Selected Excerpts of the Noble Houses)\" in \"Dune\" says of Harkonnen (in part):\nThe character is usually described as the primary antagonist of the novel. Herbert writes in \"Dune\" that the Baron possesses a \"basso voice\" and is so \"grossly and immensely fat\" that he requires anti-gravity devices known as suspensors to support his weight. He is one of the wealthiest members of the Landsraad and a bitter rival of Leto Atreides, and the Baron's \"legendary evil and intellect\" are unmatched by anyone else from House Harkonnen. In the novel, the Baron feigns outrage over losing control of Arrakis to Leto, but is actually conspiring to use the situation as an opportunity to destroy the Atreides once and for all. William Hughes of \"The A.V. Club\" describes the Baron as \"a decadent, monstrous gasbag of depravity and evil\". As ruthless and cruel as he is intelligent and cunning, the Baron is \"crafty and power-hungry\" and has a talent for manipulating others and exploiting their weaknesses, as well as a propensity for torture and blackmail. \"IGN\" describes the character as \"cruel, sadistic and hedonistic\", Travis Johnson of Flicks.com.au explains that Harkonnen is written as \"a predatory homosexual given to pederasty and incest, an unrepentant rapist and murderer.\" The Baron's sexual preference for young men is implied in \"Dune\" and \"Children of Dune\". It is noted, however, that he \"once permitted himself to be seduced\" by a Bene Gesserit in the liaison which produced his secret daughter.\nPlotlines.\n\"Dune\".\nAs \"Dune\" begins, a longstanding feud exists between the Harkonnens of Giedi Prime and the Atreides of Caladan. The Baron's intent to exterminate the Atreides line seems close to fruition as Duke Leto Atreides is lured to the desert planet Arrakis on the pretense of taking over the valuable melange operation there. The Baron has an agent in the Atreides household: Leto's own physician, the trusted Suk doctor Wellington Yueh. Though Suk Imperial Conditioning supposedly makes the subject incapable of inflicting harm, the Baron's twisted Mentat Piter De Vries notes:\nThe Baron has taken Yueh's wife Wanna prisoner, threatening her with interminable torture unless Yueh complies with his demands. Harkonnen also distracts Leto's Mentat Thufir Hawat from discovering Yueh by guiding Hawat toward another suspect: Leto's Bene Gesserit concubine Lady Jessica, of whom Hawat is already distrustful. The Atreides are soon attacked by Harkonnen forces (secretly supplemented by the seemingly unstoppable Imperial Sardaukar) as Yueh disables the protective shields around the Atreides palace on Arrakis. As instructed, Yueh takes Leto prisoner; however, desiring to slay the Baron, Yueh provides the captive Leto with a fake tooth filled with poisonous gas as a means of simultaneous assassination and suicide. De Vries kills Yueh but he also dies with Leto in the assassination attempt; however Harkonnen survives. The Baron then manipulates Hawat into his service, by convincing Hawat that Lady Jessica was the traitor and using Hawat's desire for revenge on Lady Jessica and the Emperor as motivation to assist House Harkonnen.\nJessica flees into the desert with her and Leto's son Paul Atreides, and both are presumed dead. Paul's prescience helps him determine the identity of Jessica's father, the \"maternal grandfather who cannot be named\" \u2014 the Baron himself. Over the next two years, Harkonnen learns that his nephews Glossu Rabban and Feyd-Rautha are conspiring against him to usurp his throne; he lets them continue to do so, reasoning that they have to somehow learn to organize a conspiracy. As punishment for a failed assassination attempt against him, Harkonnen forces Feyd to single-handedly slaughter all the female slaves who serve as Feyd's lovers. He explains that Feyd has to learn the price of failure.\nThe Baron's plan to assure Feyd's power is to install him as ruler of Arrakis after a period of tyrannical misrule by Rabban, making Feyd appear to be the savior of the people. However, a crisis on Arrakis begins when the mysterious Muad'Dib emerges as a leader of the native Fremen tribes, uniting them against the rule of the Harkonnens. Eventually, a series of Fremen victories against Beast Rabban threaten to disrupt the trade of the spice, inciting the Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV to intervene personally, leading several legions of Sardaukar. After the emperor's arrival on Arrakis, both Corrino and Harkonnen are shocked to learn that rather than a native Fremen warlord, their opponent Muad'Dib is the still-living Paul Atreides, and the Emperor's intervention was part of his plan. The Imperial forces fall prey to a surprise attack by the Fremen, who let a sandstorm short out the force field shields of the transport ships, disable them with projectile weapons, and then mount a mass assault using sandworms as siege-breakers. Their enemies are left trapped on the planet, outnumbered by the many tribes and outgunned by the sandworms. The Harkonnen's past ruthlessness further causes the enraged Fremen to give them little to no quarter; over the course of the battle their entire army is exterminated.\nThe Harkonnen leadership are also all killed in the course of this battle. Rabban dies first, in the early stages of the battle. Baron Harkonnen himself is poisoned with a gom jabbar by Paul's sister Alia Atreides, still a toddler physically but an adult Reverend Mother mentally, who reveals that she is his granddaughter to him just before his death. His remaining heir Feyd-Rautha is killed in ritual combat by Paul Atreides. House Harkonnen as a political entity is left virtually defunct, permanently excluded from galactic power, though Harkonnen \"blood\" is technically ascendant, as Imperial House Atreides is composed entirely of Vladimir Harkonnen's descendants.\n\"Children of Dune\".\nAlia had been born with her ancestral memories in the womb, a circumstance the Bene Gesserit refer to as Abomination, because in their experience it is inevitable that the individual will become possessed by the personality of one of their ancestors. In \"Children of Dune\", Alia falls victim to this prediction when she shares control of her body with the ego-memory of the Baron Harkonnen, and eventually falls under his power. Alia eventually commits suicide, realizing that Harkonnen's consciousness has surpassed her abilities to contain him.\n\"Prelude to Dune\".\nIn the \"Prelude to Dune\" prequel series by Brian Herbert and Anderson, it is established that Baron Vladimir Harkonnen is the son and heir of Dmitri Harkonnen and his wife Victoria. Harkonnen's father had been the head of House Harkonnen and ruled the planet Giedi Prime. Trained since youth as a possible successor, Vladimir had been eventually chosen over his half-brother Abulurd (namesake of the original). Unhappy with his brother's doings, Abulurd eventually marries Emmi Rabban and renounces the family name and his rights to the title. Under the name Abulurd Rabban, he reigns as governor of the secondary Harkonnen planet Lankiveil. Abulurd and his wife have two sons: Glossu Rabban (later nicknamed \"Beast Rabban\" after he murders his own father) and Feyd-Rautha; Vladimir later adopts the boys back into House Harkonnen, and Feyd becomes his designated heir. The Baron's most prominent political rival is Duke Leto Atreides; the Harkonnens and the Atreides have been bitter enemies for millennia, since the Battle of Corrin that ended the Butlerian Jihad. When Emperor Shaddam IV orchestrates a plot to destroy the \"Red Duke\" Leto, the Baron eagerly lends his aid.\nThe young Baron Vladimir Harkonnen is described as an exceedingly handsome man, possessing red hair and a near-perfect physique. The Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam is instructed by the Sisterhood to collect his genetic material (through conception) for their breeding program. As the Baron's homosexuality is something of an open secret, Mohiam blackmails him into having sexual relations with her and conceives his child. When that daughter proves genetically undesirable, Mohiam kills her and returns to Harkonnen for a second try; at this point he drugs and viciously rapes her. She exacts her retribution by infecting him with a rare, incurable disease that later causes his obesity. Mohiam's second child with the Baron is Jessica. In ', the deteriorating Baron at first walks with the assistance of a cane, then relies on belt-mounted suspensors to retain mobility. He consults numerous doctors in the expanse of time between the ' and \"Dune: House Harkonnen\", up to and including his future instrument Dr. Yueh, all of whom are ultimately no help. To conceal this debilitation, he pretends that his obesity is due to intentional overindulgence, lest the Landsraad remove him from power. When he determines that Mohiam inflicted him with the disease, he attempts to coerce her into revealing the cure, but soon discovers that there is none. The Baron, Duke Leto, and Jessica herself are unaware that Jessica is secretly the Baron's daughter or that he has even fathered one. In the year 10,176, the Baron's grandson Paul is born to Leto and Jessica.\n\"Hunters of Dune\".\nIn \"Hunters of Dune\" (2006), the continuation of the original series by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson, the Baron is resurrected as a ghola (5,029 years after the death of Alia) by the Lost Tleilaxu Uxtal, acting on orders from the Face Dancer Khrone. Khrone intends to use the Baron ghola to manipulate a ghola of Paul Atreides, named Paolo. Khrone tries various torture techniques for three years to awaken the 12-year-old Baron's genetic memories; these methods fail due to the Baron's sadomasochistic nature. Khrone is successful when he imprisons the Baron in a sensory deprivation tank for a prolonged period; the Baron's memories of his former life return. The reincarnated Baron is soon haunted by the voice of Alia in his mind; the source of this inner Alia is never explained.\nIn adaptations.\n1984 film.\nBaron Harkonnen is portrayed by Kenneth McMillan in David Lynch's 1984 film. The obese and disheveled Baron is overtly unstable, and covered in oozing pustules. William Hughes of \"The A.V. Club\" deemed McMillan's facial prosthetics \"very memorable\". Emmet Asher-Perrin of \"Tor.com\" wrote that \"Lynch's attempt is infamous for really leaning on [the] codified aspects of the Baron, to the point where his sore-ridden appearance has been called out as a likely connection to the AIDS epidemic, which was a prevalent health crisis while the film was in production.\" Travis Johnson of Flicks.com.au noted that the Lynch film embraced \"the archetype of the depraved gay sadist\", which would not be acceptable in 2019. Asher-Perrin added, \"Lynch also makes a point of connecting the Baron's desire for men to deviancy and violence, deliberately juxtaposing his assault of a young man with a tender love scene between Duke Leto and Lady Jessica Atreides.\"\n2000 miniseries.\nIan McNeice plays the Baron in the 2000 Sci-Fi Channel miniseries \"Frank Herbert's Dune\", and its sequel, 2003's \"Children of Dune\". Asher-Perrin notes that the miniseries played down the negative aspects emphasized by the Lynch film, and writes, \"[The Baron's] appearance was not altered to make him seem ill, he never physically attacks anyone, and the miniseries paid more attention to the fact that the Baron was a rapist, his preference for men being incidental.\" She also praises McNeice as a standout among the cast, writing that he \"manages to make the Baron Harkonnen\u2014easily one of the most despicable characters in science fiction literature\u2014every bit as conniving and vicious as he needs to be...and every bit as fascinating. McNeice has a superb sense of how to make the baron mesmerizing to watch no matter how odiously he behaves\".\n2021 film.\nBaron Harkonnen will be portrayed by Stellan Skarsg\u00e5rd in the 2021 Denis Villeneuve film \"Dune\". Skarsg\u00e5rd called the role \"small but important\", and noted \"I had seven hours in make-up every day because I had to be really fat.\" Villeneuve said:\nDiscussing the film in its early stages, Asher-Perrin writes that \"Baron Harkonnen needn't be obese for the sole purpose of making misguided points.\" She suggests that the film find \"a different way to highlight the Baron's obsession with excess\", and argues that the character's iconic suspensors could be presented as \"an affectation of laziness rather than a physical necessity.\" Travis Johnson adds that the novel's depiction of Harkonnen as \"a predatory homosexual\" is problematic in 2019. He writes of the new film, \"It's going to come down to the writing and filmmaking as to whether this characterization will fly in the current era, or will come across as an unfortunate throwback stereotype.\"\nMerchandising and influence.\nA line of \"Dune\" action figures from toy company LJN was released to lackluster sales in 1984. Styled after David Lynch's film, the collection featured a figure of Baron Harkonnen, as well as other characters. In 2006, SOTA Toys produced a Baron Harkonnen action figure for their \"Now Playing Presents\" line.\nH. R. Giger's Harkonnen Capo Chair is a chair originally designed by the artist as set dressing for an unrealized 1970s adaptation of \"Dune\" by Alejandro Jodorowsky.\nAnalysis.\nWilliam Hughes calls the Baron \"one of the most iconically awful villains in all of science fiction\", and Stuart Conover of ScienceFiction.com describes him as \"one of the most insidious villains\". Maude Campbell of \"Popular Mechanics\" writes that the Baron is \"one of the most evil characters ever put to paper (including Darth Vader)\", and Jon Michaud of \"The New Yorker\" compares \n\"Herbert's scheming, backstabbing villain, the Baron Vladimir Harkonnen\" to the villainous Lannister family of George R. R. Martin's \"A Song of Ice and Fire\" series. Emmet Asher-Perrin suggests that \"what makes the Baron truly monstrous [is] the fact that he spends all of his time plotting murder, sowing discord, and destroying populations of people to get his way\". Hughes writes that the evil Harkonnen is \"specifically designed to make the noble Atreides family seem that extra bit more dignified and pure\", with Jesse Schedeen of \"IGN\" agreeing that the Baron is \"as cruel and vindictive as Leto is noble and just.\" Hughes goes on to say that Herbert \"successfully made [the Baron] so vampirically vile that he casts a (sometimes literal) shadow over the entire series.\" Sandy Schaefer of \"Screen Rant\" calls the Baron \" a deliciously despicable antagonist\". Travis Johnson points out that in the novel Harkonnen is a predatory homosexual given to pederasty and incest, an unrepentant rapist and murderer, but depicting him as a \"depraved gay sadist\" is \"not a particularly good look in the cold light of 2019.\" Asher-Perrin also notes:\nWhile the novel suggests that the Baron's obesity might be the result of a genetic disease, the \"Prelude to Dune\" prequel trilogy by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson explains that Harkonnen was once a fit, attractive but vain man who is given the incurable disease intentionally by the Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother Mohiam after he drugs and rapes her. Asher-Perrin suggests that in this narrative, \"the Baron's corpulence is meant to be comeuppance for doing something reprehensible, a physical punishment meant to hurt his vanity by taking away the attractiveness he so prized in himself.\" He also remarks that this retelling \"does nothing to alleviate the connection being drawn between weight and hedonistic sadism\"."}
{"id": "7902", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7902", "title": "Piter De Vries", "text": "Piter De Vries is a fictional character from the \"Dune\" universe created by Frank Herbert. He is primarily featured in the 1965 novel \"Dune\", but also appears in the \"Prelude to Dune\" prequel trilogy (1999\u20132001) by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson.\nDe Vries is portrayed by Brad Dourif in David Lynch's 1984 film \"Dune\", and by Jan Unger in the 2000 \"Dune\" miniseries. The character will be played by David Dastmalchian in the 2021 Denis Villeneuve film \"Dune\".\nCharacter.\nIn the service of the ruthless Baron Vladimir Harkonnen, De Vries is a Mentat\u2014a human specially trained to perform mental functions rivaling computers, which are forbidden universe-wide. In addition, De Vries has been \"twisted\" into an amoral sadist by the Tleilaxu.\nDe Vries is so loyal to Harkonnen that he continues to serve the Baron with great enthusiasm even though his Mentat abilities and great intelligence confirm his suspicions that his master plans to eventually kill him. As he says in \"Dune\":\nDe Vries is described in the novel \"Dune\" (though not portrayed on screen) as being addicted to the drug melange, which colors both the sclera and irises of users a deep blue. He also has the ruby red lips characteristic of sapho drinkers.\nAppearances.\n\"Dune\".\nIn \"Dune\", it is established that De Vries had pioneered a type of toxin called \"residual poison\" which remains in the body for years and requires an antidote to be administered regularly. One such fatal poison is secretly administered by the Harkonnens to Thufir Hawat, the Mentat of House Atreides, in order to guarantee Hawat's allegiance to the Harkonnens, who alone possess the antidote. De Vries is the architect of the plan to destroy House Atreides, longtime enemy of the Harkonnens, while restoring the Baron's stewardship over the planet Arrakis. Dr. Wellington Yueh, personal physician to House Atreides, has undergone Suk conditioning, which renders him incapable of inflicting harm on his patients. De Vries breaks this conditioning through torture and psychological manipulation, and Yueh eventually betrays House Atreides. De Vries originally plans to claim Lady Jessica, the concubine of Duke Leto Atreides, as his slave, but he decides to become governor of Arrakis instead. However, Yueh has given the captured Leto a false tooth filled with poison gas. When Leto crushes the tooth, the intended victim Baron Harkonnen escapes, but Leto and De Vries die.\n\"Prelude to Dune\".\nIn \"\" (published in 2001 and the third novel in the \"Prelude to Dune\" prequel series by Brian Herbert and Kevin J. Anderson), Piter De Vries discovers the Harkonnen heritage of Lady Jessica and her newborn son Paul, and attempts to kidnap and ransom the infant. The plot is thwarted and the secret preserved\u2014the Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam kills the Mentat and arranges for his corpse to be shipped home to Giedi Prime. An enraged Baron is left with no choice but to order a duplicate from the Bene Tleilax: the Mentat De Vries featured in Herbert's original novel \"Dune\".\nIn adaptations.\nDe Vries is portrayed by Brad Dourif in David Lynch's 1984 film \"Dune\", and by Jan Unger in the 2000 \"Dune\" miniseries. The character will be played by David Dastmalchian in the 2021 Denis Villeneuve film \"Dune\"."}
{"id": "7903", "revid": "1020019809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7903", "title": "Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange", "text": "Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange is a method of securely exchanging cryptographic keys over a public channel and was one of the first public-key protocols as conceived by Ralph Merkle and named after Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman. DH is one of the earliest practical examples of public key exchange implemented within the field of cryptography. Published in 1976 by Diffie and Hellman, this is the earliest publicly known work that proposed the idea of a private key and a corresponding public key.\nTraditionally, secure encrypted communication between two parties required that they first exchange keys by some secure physical means, such as paper key lists transported by a trusted courier. The Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange method allows two parties that have no prior knowledge of each other to jointly establish a shared secret key over an insecure channel. This key can then be used to encrypt subsequent communications using a symmetric-key cipher.\nDiffie\u2013Hellman is used to secure a variety of Internet services. However, research published in October 2015 suggests that the parameters in use for many DH Internet applications at that time are not strong enough to prevent compromise by very well-funded attackers, such as the security services of some countries.\nThe scheme was published by Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman in 1976, but in 1997 it was revealed that James H. Ellis, Clifford Cocks, and Malcolm J. Williamson of GCHQ, the British signals intelligence agency, had previously shown in 1969 how public-key cryptography could be achieved.\nAlthough Diffie\u2013Hellman key agreement itself is a non-authenticated key-agreement protocol, it provides the basis for a variety of authenticated protocols, and is used to provide forward secrecy in Transport Layer Security's ephemeral modes (referred to as EDH or DHE depending on the cipher suite).\nThe method was followed shortly afterwards by RSA, an implementation of public-key cryptography using asymmetric algorithms.\nExpired from 1977 describes the now public-domain algorithm. It credits Hellman, Diffie, and Merkle as inventors.\nName.\nIn 2002, Hellman suggested the algorithm be called Diffie\u2013Hellman\u2013Merkle key exchange in recognition of Ralph Merkle's contribution to the invention of public-key cryptography (Hellman, 2002), writing:\nDescription.\nGeneral overview.\nDiffie\u2013Hellman key exchange establishes a shared secret between two parties that can be used for secret communication for exchanging data over a public network. An analogy illustrates the concept of public key exchange by using colors instead of very large numbers:\nThe process begins by having the two parties, Alice and Bob, publicly agree on an arbitrary starting color that does not need to be kept secret (but should be different every time). In this example, the color is yellow. Each person also selects a secret color that they keep to themselves \u2013 in this case, red and blue-green. The crucial part of the process is that Alice and Bob each mix their own secret color together with their mutually shared color, resulting in orange-tan and light-blue mixtures respectively, and then publicly exchange the two mixed colors. Finally, each of them mixes the color they received from the partner with their own private color. The result is a final color mixture (yellow-brown in this case) that is identical to the partner's final color mixture.\nIf a third party listened to the exchange, it would only know the common color (yellow) and the first mixed colors (orange-tan and light-blue), but it would be difficult for this party to determine the final secret color (yellow-brown). Bringing the analogy back to a real-life exchange using large numbers rather than colors, this determination is computationally expensive. It is impossible to compute in a practical amount of time even for modern supercomputers.\nCryptographic explanation.\nThe simplest and the original implementation of the protocol uses the multiplicative group of integers modulo \"p\", where \"p\" is prime, and \"g\" is a primitive root modulo \"p\". These two values are chosen in this way to ensure that the resulting shared secret can take on any value from 1 to \"p\"\u20131. Here is an example of the protocol, with non-secret values in blue, and secret values in red.\nBoth Alice and Bob have arrived at the same values because under mod p,\nMore specifically,\nOnly \"a\" and \"b\" are kept secret. All the other values \u2013 \"p\", \"g\", \"ga\" mod \"p\", and \"gb\" mod \"p\" \u2013 are sent in the clear. The strength of the scheme comes from the fact that \"gab\" mod \"p\" = \"gba\" mod \"p\" take extremely long times to compute by any known algorithm just from the knowledge of \"p\", \"g\", \"ga\" mod \"p\", and \"gb\" mod \"p\". Once Alice and Bob compute the shared secret they can use it as an encryption key, known only to them, for sending messages across the same open communications channel.\nOf course, much larger values of \"a\", \"b\", and \"p\" would be needed to make this example secure, since there are only 23 possible results of \"n\" mod 23. However, if \"p\" is a prime of at least 600 digits, then even the fastest modern computers using the fastest known algorithm cannot find \"a\" given only \"g\", \"p\" and \"ga\" mod \"p\". Such a problem is called the discrete logarithm problem. The computation of \"ga\" mod \"p\" is known as modular exponentiation and can be done efficiently even for large numbers.\nNote that \"g\" need not be large at all, and in practice is usually a small integer (like 2, 3, ...).\nSecrecy chart.\nThe chart below depicts who knows what, again with non-secret values in blue, and secret values in red. Here Eve is an eavesdropper \u2013 she watches what is sent between Alice and Bob, but she does not alter the contents of their communications.\nNow s is the shared secret key and it is known to both Alice and Bob, but \"not\" to Eve. Note that it is not helpful for Eve to compute \"AB\", which equals \"g\"a + b mod p.\nNote: It should be difficult for Alice to solve for Bob's private key or for Bob to solve for Alice's private key. If it is not difficult for Alice to solve for Bob's private key (or vice versa), Eve may simply substitute her own private / public key pair, plug Bob's public key into her private key, produce a fake shared secret key, and solve for Bob's private key (and use that to solve for the shared secret key. Eve may attempt to choose a public / private key pair that will make it easy for her to solve for Bob's private key).\nAnother demonstration of Diffie\u2013Hellman (also using numbers too small for practical use) is given here.\nGeneralization to finite cyclic groups.\nHere is a more general description of the protocol:\nBoth Alice and Bob are now in possession of the group element \"gab\", which can serve as the shared secret key. The group \"G\" satisfies the requisite condition for secure communication if there is not an efficient algorithm for determining \"gab\" given \"g\", \"ga\", and \"gb\".\nFor example, the elliptic curve Diffie\u2013Hellman protocol is a variant that uses elliptic curves instead of the multiplicative group of integers modulo n.\u00a0Variants using hyperelliptic curves have also been proposed. The supersingular isogeny key exchange is a Diffie\u2013Hellman variant that has been designed to be secure against quantum computers.\nOperation with more than two parties.\nDiffie\u2013Hellman key agreement is not limited to negotiating a key shared by only two participants. Any number of users can take part in an agreement by performing iterations of the agreement protocol and exchanging intermediate data (which does not itself need to be kept secret). For example, Alice, Bob, and Carol could participate in a Diffie\u2013Hellman agreement as follows, with all operations taken to be modulo \"p\":\nAn eavesdropper has been able to see ', ', ', ', ', and ', but cannot use any combination of these to efficiently reproduce \".\nTo extend this mechanism to larger groups, two basic principles must be followed:\nThese principles leave open various options for choosing in which order participants contribute to keys. The simplest and most obvious solution is to arrange the \"N\" participants in a circle and have \"N\" keys rotate around the circle, until eventually every key has been contributed to by all \"N\" participants (ending with its owner) and each participant has contributed to \"N\" keys (ending with their own). However, this requires that every participant perform \"N\" modular exponentiations.\nBy choosing a more optimal order, and relying on the fact that keys can be duplicated, it is possible to reduce the number of modular exponentiations performed by each participant to using a divide-and-conquer-style approach, given here for eight participants:\nOnce this operation has been completed all participants will possess the secret \", but each participant will have performed only four modular exponentiations, rather than the eight implied by a simple circular arrangement.\nSecurity.\nThe protocol is considered secure against eavesdroppers if \"G\" and \"g\" are chosen properly. In particular, the order of the group G must be large, particularly if the same group is used for large amounts of traffic. The eavesdropper has to solve the Diffie\u2013Hellman problem to obtain \"g\"\"ab\". This is currently considered difficult for groups whose order is large enough. An efficient algorithm to solve the discrete logarithm problem would make it easy to compute \"a\" or \"b\" and solve the Diffie\u2013Hellman problem, making this and many other public key cryptosystems insecure. Fields of small characteristic may be less secure.\nThe order of \"G\" should have a large prime factor to prevent use of the Pohlig\u2013Hellman algorithm to obtain \"a\" or \"b\". For this reason, a Sophie Germain prime \"q\" is sometimes used to calculate , called a safe prime, since the order of \"G\" is then only divisible by 2 and \"q\". \"g\" is then sometimes chosen to generate the order \"q\" subgroup of \"G\", rather than \"G\", so that the Legendre symbol of \"ga\" never reveals the low order bit of \"a\". A protocol using such a choice is for example IKEv2.\n\"g\" is often a small integer such as 2. Because of the random self-reducibility of the discrete logarithm problem a small \"g\" is equally secure as any other generator of the same group.\nIf Alice and Bob use random number generators whose outputs are not completely random and can be predicted to some extent, then it is much easier to eavesdrop.\nIn the original description, the Diffie\u2013Hellman exchange by itself does not provide authentication of the communicating parties and is thus vulnerable to a man-in-the-middle attack. Mallory (an active attacker executing the man-in-the-middle attack) may establish two distinct key exchanges, one with Alice and the other with Bob, effectively masquerading as Alice to Bob, and vice versa, allowing her to decrypt, then re-encrypt, the messages passed between them. Note that Mallory must continue to be in the middle, actively decrypting and re-encrypting messages every time Alice and Bob communicate. If she is ever absent, her previous presence is then revealed to Alice and Bob. They will know that all of their private conversations had been intercepted and decoded by someone in the channel. In most cases it will not help them get Mallory's private key, even if she used the same key for both exchanges.\nA method to authenticate the communicating parties to each other is generally needed to prevent this type of attack. Variants of Diffie\u2013Hellman, such as STS protocol, may be used instead to avoid these types of attacks.\nPractical attacks on Internet traffic.\nThe number field sieve algorithm, which is generally the most effective in solving the discrete logarithm problem, consists of four computational steps. The first three steps only depend on the order of the group G, not on the specific number whose finite log is desired. It turns out that much Internet traffic uses one of a handful of groups that are of order 1024\u00a0bits or less. By precomputing the first three steps of the number field sieve for the most common groups, an attacker need only carry out the last step, which is much less computationally expensive than the first three steps, to obtain a specific logarithm. The Logjam attack used this vulnerability to compromise a variety of Internet services that allowed the use of groups whose order was a 512-bit prime number, so called export grade. The authors needed several thousand CPU cores for a week to precompute data for a single 512-bit prime. Once that was done, individual logarithms could be solved in about a minute using two 18-core Intel Xeon CPUs.\nAs estimated by the authors behind the Logjam attack, the much more difficult precomputation needed to solve the discrete log problem for a 1024-bit prime would cost on the order of $100 million, well within the budget of a large national intelligence agency such as the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA). The Logjam authors speculate that precomputation against widely reused 1024-bit DH primes is behind claims in leaked NSA documents that NSA is able to break much of current cryptography.\nTo avoid these vulnerabilities, the Logjam authors recommend use of elliptic curve cryptography, for which no similar attack is known. Failing that, they recommend that the order, \"p\", of the Diffie\u2013Hellman group should be at least 2048\u00a0bits. They estimate that the pre-computation required for a 2048-bit prime is 109 times more difficult than for 1024-bit primes.\nOther uses.\nEncryption.\nPublic key encryption schemes based on the Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange have been proposed. The first such scheme is the ElGamal encryption. A more modern variant is the Integrated Encryption Scheme.\nForward secrecy.\nProtocols that achieve forward secrecy generate new key pairs for each session and discard them at the end of the session. The Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchange is a frequent choice for such protocols, because of its fast key generation.\nPassword-authenticated key agreement.\nWhen Alice and Bob share a password, they may use a password-authenticated key agreement (PK) form of Diffie\u2013Hellman to prevent man-in-the-middle attacks. One simple scheme is to compare the hash of s concatenated with the password calculated independently on both ends of channel. A feature of these schemes is that an attacker can only test one specific password on each iteration with the other party, and so the system provides good security with relatively weak passwords. This approach is described in ITU-T Recommendation X.1035, which is used by the G.hn home networking standard.\nAn example of such a protocol is the Secure Remote Password protocol.\nPublic key.\nIt is also possible to use Diffie\u2013Hellman as part of a public key infrastructure, allowing Bob to encrypt a message so that only Alice will be able to decrypt it, with no prior communication between them other than Bob having trusted knowledge of Alice's public key. Alice's public key is formula_3. To send her a message, Bob chooses a random \"b\" and then sends Alice formula_4 (unencrypted) together with the message encrypted with symmetric key formula_5. Only Alice can determine the symmetric key and hence decrypt the message because only she has \"a\" (the private key). A pre-shared public key also prevents man-in-the-middle attacks.\nIn practice, Diffie\u2013Hellman is not used in this way, with RSA being the dominant public key algorithm. This is largely for historical and commercial reasons, namely that RSA Security created a certificate authority for key signing that became Verisign. Diffie\u2013Hellman, as elaborated above, cannot directly be used to sign certificates. However, the ElGamal and DSA signature algorithms are mathematically related to it, as well as MQV, STS and the IKE component of the IPsec protocol suite for securing Internet Protocol communications."}
{"id": "7904", "revid": "4626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7904", "title": "Designing Experiments", "text": ""}
{"id": "7905", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7905", "title": "Discrete probability distribution", "text": ""}
{"id": "7906", "revid": "12395476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7906", "title": "Destry Rides Again", "text": "Destry Rides Again is a 1939 American Western film directed by George Marshall and starring Marlene Dietrich and James Stewart.\nThe supporting cast includes Mischa Auer, Charles Winninger, Brian Donlevy, Allen Jenkins, Irene Hervey, Billy Gilbert, Bill Cody Jr., Lillian Yarbo, and Una Merkel. Although the title comes from Max Brand's popular novel, which inspired the earlier screenplay with Tom Mix, this version is almost entirely unrelated to either.\nIn 1996, \"Destry Rides Again\" was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nSaloon owner Kent, the unscrupulous boss of the fictional Western town of Bottleneck, has the town's sheriff, Mr. Keogh, killed when Keogh asks one too many questions about a rigged poker game. Kent and Frenchy, a cheap saloon tramp who is his girlfriend, now have a stranglehold over the local cattle ranchers. The town's crooked mayor, Hiram J. Slade, who is in collusion with Kent, appoints the town drunk, Washington Dimsdale, as the new sheriff, assuming that he will be easy to control and manipulate. However, Dimsdale, a deputy under the famous lawman Tom Destry, promptly swears off drinking, and is able to call upon the latter's equally formidable son, Tom Destry Jr., to help him make Bottleneck a lawful, respectable town.\nDestry arrives in Bottleneck with Jack Tyndall, a cattleman, and his sister, Janice. Destry initially confounds the townsfolk by refusing to strap on a gun and maintaining civility in dealing with everyone, including Kent and Frenchy. This quickly makes him a disappointment to Dimsdale and a laughingstock to the townspeople; he is mockingly asked to \"clean up\" Bottleneck by being given a mop and bucket. However, after a number of rowdy horsemen ride into town shooting their pistols in the air, he demonstrates uncanny expertise in marksmanship and threatens to jail them if they do it again, earning the respect of Bottleneck's citizens.\nThrough the townsmen's evasive answers regarding the whereabouts of Keogh, Destry gradually begins to suspect that Keogh was murdered. He confirms this by provoking Frenchy into admitting it, but without a location for the body, he lacks any proof. Destry therefore deputizes Boris, a Russian immigrant whom Frenchy had earlier humiliated, and implies to Kent that he had found the body outside of town \"in remarkably good condition\". When Kent sends a member of his gang to check on Keogh's burial site, Boris and Dimsdale follow, capture, and jail him.\nAlthough the gang member is charged with Keogh's murder (in the hope that he would implicate Kent in exchange for clemency), Mayor Slade appoints himself judge of the trial, making an innocent verdict a foregone conclusion. To prevent this, Destry calls in a judge from a larger city in secret, but the plan is ruined after Boris accidentally gives away the other judge's name in the saloon. Kent orders Frenchy to invite the deputy to her house while other gang members storm the sheriff's office and cause a breakout; now in love with Destry, she accepts. When shots are fired, he rushes back, to find the cell empty and Dimsdale mortally wounded. Destry returns to his room and puts on his gun belt, abandoning his previous commitment to nonviolence.\nUnder Destry's command, the honest townsmen form a posse and prepare to attack the saloon, where Kent's gang is fortified, while Destry enters through the roof and looks for Kent. At Frenchy's urging, the townswomen march in between the groups, preventing further violence, before breaking into the saloon and subduing the gang. Kent narrowly escapes, and attempts to shoot Destry from the second floor; Frenchy takes the bullet for him, killing her, and Destry kills Kent.\nSome time later, Destry is shown to be the sheriff of a now lawful Bottleneck, repeating to children the stories that Dimsdale told him of the town's violent history. He jokingly tells a story about marriage to Janice, implying a marriage between them will soon follow.\nCast.\nAs appearing in screen credits:\nSongs.\nDietrich sings \"See What the Boys in the Back Room Will Have\" and \"You've Got That Look\", written by Frank Loesser, set to music by Frederick Hollander, which have become classics.\nProduction.\nWestern writer Max Brand contributed the novel, \"Destry Rides Again\", but the film also owes its origins to Brand's serial \"Twelve Peers\", published in a pulp magazine. In the original work, Harrison (or \"Harry\") Destry was not a pacifist. As filmed in 1932, with Tom Mix in the starring role, the central character differed in that Destry did wear six-guns.\nThe film was James Stewart's first western (he would not return to the genre until 1950, with \"Winchester '73\", followed by \"Broken Arrow\"). The story featured a ferocious cat-fight between Marlene Dietrich and Una Merkel, which apparently caused a mild censorship problem at the time of release.\nThe film also represented Dietrich's return to Hollywood after a string of flops at Paramount (\"Angel\", \"The Scarlet Empress\", \"The Devil is a Woman\") caused her, and a number of other stars, to be labeled \"box office poison.\" While vacationing at Cap d'Antibes with her family, her mentor Josef von Sternberg and her lover Erich Maria Remarque, she received an offer from Joe Pasternak to come to Universal at half the salary she had been receiving for most of the 1930s. Pasternak had previously tried to sign Dietrich to Universal while she was still in Berlin.\nUnsure of what to do she was advised by von Sternberg \"I made you into a Goddess. Now show them you have feet of clay.\"\nAccording to writer/director Peter Bogdanovich, Marlene Dietrich told him during an aircraft flight that she and James Stewart had an affair during shooting and that she became pregnant but had a surreptitious abortion without telling Stewart.\nInternationally, the film was released under the alternative titles \"\" in French and \"Arizona\" in Spanish.\nReception.\n\"Destry Rides Again\" was generally well accepted by the public, as well as critics. It was reviewed by Frank S. Nugent in \"The New York Times\", who observed that the film did not follow the usual Hollywood type-casting. On Dietrich's role, he characterized: \"It's difficult to reconcile Miss Dietrich's Frenchy, the cabaret girl of the Bloody Gulch Saloon, with the posed and posturing Dietrich we last saw in Mr. Lubitsch's 'Angel'.\" Stewart's contribution was similarly treated, \"turning in an easy, likable, pleasantly humored performance.\"\nIn Popular Culture.\nMarlene Dietrich's character, Frenchy, was the inspiration for the character of Lili Von Shtupp in the Western parody Blazing Saddles. \nReferences.\nNotes\nBibliography"}
{"id": "7918", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7918", "title": "DegreeConfluenceProject", "text": ""}
{"id": "7920", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7920", "title": "DravidianLanguages", "text": ""}
{"id": "7921", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7921", "title": "Derivative", "text": "In mathematics, the derivative of a function of a real variable measures the sensitivity to change of the function value (output value) with respect to a change in its argument (input value). Derivatives are a fundamental tool of calculus. For example, the derivative of the position of a moving object with respect to time is the object's velocity: this measures how quickly the position of the object changes when time advances.\nThe derivative of a function of a single variable at a chosen input value, when it exists, is the slope of the tangent line to the graph of the function at that point. The tangent line is the best linear approximation of the function near that input value. For this reason, the derivative is often described as the \"instantaneous rate of change\", the ratio of the instantaneous change in the dependent variable to that of the independent variable.\nDerivatives can be generalized to functions of several real variables. In this generalization, the derivative is reinterpreted as a linear transformation whose graph is (after an appropriate translation) the best linear approximation to the graph of the original function. The Jacobian matrix is the matrix that represents this linear transformation with respect to the basis given by the choice of independent and dependent variables. It can be calculated in terms of the partial derivatives with respect to the independent variables. For a real-valued function of several variables, the Jacobian matrix reduces to the gradient vector.\nThe process of finding a derivative is called differentiation. The reverse process is called \"antidifferentiation\". The fundamental theorem of calculus relates antidifferentiation with integration. Differentiation and integration constitute the two fundamental operations in single-variable calculus.\nDifferentiation.\n\"Differentiation\" is the action of computing a derivative. The derivative of a function of a variable is a measure of the rate at which the value of the function changes with respect to the change of the variable . It is called the \"derivative\" of with respect to . If and are real numbers, and if the graph of is plotted against , the derivative is the slope of this graph at each point.\nThe simplest case, apart from the trivial case of a constant function, is when is a linear function of , meaning that the graph of is a line. In this case, , for real numbers and , and the slope is given by\nwhere the symbol (Delta) is an abbreviation for \"change in\", and the combinations formula_2 and formula_3 refer to corresponding changes, i.e.\nThe above formula holds because\nThus\nThis gives the value for the slope of a line.\nIf the function is not linear (i.e. its graph is not a straight line), then the change in divided by the change in varies over the considered range: differentiation is a method to find a unique value for this rate of change, not across a certain range formula_7 but at any given value of .\nThe idea, illustrated by Figures 1 to 3, is to compute the rate of change as the limit value of the ratio of the differences as tends towards 0.\nNotation.\nTwo distinct notations are commonly used for the derivative, one deriving from Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and the other from Joseph Louis Lagrange. A third notation, first used by Isaac Newton, is sometimes seen in physics.\nIn Leibniz's notation, an infinitesimal change in is denoted by , and the derivative of with respect to is written\nsuggesting the ratio of two infinitesimal quantities. (The above expression is read as \"the derivative of \"y\" with respect to \"x\", \"dy\" by \"dx\", or \"dy\" over \"dx\". The oral form \"dy\" \"dx\"\" is often used conversationally, although it may lead to confusion.)\nIn Lagrange's notation, the derivative with respect to of a function is denoted \nIn case of ambiguity of the variable implied by the differentiation, subscript notation is used \nLagrange's notation is sometimes incorrectly attributed to Newton.\nNewton's notation for differentiation (also called the dot notation for differentiation) places a dot over the dependent variable. That is, if \"y\" is a function of \"t\", then the derivative of \"y\" with respect to \"t\" is\nHigher derivatives are represented using multiple dots, as in\nNewton's notation is generally used when the independent variable denotes time. If location is a function of \"t\", then formula_9 denotes velocity and formula_12 denotes acceleration.\nRigorous definition.\nThe most common approach to turn this intuitive idea into a precise definition is to define the derivative as a limit of difference quotients of real numbers. This is the approach described below.\nLet be a real valued function defined in an open neighborhood of a real number . In classical geometry, the tangent line to the graph of the function at was the unique line through the point that did \"not\" meet the graph of transversally, meaning that the line did not pass straight through the graph. The derivative of with respect to at is, geometrically, the slope of the tangent line to the graph of at . The slope of the tangent line is very close to the slope of the line through and a nearby point on the graph, for example . These lines are called secant lines. A value of close to zero gives a good approximation to the slope of the tangent line, and smaller values (in absolute value) of will, in general, give better approximations. The slope of the secant line is the difference between the values of these points divided by the difference between the values, that is, \nThis expression is Newton's difference quotient. Passing from an approximation to an exact answer is done using a limit. Geometrically, the limit of the secant lines is the tangent line. Therefore, the limit of the difference quotient as approaches zero, if it exists, should represent the slope of the tangent line to . This limit is defined to be the derivative of the function at :\nWhen the limit exists, is said to be \"differentiable\" at . Here is one of several common notations for the derivative (see below). From this definition it is obvious that a differentiable function is increasing if and only if its derivative is positive, and is decreasing iff its derivative is negative. This fact is used extensively when analyzing function behavior, e.g. when finding local extrema.\nEquivalently, the derivative satisfies the property that\nwhich has the intuitive interpretation (see Figure 1) that the tangent line to at gives the \"best linear approximation\"\nto near (i.e., for small ). This interpretation is the easiest to generalize to other settings (see below).\nSubstituting 0 for in the difference quotient causes division by zero, so the slope of the tangent line cannot be found directly using this method. Instead, define to be the difference quotient as a function of :\n is the slope of the secant line between and . If is a continuous function, meaning that its graph is an unbroken curve with no gaps, then is a continuous function away from . If the limit exists, meaning that there is a way of choosing a value for that makes a continuous function, then the function is differentiable at , and its derivative at equals .\nIn practice, the existence of a continuous extension of the difference quotient to is shown by modifying the numerator to cancel in the denominator. Such manipulations can make the limit value of for small clear even though is still not defined at . This process can be long and tedious for complicated functions, and many shortcuts are commonly used to simplify the process.\nDefinition over the hyperreals.\nRelative to a hyperreal extension of the real numbers, the derivative of a real function at a real point can be defined as the shadow of the quotient for infinitesimal , where . Here the natural extension of to the hyperreals is still denoted . Here the derivative is said to exist if the shadow is independent of the infinitesimal chosen.\nExample.\nThe square function given by is differentiable at , and its derivative there is 6. This result is established by calculating the limit as approaches zero of the difference quotient of :\nThe last expression shows that the difference quotient equals when and is undefined when , because of the definition of the difference quotient. However, the definition of the limit says the difference quotient does not need to be defined when . The limit is the result of letting go to zero, meaning it is the value that tends to as becomes very small:\nHence the slope of the graph of the square function at the point is , and so its derivative at is .\nMore generally, a similar computation shows that the derivative of the square function at is :\nContinuity and differentiability.\nIf is differentiable at , then must also be continuous at . As an example, choose a point and let be the step function that returns the value 1 for all less than , and returns a different value 10 for all greater than or equal to . cannot have a derivative at . If is negative, then is on the low part of the step, so the secant line from to is very steep, and as tends to zero the slope tends to infinity. If is positive, then is on the high part of the step, so the secant line from to has slope zero. Consequently, the secant lines do not approach any single slope, so the limit of the difference quotient does not exist.\nHowever, even if a function is continuous at a point, it may not be differentiable there. For example, the absolute value function given by is continuous at , but it is not differentiable there. If is positive, then the slope of the secant line from 0 to is one, whereas if is negative, then the slope of the secant line from 0 to is negative one. This can be seen graphically as a \"kink\" or a \"cusp\" in the graph at . Even a function with a smooth graph is not differentiable at a point where its tangent is vertical: For instance, the function given by is not differentiable at .\nIn summary, a function that has a derivative is continuous, but there are continuous functions that do not have a derivative.\nMost functions that occur in practice have derivatives at all points or at almost every point. Early in the history of calculus, many mathematicians assumed that a continuous function was differentiable at most points. Under mild conditions, for example if the function is a monotone function or a Lipschitz function, this is true. However, in 1872 Weierstrass found the first example of a function that is continuous everywhere but differentiable nowhere. This example is now known as the Weierstrass function. In 1931, Stefan Banach proved that the set of functions that have a derivative at some point is a meager set in the space of all continuous functions. Informally, this means that hardly any random continuous functions have a derivative at even one point.\nThe derivative as a function.\nLet be a function that has a derivative at every point in its domain. We can then define a function that maps every point to the value of the derivative of at . This function is written and is called the \"derivative function\" or the \"derivative of\" .\nSometimes has a derivative at most, but not all, points of its domain. The function whose value at equals whenever is defined and elsewhere is undefined is also called the derivative of . It is still a function, but its domain is strictly smaller than the domain of .\nUsing this idea, differentiation becomes a function of functions: The derivative is an operator whose domain is the set of all functions that have derivatives at every point of their domain and whose range is a set of functions. If we denote this operator by , then is the function . Since is a function, it can be evaluated at a point . By the definition of the derivative function, .\nFor comparison, consider the doubling function given by ; is a real-valued function of a real number, meaning that it takes numbers as inputs and has numbers as outputs:\nThe operator , however, is not defined on individual numbers. It is only defined on functions:\nBecause the output of is a function, the output of can be evaluated at a point. For instance, when is applied to the square function, , outputs the doubling function , which we named . This output function can then be evaluated to get , , and so on.\nHigher derivatives.\nLet be a differentiable function, and let be its derivative. The derivative of (if it has one) is written and is called the \"second derivative of \". Similarly, the derivative of the second derivative, if it exists, is written and is called the \"third derivative of \". Continuing this process, one can define, if it exists, the th derivative as the derivative of the th derivative. These repeated derivatives are called \"higher-order derivatives\". The th derivative is also called the derivative of order .\nIf represents the position of an object at time , then the higher-order derivatives of have specific interpretations in physics. The first derivative of is the object's velocity. The second derivative of is the acceleration. The third derivative of is the jerk. And finally, the fourth through sixth derivatives of are snap, crackle, and pop; most applicable to astrophysics.\nA function need not have a derivative (for example, if it is not continuous). Similarly, even if does have a derivative, it may not have a second derivative. For example, let\nCalculation shows that is a differentiable function whose derivative at formula_24 is given by\n is twice the absolute value function at formula_24, and it does not have a derivative at zero. Similar examples show that a function can have a th derivative for each non-negative integer but not a th derivative. A function that has successive derivatives is called \" times differentiable\". If in addition the th derivative is continuous, then the function is said to be of differentiability class . (This is a stronger condition than having derivatives, as shown by the second example of .) A function that has infinitely many derivatives is called \"infinitely differentiable\" or \"smooth\".\nOn the real line, every polynomial function is infinitely differentiable. By standard differentiation rules, if a polynomial of degree is differentiated times, then it becomes a constant function. All of its subsequent derivatives are identically zero. In particular, they exist, so polynomials are smooth functions.\nThe derivatives of a function at a point provide polynomial approximations to that function near . For example, if is twice differentiable, then\nin the sense that\nIf is infinitely differentiable, then this is the beginning of the Taylor series for evaluated at around .\nInflection point.\nA point where the second derivative of a function changes sign is called an \"inflection point\". At an inflection point, the second derivative may be zero, as in the case of the inflection point of the function given by formula_29, or it may fail to exist, as in the case of the inflection point of the function given by formula_30. At an inflection point, a function switches from being a convex function to being a concave function or vice versa.\nNotation (details).\nLeibniz's notation.\nThe symbols formula_31, formula_32, and formula_33 were introduced by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in 1675. It is still commonly used when the equation is viewed as a functional relationship between dependent and independent variables. Then the first derivative is denoted by\nand was once thought of as an infinitesimal quotient. Higher derivatives are expressed using the notation\nfor the \"n\"th derivative of formula_36. These are abbreviations for multiple applications of the derivative operator. For example,\nWith Leibniz's notation, we can write the derivative of formula_38 at the point formula_39 in two different ways:\nLeibniz's notation allows one to specify the variable for differentiation (in the denominator), which is relevant in partial differentiation. It also can be used to write the chain rule as\nLagrange's notation.\nSometimes referred to as \"prime notation\", one of the most common modern notation for differentiation is due to Joseph-Louis Lagrange and uses the prime mark, so that the derivative of a function formula_42 is denoted formula_43. Similarly, the second and third derivatives are denoted\nTo denote the number of derivatives beyond this point, some authors use Roman numerals in superscript, whereas others place the number in parentheses:\nThe latter notation generalizes to yield the notation formula_48 for the \"n\"th derivative of formula_42 \u2013 this notation is most useful when we wish to talk about the derivative as being a function itself, as in this case the Leibniz notation can become cumbersome.\nNewton's notation.\nNewton's notation for differentiation, also called the dot notation, places a dot over the function name to represent a time derivative. If formula_50, then\ndenote, respectively, the first and second derivatives of formula_38. This notation is used exclusively for derivatives with respect to time or arc length. It is typically used in differential equations in physics and differential geometry. The dot notation, however, becomes unmanageable for high-order derivatives (order 4 or more) and cannot deal with multiple independent variables.\nEuler's notation.\nEuler's notation uses a differential operator formula_54, which is applied to a function formula_42 to give the first derivative formula_56. The \"n\"th derivative is denoted formula_57.\nIf is a dependent variable, then often the subscript \"x\" is attached to the \"D\" to clarify the independent variable \"x\".\nEuler's notation is then written\nalthough this subscript is often omitted when the variable \"x\" is understood, for instance when this is the only independent variable present in the expression.\nEuler's notation is useful for stating and solving linear differential equations.\nRules of computation.\nThe derivative of a function can, in principle, be computed from the definition by considering the difference quotient, and computing its limit. In practice, once the derivatives of a few simple functions are known, the derivatives of other functions are more easily computed using \"rules\" for obtaining derivatives of more complicated functions from simpler ones.\nRules for basic functions.\nHere are the rules for the derivatives of the most common basic functions, where \"a\" is a real number. \nRules for combined functions.\nHere are some of the most basic rules for deducing the derivative of a compound function from derivatives of basic functions. \nComputation example.\nThe derivative of the function given by\nis\nHere the second term was computed using the chain rule and third using the product rule. The known derivatives of the elementary functions \"x\"2, \"x\"4, sin(\"x\"), ln(\"x\") and , as well as the constant 7, were also used.\nIn higher dimensions.\nVector-valued functions.\nA vector-valued function y of a real variable sends real numbers to vectors in some vector space R\"n\". A vector-valued function can be split up into its coordinate functions , meaning that . This includes, for example, parametric curves in R2 or R3. The coordinate functions are real valued functions, so the above definition of derivative applies to them. The derivative of y(\"t\") is defined to be the vector, called the tangent vector, whose coordinates are the derivatives of the coordinate functions. That is,\nEquivalently,\nif the limit exists. The subtraction in the numerator is the subtraction of vectors, not scalars. If the derivative of y exists for every value of \"t\", then y\u2032 is another vector-valued function.\nIf is the standard basis for R\"n\", then y(\"t\") can also be written as . If we assume that the derivative of a vector-valued function retains the linearity property, then the derivative of y(\"t\") must be\nbecause each of the basis vectors is a constant.\nThis generalization is useful, for example, if y(\"t\") is the position vector of a particle at time \"t\"; then the derivative y\u2032(\"t\") is the velocity vector of the particle at time \"t\".\nPartial derivatives.\nSuppose that \"f\" is a function that depends on more than one variable\u2014for instance,\n\"f\" can be reinterpreted as a family of functions of one variable indexed by the other variables:\nIn other words, every value of \"x\" chooses a function, denoted \"fx\", which is a function of one real number. That is,\nOnce a value of \"x\" is chosen, say \"a\", then determines a function \"fa\" that sends \"y\" to :\nIn this expression, \"a\" is a \"constant\", not a \"variable\", so \"fa\" is a function of only one real variable. Consequently, the definition of the derivative for a function of one variable applies:\nThe above procedure can be performed for any choice of \"a\". Assembling the derivatives together into a function gives a function that describes the variation of \"f\" in the \"y\" direction:\nThis is the partial derivative of \"f\" with respect to \"y\". Here \u2202 is a rounded \"d\" called the partial derivative symbol. To distinguish it from the letter \"d\", \u2202 is sometimes pronounced \"der\", \"del\", or \"partial\" instead of \"dee\".\nIn general, the partial derivative of a function in the direction \"xi\" at the point (\"a\"1, ..., \"a\"\"n\") is defined to be:\nIn the above difference quotient, all the variables except \"xi\" are held fixed. That choice of fixed values determines a function of one variable\nand, by definition,\nIn other words, the different choices of \"a\" index a family of one-variable functions just as in the example above. This expression also shows that the computation of partial derivatives reduces to the computation of one-variable derivatives.\nThis is fundamental for the study of the functions of several real variables. Let be such a real-valued function. If all partial derivatives of are defined at the point , these partial derivatives define the vector\nwhich is called the gradient of at . If is differentiable at every point in some domain, then the gradient is a vector-valued function that maps the point to the vector . Consequently, the gradient determines a vector field.\nDirectional derivatives.\nIf \"f\" is a real-valued function on Rn, then the partial derivatives of \"f\" measure its variation in the direction of the coordinate axes. For example, if \"f\" is a function of \"x\" and \"y\", then its partial derivatives measure the variation in \"f\" in the \"x\" direction and the \"y\" direction. They do not, however, directly measure the variation of \"f\" in any other direction, such as along the diagonal line . These are measured using directional derivatives. Choose a vector\nThe directional derivative of \"f\" in the direction of v at the point x is the limit\nIn some cases it may be easier to compute or estimate the directional derivative after changing the length of the vector. Often this is done to turn the problem into the computation of a directional derivative in the direction of a unit vector. To see how this works, suppose that . Substitute into the difference quotient. The difference quotient becomes:\nThis is \"\u03bb\" times the difference quotient for the directional derivative of \"f\" with respect to u. Furthermore, taking the limit as \"h\" tends to zero is the same as taking the limit as \"k\" tends to zero because \"h\" and \"k\" are multiples of each other. Therefore, . Because of this rescaling property, directional derivatives are frequently considered only for unit vectors.\nIf all the partial derivatives of \"f\" exist and are continuous at x, then they determine the directional derivative of \"f\" in the direction v by the formula:\nThis is a consequence of the definition of the total derivative. It follows that the directional derivative is linear in v, meaning that .\nThe same definition also works when \"f\" is a function with values in R\"m\". The above definition is applied to each component of the vectors. In this case, the directional derivative is a vector in R\"m\".\nTotal derivative, total differential and Jacobian matrix.\nWhen \"f\" is a function from an open subset of R\"n\" to R\"m\", then the directional derivative of \"f\" in a chosen direction is the best linear approximation to \"f\" at that point and in that direction. But when , no single directional derivative can give a complete picture of the behavior of \"f\". The total derivative gives a complete picture by considering all directions at once. That is, for any vector v starting at a, the linear approximation formula holds:\nJust like the single-variable derivative, is chosen so that the error in this approximation is as small as possible.\nIf \"n\" and \"m\" are both one, then the derivative is a number and the expression is the product of two numbers. But in higher dimensions, it is impossible for to be a number. If it were a number, then would be a vector in R\"n\" while the other terms would be vectors in R\"m\", and therefore the formula would not make sense. For the linear approximation formula to make sense, must be a function that sends vectors in R\"n\" to vectors in R\"m\", and must denote this function evaluated at v.\nTo determine what kind of function it is, notice that the linear approximation formula can be rewritten as\nNotice that if we choose another vector w, then this approximate equation determines another approximate equation by substituting w for v. It determines a third approximate equation by substituting both w for v and for a. By subtracting these two new equations, we get\nIf we assume that v is small and that the derivative varies continuously in a, then is approximately equal to , and therefore the right-hand side is approximately zero. The left-hand side can be rewritten in a different way using the linear approximation formula with substituted for v. The linear approximation formula implies:\nThis suggests that is a linear transformation from the vector space R\"n\" to the vector space R\"m\". In fact, it is possible to make this a precise derivation by measuring the error in the approximations. Assume that the error in these linear approximation formula is bounded by a constant times ||v||, where the constant is independent of v but depends continuously on a. Then, after adding an appropriate error term, all of the above approximate equalities can be rephrased as inequalities. In particular, is a linear transformation up to a small error term. In the limit as v and w tend to zero, it must therefore be a linear transformation. Since we define the total derivative by taking a limit as v goes to zero, must be a linear transformation.\nIn one variable, the fact that the derivative is the best linear approximation is expressed by the fact that it is the limit of difference quotients. However, the usual difference quotient does not make sense in higher dimensions because it is not usually possible to divide vectors. In particular, the numerator and denominator of the difference quotient are not even in the same vector space: The numerator lies in the codomain R\"m\" while the denominator lies in the domain R\"n\". Furthermore, the derivative is a linear transformation, a different type of object from both the numerator and denominator. To make precise the idea that is the best linear approximation, it is necessary to adapt a different formula for the one-variable derivative in which these problems disappear. If , then the usual definition of the derivative may be manipulated to show that the derivative of \"f\" at \"a\" is the unique number such that\nThis is equivalent to\nbecause the limit of a function tends to zero if and only if the limit of the absolute value of the function tends to zero. This last formula can be adapted to the many-variable situation by replacing the absolute values with norms.\nThe definition of the total derivative of \"f\" at a, therefore, is that it is the unique linear transformation such that\nHere h is a vector in R\"n\", so the norm in the denominator is the standard length on R\"n\". However, \"f\"\u2032(a)h is a vector in R\"m\", and the norm in the numerator is the standard length on R\"m\". If \"v\" is a vector starting at \"a\", then is called the pushforward of v by \"f\" and is sometimes written .\nIf the total derivative exists at a, then all the partial derivatives and directional derivatives of \"f\" exist at a, and for all v, is the directional derivative of \"f\" in the direction v. If we write \"f\" using coordinate functions, so that , then the total derivative can be expressed using the partial derivatives as a matrix. This matrix is called the Jacobian matrix of \"f\" at a:\nThe existence of the total derivative \"f\"\u2032(a) is strictly stronger than the existence of all the partial derivatives, but if the partial derivatives exist and are continuous, then the total derivative exists, is given by the Jacobian, and depends continuously on a.\nThe definition of the total derivative subsumes the definition of the derivative in one variable. That is, if \"f\" is a real-valued function of a real variable, then the total derivative exists if and only if the usual derivative exists. The Jacobian matrix reduces to a 1\u00d71 matrix whose only entry is the derivative \"f\"\u2032(\"x\"). This 1\u00d71 matrix satisfies the property that is approximately zero, in other words that\nUp to changing variables, this is the statement that the function formula_111 is the best linear approximation to \"f\" at \"a\".\nThe total derivative of a function does not give another function in the same way as the one-variable case. This is because the total derivative of a multivariable function has to record much more information than the derivative of a single-variable function. Instead, the total derivative gives a function from the tangent bundle of the source to the tangent bundle of the target.\nThe natural analog of second, third, and higher-order total derivatives is not a linear transformation, is not a function on the tangent bundle, and is not built by repeatedly taking the total derivative. The analog of a higher-order derivative, called a jet, cannot be a linear transformation because higher-order derivatives reflect subtle geometric information, such as concavity, which cannot be described in terms of linear data such as vectors. It cannot be a function on the tangent bundle because the tangent bundle only has room for the base space and the directional derivatives. Because jets capture higher-order information, they take as arguments additional coordinates representing higher-order changes in direction. The space determined by these additional coordinates is called the jet bundle. The relation between the total derivative and the partial derivatives of a function is paralleled in the relation between the \"k\"th order jet of a function and its partial derivatives of order less than or equal to \"k\".\nBy repeatedly taking the total derivative, one obtains higher versions of the Fr\u00e9chet derivative, specialized to R\"p\". The \"k\"th order total derivative may be interpreted as a map\nwhich takes a point x in R\"n\" and assigns to it an element of the space of \"k\"-linear maps from R\"n\" to R\"m\" \u2013 the \"best\" (in a certain precise sense) \"k\"-linear approximation to \"f\" at that point. By precomposing it with the diagonal map \u0394, , a generalized Taylor series may be begun as\nwhere f(a) is identified with a constant function, are the components of the vector , and and are the components of and as linear transformations.\nGeneralizations.\nThe concept of a derivative can be extended to many other settings. The common thread is that the derivative of a function at a point serves as a linear approximation of the function at that point.\nHistory.\nCalculus, known in its early history as \"infinitesimal calculus\", is a mathematical discipline focused on limits, functions, derivatives, integrals, and infinite series. Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz independently discovered calculus in the mid-17th century. However, each inventor claimed the other stole his work in a bitter dispute that continued until the end of their lives."}
{"id": "7922", "revid": "8410945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7922", "title": "Dravidian languages", "text": "Dravidian is a family of languages spoken by 220 million people, mainly in southern India and northern Sri Lanka, with pockets elsewhere in South Asia. Since the colonial era, there have been small but significant immigrant communities outside South Asia in Mauritius, Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines, Britain, Australia, France, Canada, Germany and the United States.\nThe Dravidian languages are first attested in the 2nd century BCE as Tamil-Brahmi script inscribed on the cave walls in the Madurai and Tirunelveli districts of Tamil Nadu. The Dravidian languages with the most speakers are (in descending order of number of speakers) Telugu, Tamil, Kannada and Malayalam, all of which have long literary traditions. Smaller literary languages are Tulu and Kodava. There are also a number of Dravidian-speaking scheduled tribes, such as the Kurukh in Eastern India and Gondi in Central India.\nOnly two Dravidian languages are spoken exclusively outside the post-1947 state of India: Brahui in the Balochistan region of Pakistan and Afghanistan; and Dhangar, a dialect of Kurukh, in parts of Nepal and Bhutan. Dravidian place names along the Arabian Sea coasts and Dravidian grammatical influence such as clusivity in the Indo-Aryan languages, namely, Marathi, Gujarati, Marwari, and Sindhi, suggest that Dravidian languages were once spoken more widely across the Indian subcontinent.\nThough some scholars have argued that the Dravidian languages may have been brought to India by migrations from the Iranian plateau in the fourth or third millennium BCE or even earlier, the Dravidian languages cannot easily be connected to any other language family and could well be indigenous to India.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the Sanskrit word ' is the word '. Kamil Zvelebil cites the forms such as \"dramila\" (in 's Sanskrit work \"Avantisundar\u012bkath\u0101\") ' (found in the Sri Lankan (Ceylonese) chronicle \"Mahavamsa\") and then goes on to say, \"The forms \"dami\u1e37a\"/\"damila\" almost certainly provide a connection of ' \" with the indigenous name of the Tamil language, the likely derivation being \"*' &gt; *' &gt; '- / \"damila\"- and further, with the intrusive, 'hypercorrect' (or perhaps analogical) -\"r\"-, into '. The -\"m\"-/-\"v\"- alternation is a common enough phenomenon in Dravidian phonology\".\nBhadriraju Krishnamurti states in his reference book \"The Dravidian languages\": \nBased on what Krishnamurti states (referring to a scholarly paper published in the \"International Journal of Dravidian Linguistics\"), the Sanskrit word ' itself is later than ' since the dates for the forms with -r- are centuries later than the dates for the forms without -r- (', '-, \"damela\"- etc.).\nDiscovery.\nThe 14th century Sanskrit text \"Lilatilakam\", which is a grammar of Manipravalam, states that the spoken languages of present-day Kerala and Tamil Nadu were similar, terming them as \"Drami\u1e0da\". The author doesn't consider the \"Kar\u1e47\u1e47\u0101\u1e6da\" (Kannada) and the \"Andhra\" (Telugu) languages as \"Drami\u1e0da\", because they were very different from the language of the \"Tamil Veda\" (\"Tiruvaymoli\"), but states that some people would include them in the \"Drami\u1e0da\" category.\nIn 1816, Alexander D. Campbell suggested the existence of a Dravidian language family in his \"Grammar of the Teloogoo Language\", in which he and Francis W. Ellis argued that Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam, Tulu and Kodava descended from a common, non-Indo-European ancestor. In 1856 Robert Caldwell published his \"Comparative Grammar of the Dravidian or South-Indian Family of Languages\", which considerably expanded the Dravidian umbrella and established Dravidian as one of the major language groups of the world. Caldwell coined the term \"Dravidian\" for this family of languages, based on the usage of the Sanskrit word \u0926\u094d\u0930\u0935\u093f\u0926\u093e (Dravid\u0101) in the work \"Tantrav\u0101rttika\" by . In his own words, Caldwell says,\n The 1961 publication of the \"Dravidian Etymological Dictionary\" by T. Burrow and M. B. Emeneau proved a notable event in the study of Dravidian linguistics.\nClassification.\nThe Dravidian languages form a close-knit family. Most scholars agree on four groups: South (or South DravidianI), South-Central (or South DravidianII), Central, and North Dravidian, but there are different proposals regarding the relationship between these groups. Earlier classifications grouped Central and South-Central Dravidian in a single branch. On the other hand, Krishnamurti groups South-Central and South Dravidian together.\nSome authors deny that North Dravidian forms a valid subgroup, splitting it into Northeast (Kurukh\u2013Malto) and Northwest (Brahui). Their affiliation has been proposed based primarily on a small number of common phonetic developments, including:\nMcAlpin (2003) notes that no exact conditioning can be established for the first two changes, and proposes that distinct Proto-Dravidian *q and *k\u02b2 should be reconstructed behind these correspondences, and that Brahui, Kurukh-Malto, and the rest of Dravidian may be three coordinate branches, possibly with Brahui being the earliest language to split off. A few morphological parallels between Brahui and Kurukh-Malto are also known, but according to McAlpin they are analyzable as shared archaisms rather than shared innovations.\nIn addition, \"Ethnologue\" lists several unclassified Dravidian languages: Allar, Bazigar, Bharia, Malankuravan (possibly a dialect of Malayalam), and Vishavan. \"Ethnologue\" also lists several unclassified Southern Dravidian languages: Mala Malasar, Malasar, Thachanadan, Ullatan, Kalanadi, Kumbaran, Kunduvadi, Kurichiya, Attapady Kurumba, Muduga, Pathiya, and Wayanad Chetti.\nPattapu may also be Southern.\nA computational phylogenetic study of the Dravidian language family was undertaken by Kolipakam, et al. (2018). Kolipakam, et al. (2018) supports the internal coherence of the four Dravidian branches South (or South Dravidian I), South-Central (or South Dravidian II), Central, and North, but is uncertain about the precise relationships of these four branches to each other. The date of Dravidian is estimated to be 4,500 years old.\nDistribution.\nSince 1981, the Census of India has reported only languages with more than 10,000 speakers, including 17 Dravidian languages. In 1981, these accounted for approximately 24% of India's population.\nIn the 2001 census, they included 214 million people, about 21% of India's total population of 1.02 billion. In addition, the largest Dravidian-speaking group outside India, Tamil speakers in Sri Lanka, number around 4.7 million. The total number of speakers of Dravidian languages is around 227 million people, around 13% of the population of the Indian subcontinent.\nThe largest group of the Dravidian languages is South Dravidian, with almost 150 million speakers. Tamil, Kannada and Malayalam make up around 98% of the speakers, with 75 million, 44 million and 37 million native speakers, respectively.\nThe next-largest is the South-Central branch, which has 78 million native speakers, the vast majority of whom speak Telugu. The total number of speakers of Telugu, including those whose first language is not Telugu, is around 84 million people. This branch also includes the tribal language Gondi spoken in central India.\nThe second-smallest branch is the Northern branch, with around 6.3 million speakers. This is the only sub-group to have a language spoken in Pakistan \u2014 Brahui.\nThe smallest branch is the Central branch, which has only around 200,000 speakers. These languages are mostly tribal, and spoken in central India.\nLanguages recognized as official languages of India appear here in boldface.\nProposed relations with other families.\nThe Dravidian family has defied all of the attempts to show a connection with other languages, including Indo-European, Hurrian, Basque, Sumerian, Korean and Japanese. Comparisons have been made not just with the other language families of the Indian subcontinent (Indo-European, Austroasiatic, Sino-Tibetan, and Nihali), but with all typologically similar language families of the Old World. Nonetheless, although there are no readily detectable genealogical connections, Dravidian shares strong areal features with the Indo-Aryan languages, which have been attributed to a substratum influence from Dravidian.\nDravidian languages display typological similarities with the Uralic language group, and there have been several attempts to establish a genetic relationship in the past. This idea has been popular amongst Dravidian linguists, including Robert Caldwell, Thomas Burrow, Kamil Zvelebil, and Mikhail Andronov, The hypothesis is, however, rejected by most specialists in Uralic languages, and also in recent times by Dravidian linguists such as Bhadriraju Krishnamurti.\nIn the early 1970s, the linguist David McAlpin produced a detailed proposal of a genetic relationship between Dravidian and the extinct Elamite language of ancient Elam (present-day southwestern Iran). The Elamo-Dravidian hypothesis was supported in the late 1980s by the archaeologist Colin Renfrew and the geneticist Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza, who suggested that Proto-Dravidian was brought to India by farmers from the Iranian part of the Fertile Crescent. (In his 2000 book, Cavalli-Sforza suggested western India, northern India and northern Iran as alternative starting points.) However, linguists have found McAlpin's cognates unconvincing and criticized his proposed phonological rules as \"ad hoc\". Elamite is generally believed by scholars to be a language isolate, and the theory has had no effect on studies of the language. In 2012, Southworth suggested a \"Zagrosian family\" of West Asian origin including Elamite, Brahui and Dravidian as its three branches.\nDravidian is one of the primary language families in the Nostratic proposal, which would link most languages in North Africa, Europe and Western Asia into a family with its origins in the Fertile Crescent sometime between the Last Glacial Period and the emergence of Proto-Indo-European 4,000\u20136,000 BCE. However, the general consensus is that such deep connections are not, or not yet, demonstrable.\nPrehistory.\nThe origins of the Dravidian languages, as well as their subsequent development and the period of their differentiation are unclear, partially due to the lack of comparative linguistic research into the Dravidian languages. Though some scholars have argued that the Dravidian languages may have been brought to India by migrations in the fourth or third millennium BCE or even earlier, the Dravidian languages cannot easily be connected to any other language, and they could well be indigenous to India. Proto-Dravidian was spoken in the 4th or 3rd millennium BCE, and it is thought that the Dravidian languages were the most widespread indigenous languages in the Indian subcontinent before the advance of the Indo-Aryan languages.\nProto-Dravidian and onset of diversification.\nAs a proto-language, the Proto-Dravidian language is not itself attested in the historical record. Its modern conception is based solely on reconstruction. It was suggested in the 1980s that the language was spoken in the 4th millennium BCE, and started disintegrating into various branches around 3rd millennium BCE. According to Krishnamurti, Proto-Dravidian may have been spoken in the Indus civilization, suggesting a \"tentative date of Proto-Dravidian around the early part of the third millennium.\" Krishnamurti further states that South Dravidian I (including pre-Tamil) and South Dravidian II (including Pre-Telugu) split around the eleventh century BCE, with the other major branches splitting off at around the same time. Kolipakam et al. (2018) estimate the Dravidian language family to be approximately 4,500 years old.\nSeveral geneticists have noted a strong correlation between Dravidian and the Ancestral South Indian (ASI) component of South Asian genetic makeup. Narasimhan et al. (2018) argue that the ASI component itself resulted from a mixture of Iranian-related agriculturalists, moving southeast after the decline of the Indus Valley Civilization (early 2nd millennium BCE), and hunter-gatherers native to southern India. They conclude that one of these two groups may have been the source of proto-Dravidian.\nIntroduction from the northwest would be consistent with the location of Brahui and with attempts to interpret the Indus script as Dravidian. On the other hand, reconstructed Proto-Dravidian terms for flora and fauna provide some support for a south Indian origin.\nIndus Valley Civilisation.\nThe Indus Valley civilisation (3,300\u20131,900 BCE), located in Northwestern Indian subcontinent, is sometimes suggested to have been Dravidian. Already in 1924, when announcing the discovery of the IVC, John Marshall stated that (one of) the language(s) may have been Dravidic. Cultural and linguistic similarities have been cited by researchers Henry Heras, Kamil Zvelebil, Asko Parpola and Iravatham Mahadevan as being strong evidence for a proto-Dravidian origin of the ancient Indus Valley civilisation. The discovery in Tamil Nadu of a late Neolithic (early 2nd millennium BCE, i.e. post-dating Harappan decline) stone celt allegedly marked with Indus signs has been considered by some to be significant for the Dravidian identification.\nYuri Knorozov surmised that the symbols represent a logosyllabic script and suggested, based on computer analysis, an underlying agglutinative Dravidian language as the most likely candidate for the underlying language. Knorozov's suggestion was preceded by the work of Henry Heras, who suggested several readings of signs based on a proto-Dravidian assumption.\nLinguist Asko Parpola writes that the Indus script and Harappan language are \"most likely to have belonged to the Dravidian family\". Parpola led a Finnish team in investigating the inscriptions using computer analysis. Based on a proto-Dravidian assumption, they proposed readings of many signs, some agreeing with the suggested readings of Heras and Knorozov (such as equating the \"fish\" sign with the Dravidian word for fish, \"min\") but disagreeing on several other readings. A comprehensive description of Parpola's work until 1994 is given in his book \"Deciphering the Indus Script\".\nNorthern Dravidian pockets.\nAlthough in modern times speakers of the various Dravidian languages have mainly occupied the southern portion of India, in earlier times they probably were spoken in a larger area. After the Indo-Aryan migrations into north-western India, starting ca. 1500 BCE, and the establishment of the Kuru kingdom ca. 1100 BCE, a process of Sanskritisation of the masses started, which resulted in a language shift in northern India. Southern India has remained majority Dravidian, but pockets of Dravidian can be found in central India, Pakistan and Nepal.\nThe Kurukh and Malto are pockets of Dravidian languages in central India, spoken by people who may have migrated from south India. They do have myths about external origins. The Kurukh have traditionally claimed to be from the Deccan Peninsula, more specifically Karnataka. The same tradition has existed of the Brahui, who call themselves immigrants. Holding this same view of the Brahui are many scholars such as L.H. Horace Perera and M.Ratnasabapathy.\nThe Brahui population of Pakistan's Balochistan province has been taken by some as the linguistic equivalent of a relict population, perhaps indicating that Dravidian languages were formerly much more widespread and were supplanted by the incoming Indo-Aryan languages. However, it has been argued that the absence of any Old Iranian (Avestan) loanwords in Brahui suggests that the Brahui migrated to Balochistan from central India less than 1,000 years ago. The main Iranian contributor to Brahui vocabulary, Balochi, is a western Iranian language like Kurdish, and arrived in the area from the west only around 1000 CE. Sound changes shared with Kurukh and Malto also suggest that Brahui was originally spoken near them in central India.\nDravidian influence on Sanskrit.\nDravidian languages show extensive lexical (vocabulary) borrowing, but only a few traits of structural (either phonological or grammatical) borrowing from Indo-Aryan, whereas Indo-Aryan shows more structural than lexical borrowings from the Dravidian languages. Many of these features are already present in the oldest known Indo-Aryan language, the language of the \"Rigveda\" (c.1500 BCE), which also includes over a dozen words borrowed from Dravidian.\nVedic Sanskrit has retroflex consonants (/, ) with about 88 words in the \"Rigveda\" having unconditioned retroflexes. Some sample words are ', ', ', ', ' and '.\nSince other Indo-European languages, including other Indo-Iranian languages, lack retroflex consonants, their presence in Indo-Aryan is often cited as evidence of substrate influence from close contact of the Vedic speakers with speakers of a foreign language family rich in retroflex consonants. The Dravidian family is a serious candidate since it is rich in retroflex phonemes reconstructible back to the Proto-Dravidian stage.\nIn addition, a number of grammatical features of Vedic Sanskrit not found in its sister Avestan language appear to have been borrowed from Dravidian languages. These include the gerund, which has the same function as in Dravidian. Some linguists explain this asymmetrical borrowing by arguing that Middle Indo-Aryan languages were built on a Dravidian substratum. These scholars argue that the most plausible explanation for the presence of Dravidian structural features in Indic is language shift, that is, native Dravidian speakers learning and adopting Indic languages due to elite dominance. Although each of the innovative traits in Indic could be accounted for by internal explanations, early Dravidian influence is the only explanation that can account for all of the innovations at once; moreover, it accounts for several of the innovative traits in Indic better than any internal explanation that has been proposed.\nGrammar.\nThe most characteristic grammatical features of Dravidian languages are:\nPhonology.\nDravidian languages are noted for the lack of distinction between aspirated and unaspirated stops. While some Dravidian languages have accepted large numbers of loan words from Sanskrit and other Indo-Iranian languages in addition to their already vast vocabulary, in which the orthography shows distinctions in voice and aspiration, the words are pronounced in Dravidian according to different rules of phonology and phonotactics: aspiration of plosives is generally absent, regardless of the spelling of the word. This is not a universal phenomenon and is generally avoided in formal or careful speech, especially when reciting. For instance, Tamil does not distinguish between voiced and voiceless stops. In fact, the Tamil alphabet lacks symbols for voiced and aspirated stops. Dravidian languages are also characterized by a three-way distinction between dental, alveolar, and retroflex places of articulation as well as large numbers of liquids.\nProto-Dravidian.\nProto-Dravidian had five short and long vowels: \"*a\", \"*\u0101\", \"*i\", \"*\u012b\", \"*u\", \"*\u016b\", \"*e\", \"*\u0113\", \"*o\", \"*\u014d\". There were no diphthongs; \"ai\" and \"au\" are treated as *\"ay\" and *\"av\" (or *\"aw\").\nThe five-vowel system is largely preserved in the descendent subgroups.\nThe following consonantal phonemes are reconstructed:\nNumerals.\nThe numerals from 1 to 10 in various Dravidian and Indo-Aryan languages (here exemplified by Indo Aryan language Sanskrit and Iranian language Persian).\nLiterature.\nFour Dravidian languages, viz. Tamil, Kannada, Telugu and Malayalam, have lengthy literary traditions.\nLiterature in Tulu and Kodava is more recent. Recently old literature in Gondi has been discovered as well.\nThe earliest known Dravidian inscriptions are 76 Old Tamil inscriptions on cave walls in Madurai and Tirunelveli districts in Tamil Nadu, dating from the 2nd century BCE.\nThese inscriptions are written in a variant of the Brahmi script called Tamil Brahmi.\nIn 2019, the Tamil Nadu Archaeology Department released a report on excavations at Keeladi, near Madurai, Tamil Nadu, including a description of potsherds dated to the 6th century BCE inscribed with personal names in the Tamil-Brahmi script.\nHowever, the report lacks the detail of a full archaeological study, and other archaeologists have disputed whether the oldest dates obtained for the site can be assigned to these potsherds.\nThe earliest long text in Old Tamil is the \"Tolk\u0101ppiyam\", a work on Tamil grammar and poetics preserved in a 5th-century CE redaction, whose oldest layers could date from the late 2nd century or 1st century BCE.\nKannada is first known from the Halmidi inscription (450 CE). A 9th-century treatise on poetics, the \"Kavirajamarga\", is the first literary work.\nThe earliest Telugu inscription, from Erragudipadu in Kadapa district, is dated 575. The first literary work is an 11th-century translation of part of the \"Mah\u0101bh\u0101rata\".\nThe earliest Malayalam text is the Vazhappally copper plate (9th century). The first literary work is \"R\u0101macaritam\" (12th century)."}
{"id": "7923", "revid": "23934003", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7923", "title": "Dracula", "text": "Dracula is an 1897 Gothic horror novel by Irish author Bram Stoker. It introduced the character of Count Dracula and established many conventions of subsequent vampire fantasy. The novel tells the story of Dracula's attempt to move from Transylvania to England so that he may find new blood and spread the undead curse, and of the battle between Dracula and a small group of people led by Professor Abraham Van Helsing.\n\"Dracula\" has been assigned to many literary genres including vampire literature, horror fiction, gothic fiction, and invasion literature. The novel has spawned numerous theatrical, film, and television interpretations.\nPlot.\n\"Dracula\" is an epistolary novel, told through letters, diary entries, newspaper articles, telegrams, and a ship's log. The novel is set mostly in Transylvania and England, and unfolds mostly chronologically between 3 May and 6 November.\nJonathan Harker, a newly qualified English solicitor, visits Count Dracula at his castle in the Carpathian Mountains to help the Count purchase a house near London. Ignoring the Count's warning, Harker wanders the castle and encounters three vampire women; Dracula rescues him, and Harker realises that he is a vampire, too. Soon after, Dracula leaves the castle, abandoning Harker to the women; Harker escapes with his life and ends up delirious in a Budapest hospital. Dracula takes a ship for England, with boxes of earth from his castle. The captain's log narrates the crew's disappearance, until he alone remains, bound to the helm to maintain course. An animal resembling a large dog is seen leaping ashore when the ship runs aground at Whitby.\nLucy Westenra's letter to her best friend, Harker's fianc\u00e9e Mina Murray, describes her marriage proposals from Dr. John Seward, Quincey Morris, and Arthur Holmwood. Lucy accepts Holmwood's, but all remain friends. Mina joins her friend Lucy on holiday in Whitby. Lucy begins sleepwalking. After his ship lands there, Dracula stalks Lucy. Mina receives a letter about her missing fianc\u00e9's illness, and goes to Budapest to nurse him. Lucy becomes very ill. Seward's old teacher, Professor Abraham Van Helsing, determines the nature of Lucy's condition, but refuses to disclose it. He diagnoses her with acute blood-loss. Van Helsing places garlic flowers around her room and makes her a necklace of them.\nLucy's mother removes the garlic flowers, not knowing they repel vampires. While Seward and Van Helsing are absent, Lucy and her mother are terrified by a wolf and Mrs. Westenra dies of a heart attack. Lucy dies shortly thereafter. After her burial, newspapers report children being stalked in the night by a beautiful lady, and Van Helsing deduces it is her. The four go to her tomb and see that she is a vampire. They stake her heart, behead her, and fill her mouth with garlic. Jonathan Harker and his now-wife Mina have returned, and they join the campaign against Dracula.\nEveryone stays at Dr. Seward's asylum as the men begin to hunt Dracula. Van Helsing finally shares what he knows about Dracula and vampires, so all will better understand Dracula's actions and predict his movements. Vampires can only rest on earth from their homeland. Dracula communicates with Seward's patient, Renfield, an insane man who eats vermin to absorb their life force. After Dracula learns of the group's plot against him, he uses Renfield to enter the asylum. He secretly attacks Mina three times, drinking her blood each time and forcing Mina to drink his blood on the final visit. She is cursed to become a vampire after her death unless Dracula is killed.\nAs the men find Dracula's properties, they also discover many earth boxes within. The vampire hunters open each of the boxes and seal wafers of the host inside them; the sacrament makes the boxes useless to Dracula. They attempt to trap Dracula in his Piccadilly house, but he escapes. They learn that Dracula is fleeing to his castle in Transylvania with his last box. Mina has a faint psychic connection to Dracula, which Van Helsing exploits via hypnosis to track Dracula's movements. Guided by Mina, they pursue him.\nIn Galatz, Romania, the hunters split up. Van Helsing and Mina go to Dracula's castle, where the professor destroys the vampire women. Jonathan Harker and Arthur Holmwood follow Dracula's boat on the river, while Quincey Morris and John Seward parallel them on land. After Dracula's box is finally loaded onto a wagon by Szgany men, the hunters converge and attack it. After routing the Szgany, Harker slashes Dracula's neck and Quincey stabs him in the heart. Dracula crumbles to dust, freeing Mina from her vampiric curse, and Quincey dies from his wounds. A note by Jonathan Harker seven years later states that the Harkers have a son, named Quincey.\nBackground.\nBetween 1879 and 1898, Stoker was a business manager for the Lyceum Theatre in London, where he supplemented his income by writing many sensational novels, his most successful being the vampire tale \"Dracula\" published on 26 May 1897. Parts of it are set around the English town of Whitby on the Yorkshire coast where he spent summer holidays.\nThroughout the 1880s and 1890s, authors such as H. Rider Haggard, Rudyard Kipling, Robert Louis Stevenson, Arthur Conan Doyle, and H. G. Wells wrote many tales in which fantastic creatures threatened to destroy life on Earth. Invasion literature was at a peak, and Stoker's formula was very familiar by 1897 to readers of fantastic adventure stories. Victorian readers enjoyed \"Dracula\" as a good adventure story like many others, but it did not reach its legendary status until later in the 20th century when film versions began to appear.\nBefore writing \"Dracula\", Stoker spent seven years researching European folklore and stories of vampires, being most influenced by Emily Gerard's 1885 essay \"Transylvania Superstitions\" which includes content about a vampire myth. The reputation for cruelty of the Romanian ruler of Wallachia Vlad III Dracula, which Stoker first learned about in 1881, inspired the name of the count Dracula. However, Dracula's scholar Elizabeth Miller has remarked that aside from the name and some mention of Romanian history, the background of Stoker's Count bears no resemblance to that of Vlad III Dracula. From 1890 to 1897 Stoker was a member of the London Library, where markings in Sabine Baring-Gould's \"\"Book of Were-Wolves\", Thomas Browne's \"Pseudodoxica Epidemica\", AF Crosse's \"Round About the Carpathians\" and Charles Boner's \"Transylvania\"\" are attributed to Stoker's research for \"Dracula\". Also some 1896 New York World clippings about Mercy Brown were found amongst Stoker's papers, but it is unsure how much the case could have influenced the novel. Later he also claimed that he had a nightmare, caused by eating too much crab meat, about a \"vampire king\" rising from his grave.\nThe Lyceum Theatre in the West End where Stoker worked between 1878 and 1898 was headed by actor-manager Henry Irving, who was Stoker's real-life inspiration for Dracula's mannerisms and who Stoker hoped would play Dracula in a stage version. Irving never did agree to do a stage version, but Dracula's dramatic sweeping gestures and gentlemanly mannerisms drew their living embodiment from Irving.\n\"The Dead Un-Dead\" was one of Stoker's original titles for \"Dracula\", and the manuscript was entitled simply \"The Un-Dead\" up until a few weeks before publication. Stoker's notes for \"Dracula\" show that the name of the count was originally \"Count Wampyr\", but Stoker became intrigued by the name \"Dracula\" while doing research, after reading William Wilkinson's book \"An Account of the Principalities of Wallachia and Moldavia with Political Observations Relative to Them\" (London 1820), which he found in the Whitby Library and consulted a number of times during visits to Whitby in the 1890s. The name Dracula was the patronym (\"Dr\u0103culea\") of the descendants of Vlad II of Wallachia, who took the name \"Dracul\" after being invested in the Order of the Dragon in 1431. In the Old Romanian language, the word \"dracul\" (Romanian \"drac\" \"dragon\" + \"-ul\" \"the\") meant \"the dragon\" and Dracula meant \"son of the dragon\". In the present day however, dracul means \"the devil\".\nPublication.\n\"Dracula\" was published in London in May 1897 by Archibald Constable and Company. Costing six shillings, the novel was bound in yellow cloth and titled in red letters. It was copyrighted in the United States in 1899 with the publication by Doubleday &amp; McClure of New York. But when Universal Studios purchased the rights, it came to light that Bram Stoker had not complied with a portion of US copyright law, placing the novel into the public domain. In the United Kingdom and other countries following the Berne Convention on copyrights, the novel was under copyright until April 1962, fifty years after Stoker's death.\nReaction and scholarly criticism.\nReaction.\n\"Dracula\" was not an immediate bestseller when it was first published, although reviewers praised it. Some Victorian fans described it as \"the sensation of the season\" and \"the most blood-curdling novel of the paralysed century\". Sherlock Holmes author Arthur Conan Doyle wrote to Stoker in a letter, \"I write to tell you how very much I have enjoyed reading \"Dracula\". I think it is the very best story of diablerie which I have read for many years.\"\nAccording to literary historians Nina Auerbach and David J. Skal in the Norton Critical Edition, the novel has become more significant for modern readers than it was for Victorian readers, most of whom enjoyed it just as a adventure story. It reached its broad and iconic status only later in the 20th century when the movie versions appeared. A. Asbj\u00f8rn J\u00f8n has also noted that \"Dracula\" has had a significant impact on the image of the vampire in popular culture, folklore, and legend.\nIt did not make much money for Stoker. In the last year of his life, he was so poor that he had to petition for a compassionate grant from the Royal Literary Fund, and his widow was forced to sell his notes and outlines of the novel at a Sotheby's auction in 1913, where they were purchased for a little over \u00a32 (). But then F. W. Murnau's unauthorized adaptation of the story was released in theatres in 1922 in the form of \"Nosferatu\". Stoker's widow took affront and, during the legal battle that followed, the novel's popularity started to grow. \"Nosferatu\" was followed by a successful stage adaptation, touring the UK for three years before arriving in the US where Stoker's creation caught Hollywood's attention and, after the American 1931 movie version was released, the book has never been out of print.\nHistorical and geographical references.\nAttention was drawn to the supposed connections between the historical Transylvanian-born Vlad III Dracula (also known as Vlad Tepes) of Wallachia and Bram Stoker's fictional Dracula, following the publication of \"In Search of Dracula\" by Radu Florescu and Raymond T. McNally in 1972.\nDuring his main reign (1456\u20131462), \"Vlad the Impaler\" is said to have killed from 40,000 to 100,000 European civilians (political rivals, criminals, and anyone that he considered \"useless to humanity\"), mainly by impaling. The sources depicting these events are records by Saxon settlers in neighbouring Transylvania who had frequent clashes with Vlad III. Vlad III is revered as a folk hero by Romanians for driving off the invading Ottoman Turks, of whom his impaled victims are said to have included as many as 100,000. There is no solid evidence that the Count in the novel was modelled on Vlad the Impaler of Wallachia. At most, Stoker borrowed only the name Dracula and \"scraps of miscellaneous information\" about Romanian history, according to one expert, Elizabeth Miller; as well, and there are no comments about him in the author's working notes.\nHistorically, the name \"Dracula\" is derived from an order of chivalry called the Order of the Dragon, founded by Sigismund of Luxembourg (then king of Hungary) to uphold Christianity and defend the Holy Roman Empire against the Ottoman Turks. Vlad II Dracul, father of Vlad III, was admitted to the order around 1431, after which Vlad II wore the emblem of the order and later, as ruler of Wallachia, his coinage bore the dragon symbol, from which the name \"Dracula\" is derived since \"dracul\" in Romanian means \"the dragon\".\nMany of Stoker's biographers and literary critics have found strong similarities to the earlier Irish writer Sheridan Le Fanu's classic of the vampire genre \"Carmilla\". In writing \"Dracula\", Stoker may also have drawn on stories about the s\u00eddhe, some of which feature blood-drinking women. The Irish legend of Abhartach has also been suggested as a source. It is also thought probable that his mother's stories of events during the severe cholera outbreak in Sligo in 1832 were influential, particularly themes of being buried while alive.\nIn her book \"The Essential Dracula\", Clare Haword-Maden suggested that the castle of Count Dracula was inspired by Slains Castle, at which Bram Stoker was a guest of the 19th Earl of Erroll. According to Miller, he first visited Cruden Bay in 1893, three years after work had begun on \"Dracula\". Haining and Tremaine maintain that, during this visit, Stoker was especially impressed by Slains Castle's interior and the surrounding landscape. Miller and Leatherdale question the stringency of this connection.\nAnother possibility is that he copied information about Kem\u00e9ny Castle at V\u00e9cs from one of his sources on Transylvania, the book by Major E.C. Johnson. A further option is that Stoker saw an illustration of Castle Bran (T\u00f6rzburg) in the book on Transylvania by Charles Boner, or read about it in the books by Mazuchelli or Crosse. Incidentally, Dracula's castle resembles the real-life citadel of the historical Dracula - Poienari Citadel, at least for the thousand-foot drop from a steep precipice upon which both castles stand upon, as noted by Sir Christopher Lee in the documentary \"In Search of Dracula\" (1974). However, it is generally believed, even by Lee, that Stoker himself did not know of the Poienari fortress, since it does not appear in any of Stoker's sources or research notes.\nPossibly, Stoker was not inspired by a real edifice at all, but by Jules Verne's novel \"The Carpathian Castle\" (1892) or Ann Radcliffe's \"The Mysteries of Udolpho\" (1794). \nMany of the scenes in Whitby and London are based on real places that Stoker frequently visited, although he distorts the geography for the sake of the story in some cases. One scholar has suggested that Stoker chose Whitby as the site of Dracula's first appearance in England because of the Synod of Whitby, given the novel's preoccupation with timekeeping and calendar disputes.\nOfficial derivative publications.\n\"Dracula's Guest\".\nThe short story \"Dracula's Guest\" was posthumously published in 1914, two years after Stoker's death. It was, according to most contemporary critics, the deleted first (or second) chapter from the original manuscript and the one which gave the volume its name, but which the original publishers deemed unnecessary to the overall story.\n\"Dracula's Guest\" follows an unnamed Englishman traveller as he wanders around Munich before leaving for Transylvania. It is Walpurgis Night and the young Englishman foolishly leaves his hotel, in spite of the coachman's warnings, and wanders through a dense forest alone. Along the way, he feels that he is being watched by a tall and thin stranger (possibly Count Dracula).\nThe short story climaxes in an old graveyard where the Englishman, caught in a blizzard, takes refuge in the marble tomb of \"Countess Dolingen of Gratz\". Within the tomb, he sees the Countess\u2014apparently asleep and healthy\u2014but before he can investigate further, a mysterious force throws him clear of the tomb. A lightning bolt then strikes the tomb, destroying it and incinerating the undead screaming countess. The Englishman then loses consciousness. He awakens to find a \"gigantic\" wolf lying on his chest and licking at his throat; however, the wolf merely keeps him warm and protects him until help arrives.\nWhen the Englishman is finally taken back to his hotel, a telegram awaits him from his expectant host Dracula, with a warning about \"dangers from snow and wolves and night\". The Swedish scholar Rickard Berghorn noted that the description of the blonde countess in \"Dracula's Guest\" closely resembled the description of Josephine in the \"Powers of Darkness\", which he used to argue that the countess and Josephine were meant to be the same character.\n\"Powers of Darkness\".\nIn 1901, \"Dracula\" was translated into Icelandic by Valdimar \u00c1smundsson under the title \"Makt Myrkranna\" (\"Powers of Darkness\") with a preface written by Stoker. Not until 2014 was it noticed that \"Makt Myrkranna\" differed significantly from Stoker's version of \"Dracula\". The characters had different names, the book was shorter and there was more emphasis on sex than in the English version. The Dutch scholar Hans Corneel de Roos wrote: \"Although \"Dracula\" received positive reviews in most newspapers of the day...the original novel can be tedious and meandering...\"Powers of Darkness\", by contrast, is written in a concise, punchy style; each scene adds to the progress of the plot.\" In \"Makt Myrkranna\", Dracula is in contact with various ambassadors in what is hinted at is a bid for world domination. The majority of \"Makt Myrkranna\" concerns Thomas Harker's (as Jonathan Harker is called here) stay at Dracula's castle in Transylvania, with the rest of novel being a rushed and barely fleshed out story.\nDe Roos has argued that the differences between the English original of \"Dracula\" and the Icelandic version were not due to changes made by \u00c1smundsson, but rather that he was using a different, older manuscript of \"Dracula\" provided to him by Stoker, which the latter had discarded for the English version. De Roos has argued that some aspects of \"Makt Myrkranna\" were due to \u00c1smundsson and other aspects were parts of \"Dracula\" that Stoker had removed due to concerns about government censorship.\nAdaptations.\nThe story of \"Dracula\" has been the basis for numerous films and plays. Stoker himself wrote the first theatrical adaptation, which was presented at the Lyceum Theatre on 18 May 1897 under the title \"Dracula, or The Undead\" shortly before the novel's publication and performed only once, in order to establish his own copyright for such adaptations. This adaption was first published only a century later in October 1997. The first motion picture to feature Dracula was \"Dracula's Death\", produced in Hungary in 1921. The now-lost film, however, was not an adaptation of Stoker's novel, but featured an original story.\nF. W. Murnau's unauthorised film adaptation \"Nosferatu\" was released in 1922, and the popularity of the novel increased considerably, owing to an attempt by Stoker's widow to have the film removed from public circulation. Prana Film, the production company, had been unable to obtain permission to adapt the story from Bram's widow Florence Stoker, so screenwriter Henrik Galeen was told to alter numerous details to avoid legal trouble. Galeen transplanted the action of the story from 1890s England to 1830s Germany and reworked several characters, dropping some (such as Lucy and all three of her suitors), and renaming others (Dracula became Orlok, Jonathan Harker became Thomas Hutter, Mina became Ellen, and so on). This attempt failed to avoid a court case, however; Florence Stoker sued Prana Film, and all copies of the film were ordered to be destroyed. However, the company was bankrupt, and Stoker only recovered her legal fees in damages. Some copies survived and found their way into theatres. Eventually, Florence Stoker gave up the fight against public displays of the film. Subsequent rereleases of the film have typically undone some of the changes, such as restoring the original character names (a practice also followed by Werner Herzog in his 1979 remake of Murnau's film \"Nosferatu the Vampyre\").\nFlorence Stoker licensed the story to playwright Hamilton Deane, whose 1924 stage play adaptation toured England for several years before settling down in London. In 1927, American stage producer Horace Liveright hired John L. Balderston to revise Deane's script in advance of its American premiere. Balderston significantly compressed the story, most notably consolidating or removing several characters. The Deane play and its Balderston revisions introduced an expanded role and history for Renfield, who now replaced Jonathan Harker as Dracula's solicitor in the first part of the story; combined Mina Harker and Lucy Westenra into a single character named Lucy (though both Mina and Lucy would appear in the subsequent film); and omitted both Arthur Holmwood and Quincey Morris entirely. When the play premiered in New York, it was with Bela Lugosi in the title role, and with Edward Van Sloan as Abraham Van Helsing, roles which both actors (as well as Herbert Bunston as Dr. Seward) reprised for the English-language version of the 1931 Universal Pictures film production. The 1931 film was one of the most commercially successful adaptations of the story to date; it and the Deane/Balderston play that preceded it set the standard for film and television adaptations of the story, with the alterations to the novel becoming standard for later adaptations for decades to come. Universal Studios continued to feature the character of Dracula in many of their horror films from the 1930s and 1940s.\nIn 1958, film company Hammer Film Productions followed the success of its \"The Curse of Frankenstein\" from the previous year with \"Dracula\", released in the United States as \"Horror of Dracula\", directed by Terence Fisher. Fisher's production featured Christopher Lee as Dracula and Peter Cushing as Van Helsing. It was an international hit for Hammer Film, and Lee fixed the image of the fanged vampire in popular culture. Both Lee and Cushing reprised their roles multiple times over the next decade and a half, concluding with \"The Legend of the 7 Golden Vampires\" (with Cushing but not Lee) in 1974. Christopher Lee also took on the role of Dracula in \"Count Dracula\", a 1970 Spanish-Italian-German co-production notable for its adherence to the plot of the original novel. Playing the part of Renfield in that version was Klaus Kinski, who later played Dracula himself in 1979's \"Nosferatu the Vampyre\".\nIn 1977, the BBC made \"Count Dracula\", a 155-minute adaptation for television starring Louis Jourdan. Later film adaptations include John Badham's 1979 \"Dracula\", starring Frank Langella and inspired by the 1977 Broadway revival of the Deane/Hamilton play, and Francis Ford Coppola's 1992 \"Bram Stoker's Dracula\", starring Gary Oldman. The character of Count Dracula has remained popular over the years, and many films have used the character as a villain, while others have named him in their titles, including \"Dracula's Daughter\" and \"The Brides of Dracula\"."}
{"id": "7925", "revid": "32137983", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7925", "title": "David Hume", "text": "David Hume (; born David Home; 7 May 1711 NS \u2013 25 August 1776) was a Scottish Enlightenment philosopher, historian, economist, librarian and essayist, who is best known today for his highly influential system of philosophical empiricism, skepticism, and naturalism. Beginning with \"A Treatise of Human Nature\" (1739\u201340), Hume strove to create a naturalistic science of man that examined the psychological basis of human nature. Hume argued against the existence of innate ideas, positing that all human knowledge derives solely from experience. This places him with Francis Bacon, Thomas Hobbes, John Locke, and George Berkeley as a British Empiricist.\nHume argued that inductive reasoning and belief in causality cannot be justified rationally; instead, they result from custom and mental habit. We never actually perceive that one event causes another but only experience the \"constant conjunction\" of events. This problem of induction means that to draw any causal inferences from past experience, it is necessary to presuppose that the future will resemble the past, a presupposition which cannot itself be grounded in prior experience.\nAn opponent of philosophical rationalists, Hume held that passions rather than reason govern human behaviour, famously proclaiming that \"Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions.\" Hume was also a sentimentalist who held that ethics are based on emotion or sentiment rather than abstract moral principle. He maintained an early commitment to naturalistic explanations of moral phenomena and is usually taken to have first clearly expounded the is\u2013ought problem, or the idea that a statement of fact alone can never give rise to a normative conclusion of what \"ought\" to be done.\nHume also denied that humans have an actual conception of the self, positing that we experience only a bundle of sensations, and that the self is nothing more than this bundle of causally-connected perceptions. Hume's compatibilist theory of free will takes causal determinism as fully compatible with human freedom. His views on philosophy of religion, including his rejection of miracles and the argument from design for God's existence, were especially controversial for their time.\nHume influenced utilitarianism, logical positivism, the philosophy of science, early analytic philosophy, cognitive science, theology, and many other fields and thinkers. Immanuel Kant credited Hume as the inspiration who had awakened him from his \"dogmatic slumbers.\"\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nHume was born on 26 April 1711 (Old Style), as David Home, in a tenement on the northside of Edinburgh's Lawnmarket. He was the second of two sons to Joseph Home of Chirnside in the County of Berwick, an advocate of Ninewells, and wife Catherine Home (n\u00e9e Falconer), daughter of Sir David Falconer of Newton and wife Mary Falconer (n\u00e9e Norvell). Joseph died just after David's second birthday. Catherine, who never remarried, raised the two brothers and their sister on her own.\nHume changed his family name's spelling in 1734, as the surname 'Home' (pronounced like 'Hume') was not well-known in England. Hume never married and lived partly at his Chirnside family home in Berwickshire, which had belonged to the family since the 16th century. His finances as a young man were very \"slender\", as his family was not rich and, as a younger son, he had little patrimony to live on.\nHume attended the University of Edinburgh at an unusually early ageeither 12 or possibly as young as 10at a time when 14 was the typical age. Initially, Hume considered a career in law, because of his family. However, in his words, he came to have: \u2026an insurmountable aversion to everything but the pursuits of Philosophy and general Learning; and while [my family] fanceyed I was poring over Voet and Vinnius, Cicero and Virgil were the Authors which I was secretly devouring.He had little respect for the professors of his time, telling a friend in 1735 that \"there is nothing to be learnt from a Professor, which is not to be met with in Books\". He did not graduate.\n\"Disease of the learned\".\nAged 18 or so, Hume made a philosophical discovery that opened him up to \"a new Scene of Thought\", inspiring him \"to throw up every other Pleasure or Business to apply entirely to it\". As he did not recount what this scene exactly was, commentators have offered a variety of speculations. One prominent interpretation among contemporary Humean scholarship is that this new \"scene of thought\" was Hume's realisation that Francis Hutcheson's theory of \"moral sense\" could be applied to the understanding of morality as well.\nFrom this inspiration, Hume set out to spend a minimum of 10 years reading and writing. He soon came to the verge of a mental breakdown, first starting with a coldnesswhich he attributed to a \"Laziness of Temper\"that lasted about nine months. Later, some scurvy spots broke out on his fingers, persuading Hume's physician to diagnose Hume as suffering from the \"Disease of the Learned\".\nHume wrote that he \"went under a Course of Bitters and Anti-Hysteric Pills\", taken along with a pint of claret every day. He also decided to have a more active life to better continue his learning. His health improved somewhat, but in 1731 he was afflicted with a ravenous appetite and palpitations of the heart. After eating well for a time, he went from being \"tall, lean and raw-bon'd\" to being \"sturdy, robust [and] healthful-like.\" Indeed, Hume would become well known for being obese and a fondness for good port and cheese.\nCareer.\nAlthough having noble ancestry, at 25 years of age, Hume had no source of income and no learned profession. As was common at his time, he became a merchant's assistant, despite having to leave his native Scotland. He travelled via Bristol to La Fl\u00e8che in Anjou, France. There he had frequent discourse with the Jesuits of the College of La Fl\u00e8che.\nHume was derailed in his attempts to start a university career by protests over his alleged \"atheism\", also lamenting that his literary debut, \"A Treatise of Human Nature\", \"fell dead-born from the press.\" However, he found literary success in his lifetime as an essayist, and a career as a librarian at the University of Edinburgh. His tenure there, and the access to research materials it provided, resulted in Hume's writing the massive six-volume \"The History of England\", which became a bestseller and the standard history of England in its day. For over 60 years, Hume was the dominant interpreter of English history. He described his \"love for literary fame\" as his \"ruling passion\" and judged his two late works, the so-called \"first\" and \"second\" enquiries, \"An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding\" and \"An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals\", as his greatest literary and philosophical achievements. He would ask of his contemporaries to judge him on the merits of the later texts alone, rather than on the more radical formulations of his early, youthful work, dismissing his philosophical debut as juvenilia: \"A work which the Author had projected before he left College.\" Despite Hume's protestations, a consensus exists today that his most important arguments and philosophically distinctive doctrines are found in the original form they take in the \"Treatise\". Though he was only 23 years old when starting this work, it is now regarded as one of the most important in the history of Western philosophy.\n1730s.\nHume worked for four years on his first major work, \"A Treatise of Human Nature\", subtitled \"Being an Attempt to Introduce the Experimental Method of Reasoning into Moral Subjects\", completing it in 1738 at the age of 28. Although many scholars today consider the \"Treatise\" to be Hume's most important work and one of the most important books in Western philosophy, critics in Great Britain at the time described it as \"abstract and unintelligible\". As Hume had spent most of his savings during those four years, he resolved \"to make a very rigid frugality supply [his] deficiency of fortune, to maintain unimpaired my independency, and to regard every object as contemptible except the improvements of my talents in literature\".\nDespite the disappointment, Hume later wrote: \"Being naturally of a cheerful and sanguine temper, I soon recovered from the blow and prosecuted with great ardour my studies in the country.\" There, in an attempt to make his larger work better known and more intelligible, he published the \"An Abstract of a Book lately Published\" as a summary of the main doctrines of the \"Treatise\", without revealing its authorship. Although there has been some academic speculation as to who actually wrote this pamphlet, it is generally regarded as Hume's creation.\n1740s.\nAfter the publication of \"Essays Moral and Political\" in 1741included in the later edition as \"Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary\"Hume applied for the Chair of Pneumatics and Moral Philosophy at the University of Edinburgh. However, the position was given to William Cleghorn after Edinburgh ministers petitioned the town council not to appoint Hume because he was seen as an atheist.\nIn 1745, during the Jacobite risings, Hume tutored the Marquess of Annandale (1720\u201392), an engagement that ended in disarray after about a year. Hume then started his great historical work, \"The History of England\", taking fifteen years and running to over a million words. During this time he was also involved with the Canongate Theatre through his friend John Home, a preacher.\nIn this context, he associated with Lord Monboddo and other thinkers of the Scottish Enlightenment in Edinburgh. From 1746, Hume served for three years as secretary to General James St Clair, who was envoy to the courts of Turin and Vienna. At that time Hume also wrote \"Philosophical Essays Concerning Human Understanding\", later published as \"An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding\". Often called the \"First Enquiry\", it proved little more successful than the \"Treatise\", perhaps because of the publication of his short autobiography \"My Own Life\", which \"made friends difficult for the first Enquiry\".\nIn 1749 he went to live with his brother in the countryside, although he continued to associate with the aforementioned Scottish Enlightenment figures.\n1750s-mid 1760s.\nHume's religious views were often suspect and, in the 1750s, it was necessary for his friends to avert a trial against him on the charge of heresy, specifically in an ecclesiastical court. However, he \"would not have come and could not be forced to attend if he said he was not a member of the Established Church\". Hume failed to gain the chair of philosophy at the University of Glasgow due to his religious views. By this time, he had published the \"Philosophical Essays\", which were decidedly anti-religious. Even Adam Smith, his personal friend who had vacated the Glasgow philosophy chair, was against his appointment out of concern that public opinion would be against it.\nHume returned to Edinburgh in 1751. In the following year, the Faculty of Advocates hired him to be their Librarian, a job in which he would receive little to no pay, but which nonetheless gave him \"the command of a large library\". This resource enabled him to continue historical research for \"The History of England\". Hume's volume of \"Political Discourses\", written in 1749 and published by Kincaid &amp; Donaldson in 1752, was the only work he considered successful on first publication.\nEventually, with the publication of his six-volume \"The History of England\" between 1754 and 1762, Hume achieved the fame that he coveted. The volumes traced events from the Invasion of Julius Caesar to the Revolution of 1688, and was a bestseller in its day. Hume was also a longtime friend of bookseller Andrew Millar, who sold Hume's \"History\" (after acquiring the rights from Scottish bookseller Gavin Hamilton), although the relationship was sometimes complicated. Letters between them illuminate both men's interest in the success of the \"History\". In 1762 Hume moved from Jack's Land on the Canongate to James Court on the Lawnmarket. He sold the house to James Boswell in 1766.\nLater years.\nFrom 1763 to 1765, Hume was invited to attend Lord Hertford in Paris, where he became secretary to the British embassy. Hume was well received in Paris, and while there he met with Isaac de Pinto.\nIn 1766, Hume left Paris to accompany Jean-Jacques Rousseau to England. Once there, he and Rousseau fell out, leaving Hume sufficiently worried about the damage to his reputation from the quarrel with Rousseau. So much so, that Hume would author an account of the dispute, titling it \"A concise and genuine account of the dispute between Mr. Hume and Mr. Rousseau\".\nIn 1765, Hume served as British Charg\u00e9 d'affaires, writing \"despatches to the British Secretary of State\". He wrote of his Paris life, \"I really wish often for the plain roughness of The Poker Club of Edinburgh\u2026to correct and qualify so much lusciousness.\" In 1766, upon returning to Britain, Hume encouraged his patron Lord Hertford to invest in a number of slave plantations, acquired by George Colebrooke and others in the Windward Islands. In June 1766 Hume facilitated the purchase of the slave plantation by writing to Victor-Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Charpentier, marquis d'Ennery, the French governor of Martinique, on behalf of his friend, John Stewart, a wine merchant and lent Stewart \u00a3400 earlier in the same year. According to Dr. Felix Waldmann, a former Hume Fellow at the University of Edinburgh, Hume's \"puckish scepticism about the existence of religious miracles played a significant part in defining the critical outlook which underpins the practice of modern science. But his views served to reinforce the institution of racialised slavery in the later 18th century.\"\nIn 1767, Hume was appointed Under Secretary of State for the Northern Department. Here, he wrote that he was given \"all the secrets of the Kingdom\". In 1769 he returned to James' Court in Edinburgh, where he would live from 1771 until his death in 1776.\nHume's nephew and namesake, David Hume of Ninewells (1757\u20131838), was a co-founder of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1783. He was a Professor of Scots Law at Edinburgh University and rose to be Principal Clerk of Session in the Scottish High Court and Baron of the Exchequer. He is buried with his uncle in Old Calton Cemetery.\nAutobiography.\nIn the last year of his life, Hume wrote an extremely brief autobiographical essay titled \"My Own Life\", summing up his entire life in \"fewer than 5 pages\", and notably contains many interesting judgments that have been of enduring interest to subsequent readers of Hume. Donald Seibert (1984), a scholar of 18th-century literature, judged it a \"remarkable autobiography, even though it may lack the usual attractions of that genre. Anyone hankering for startling revelations or amusing anecdotes had better look elsewhere.\"\nDespite condemning vanity as a dangerous passion, in his autobiography Hume confesses his belief that the \"love of literary fame\" had served as his \"ruling passion\" in life, and claims that this desire \"never soured my temper, notwithstanding my frequent disappointments\". One such disappointment Hume discusses in this account is in the initial literary reception of the \"Treatise\", which he claims to have overcome by means of the success of the \"Essays\": \"the work was favourably received, and soon made me entirely forget my former disappointment\". Hume, in his own retrospective judgment, argues that his philosophical debut's apparent failure \"had proceeded more from the manner than the matter\". He thus suggests that \"I had been guilty of a very usual indiscretion, in going to the press too early.\"\nHume also provides an unambiguous self-assessment of the relative value of his works: that \"my Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals; which, in my own opinion (who ought not to judge on that subject) is of all my writings, historical, philosophical, or literary, incomparably the best.\" He also wrote of his social relations: \"My company was not unacceptable to the young and careless, as well as to the studious and literary\", noting of his complex relation to religion, as well as to the state, that \"though I wantonly exposed myself to the rage of both civil and religious factions, they seemed to be disarmed in my behalf of their wonted fury\". He goes on to profess of his character: \"My friends never had occasion to vindicate any one circumstance of my character and conduct.\" Hume concludes the essay with a frank admission:I cannot say there is no vanity in making this funeral oration of myself, but I hope it is not a misplaced one; and this is a matter of fact which is easily cleared and ascertained.\nDeath.\nDiarist and biographer James Boswell saw Hume a few weeks before his death from a form of abdominal cancer. Hume told him that he sincerely believed it a \"most unreasonable fancy\" that there might be life after death. asked that his body be interred in a \"simple Roman tomb\", requesting in his will that it be inscribed only with his name and the year of his birth and death, \"leaving it to Posterity to add the Rest\".\nDavid Hume died at the southwest corner of St. Andrew's Square in Edinburgh's New Town, at what is now 21 Saint David Street. A popular story, consistent with some historical evidence, suggests that the street was named after Hume.\nHis tomb stands, as he wished it, on the southwestern slope of Calton Hill, in the Old Calton Cemetery. Adam Smith later recounted Hume's amusing speculation that he might ask Charon, Hades' ferryman, to allow him a few more years of life in order to see \"the downfall of some of the prevailing systems of superstition\". The ferryman replied, \"You loitering rogue, that will not happen these many hundred years.\u2026 Get into the boat this instant.\"\nWritings.\n\"A Treatise of Human Nature\" begins with the introduction: \"'Tis evident, that all the sciences have a relation, more or less, to human nature.\u2026 Even Mathematics, Natural Philosophy, and Natural Religion, are in some measure dependent on the science of Man.\" The science of man, as Hume explains, is the \"only solid foundation for the other sciences\" and that the method for this science requires both experience and observation as the foundations of a logical argument. In regards to this, philosophical historian Frederick Copleston (1999) suggests that it was Hume's aim to apply to the science of man the method of experimental philosophy (the term that was current at the time to imply Natural philosophy), and that \"Hume's plan is to extend to philosophy in general the methodological limitations of Newtonian physics.\"\nUntil recently, Hume was seen as a forerunner of logical positivism, a form of anti-metaphysical empiricism. According to the logical positivists (in summary of their verification principle), unless a statement could be verified by experience, or else was true or false by definition (i.e. either tautological or contradictory), then it was meaningless. Hume, on this view, was a proto-positivist, who, in his philosophical writings, attempted to demonstrate the ways in which ordinary propositions about objects, causal relations, the self, and so on, are semantically equivalent to propositions about one's experiences.\nMany commentators have since rejected this understanding of Humean empiricism, stressing an epistemological (rather than a semantic) reading of his project. According to this opposing view, Hume's empiricism consisted in the idea that it is our knowledge, and not our ability to conceive, that is restricted to what can be experienced. Hume thought that we can form beliefs about that which extends beyond any possible experience, through the operation of faculties such as custom and the imagination, but he was sceptical about claims to knowledge on this basis.\nImpressions and ideas.\nA central doctrine of Hume's philosophy, stated in the very first lines of the \"Treatise of Human Nature\", is that the mind consists of perceptions, or the mental objects which are present to it, and which divide into two categories: \"All the perceptions of the human mind resolve themselves into two distinct kinds, which I shall call and .\" Hume believed that it would \"not be very necessary to employ many words in explaining this distinction\", which commentators have generally taken to mean the distinction between \"feeling\" and \"thinking\". Controversially, Hume, in some sense, may regard the distinction as a matter of degree, as he takes \"impressions\" to be distinguished from ideas on the basis of their force, liveliness, and vivacitywhat Henry E. Allison (2008) calls the \"FLV criterion.\" \"Ideas\" are therefore \"faint\" impressions. For example, experiencing the painful sensation of touching a hot pan's handle is more forceful than simply thinking about touching a hot pan. According to Hume, \"impressions\" are meant to be the original form of all our ideas. From this, Don Garrett (2002) has coined the term \"copy principle,\" referring to Hume's doctrine that all ideas are ultimately copied from some original impression, whether it be a passion or sensation, from which they derive.\nSimple and complex.\nAfter establishing the forcefulness of impressions and ideas, these two categories are further broken down into \"simple\" and \"complex\": \"simple perceptions or impressions and ideas are such as admit of no distinction nor separation\", whereas \"the complex are the contrary to these, and may be distinguished into parts\". When looking at an apple, a person experiences a variety of colour-sensationswhat Hume notes as a complex impression. Similarly, a person experiences a variety of taste-sensations, tactile-sensations, and smell-sensations when biting into an apple, with the overall sensationagain, a complex impression. Thinking about an apple allows a person to form complex ideas, which are made of similar parts as the complex impressions they were developed from, but which are also less forceful. Hume believes that complex perceptions can be broken down into smaller and smaller parts until perceptions are reached that have no parts of their own, and these perceptions are thus referred to as simple.\nPrinciples of association.\nRegardless of how boundless it may seem, a person's imagination is confined to the mind's ability to recombine the information it has already acquired from the body's sensory experience (the ideas that have been derived from impressions). In addition, \"as our imagination takes our most basic ideas and leads us to form new ones, it is directed by three principles of association, namely, resemblance, contiguity, and cause and effect\":\nHume elaborates more on the last principle, explaining that, when somebody observes that one object or event consistently produces the same object or event, that results in \"an expectation that a particular event (a 'cause') will be followed by another event (an 'effect') previously and constantly associated with it\". Hume calls this principle \"custom\", or \"habit\", saying that \"custom...renders our experience useful to us, and makes us expect, for the future, a similar train of events with those which have appeared in the past\". However, even though custom can serve as a guide in life, it still only represents an expectation. In other words: Experience cannot establish a necessary connection between cause and effect, because we can imagine without contradiction a case where the cause does not produce its usual effect\u2026the reason why we mistakenly infer that there is something in the cause that necessarily produces its effect is because our past experiences have habituated us to think in this way. Continuing this idea, Hume argues that \"only in the pure realm of ideas, logic, and mathematics, not contingent on the direct sense awareness of reality, [can] causation safely\u2026be applied\u2014all other sciences are reduced to probability\". He uses this scepticism to reject metaphysics and many theological views on the basis that they are not grounded in fact and observations, and are therefore beyond the reach of human understanding.\nInduction and causation.\nThe cornerstone of Hume's epistemology is the problem of induction. This may be the area of Hume's thought where his scepticism about human powers of reason is most pronounced. The problem revolves around the plausibility of inductive reasoning, that is, reasoning from the observed behaviour of objects to their behaviour when unobserved. As Hume wrote, induction concerns how things behave when they go \"beyond the present testimony of the senses, or the records of our memory\". Hume argues that we tend to believe that things behave in a regular manner, meaning that patterns in the behaviour of objects seem to persist into the future, and throughout the unobserved present. Hume's argument is that we cannot rationally justify the claim that nature will continue to be uniform, as justification comes in only two varieties\u2014demonstrative reasoning and probable reasoning\u2014and both of these are inadequate. With regard to demonstrative reasoning, Hume argues that the uniformity principle cannot be demonstrated, as it is \"consistent and conceivable\" that nature might stop being regular. Turning to probable reasoning, Hume argues that we cannot hold that nature will continue to be uniform because it has been in the past. As this is using the very sort of reasoning (induction) that is under question, it would be circular reasoning. Thus, no form of justification will rationally warrant our inductive inferences.\nHume's solution to this problem is to argue that, rather than reason, natural instinct explains the human practice of making inductive inferences. He asserts that \"Nature, by an absolute and uncontroulable [\"sic\"] necessity has determin'd us to judge as well as to breathe and feel.\" In 1985, and in agreement with Hume, John D. Kenyon writes: Reason might manage to raise a doubt about the truth of a conclusion of natural inductive inference just for a moment\u00a0... but the sheer agreeableness of animal faith will protect us from excessive caution and sterile suspension of belief.Others, such as Charles Sanders Peirce, have demurred from Hume's solution, while some, such as Kant and Karl Popper, have thought that Hume's analysis has \"posed a most fundamental challenge to all human knowledge claims\".\nThe notion of causation is closely linked to the problem of induction. According to Hume, we reason inductively by associating constantly conjoined events. It is the mental act of association that is the basis of our concept of causation. At least three interpretations of Hume's theory of causation are represented in the literature:\nHume acknowledged that there are events constantly unfolding, and humanity cannot guarantee that these events are caused by prior events or are independent instances. He opposed the widely accepted theory of causation that 'all events have a specific course or reason'. Therefore, Hume crafted his own theory of causation, formed through his empiricist and sceptic beliefs. He split causation into two realms: \"All the objects of human reason or enquiry may naturally be divided into two kinds, to wit, Relations of Ideas, and Matters of Fact.\" Relations of Ideas are \"a priori\" and represent universal bonds between ideas that mark the cornerstones of human thought. Matters of Fact are dependent on the observer and experience. They are often not universally held to be true among multiple persons. Hume was an Empiricist, meaning he believed \"causes and effects are discoverable not by reason, but by experience\". He goes on to say that, even with the perspective of the past, humanity cannot dictate future events because thoughts of the past are limited, compared to the possibilities for the future. Hume's separation between Matters of Fact and Relations of Ideas is often referred to as \"Hume's fork.\"\nHume explains his theory of causation and causal inference by division into three different parts. In these three branches he explains his ideas and compares and contrasts his views to his predecessors. These branches are the Critical Phase, the Constructive Phase, and Belief. In the Critical Phase, Hume denies his predecessors' theories of causation. Next, he uses the Constructive Phase to resolve any doubts the reader may have had while observing the Critical Phase. \"Habit or Custom\" mends the gaps in reasoning that occur without the human mind even realising it. Associating ideas has become second nature to the human mind. It \"makes us expect for the future, a similar train of events with those which have appeared in the past\". However, Hume says that this association cannot be trusted because the span of the human mind to comprehend the past is not necessarily applicable to the wide and distant future. This leads him to the third branch of causal inference, Belief. Belief is what drives the human mind to hold that expectancy of the future is based on past experience. Throughout his explanation of causal inference, Hume is arguing that the future is not certain to be repetition of the past and that the only way to justify induction is through uniformity.\nThe logical positivist interpretation is that Hume analyses causal propositions, such as \"A causes B\", in terms of regularities in perception: \"A causes B\" is equivalent to \"Whenever A-type events happen, B-type ones follow\", where \"whenever\" refers to all possible perceptions. In his \"Treatise of Human Nature\", Hume wrote:\nPower and necessity\u2026are\u2026qualities of perceptions, not of objects\u2026felt by the soul and not perceiv'd externally in bodies.\nThis view is rejected by sceptical realists, who argue that Hume thought that causation amounts to more than just the regular succession of events. Hume said that, when two events are causally conjoined, a necessary connection underpins the conjunction:\nShall we rest contented with these two relations of contiguity and succession, as affording a complete idea of causation? By no means\u2026there is a \"necessary connexion\" to be taken into consideration.\nAngela Coventry writes that, for Hume, \"there is nothing in any particular instance of cause and effect involving external objects which suggests the idea of power or necessary connection\" and \"we are ignorant of the powers that operate between objects\". However, while denying the possibility of knowing the powers between objects, Hume accepted the causal principle, writing: \"I never asserted so absurd a proposition as that something could arise without a cause.\"\nIt has been argued that, while Hume did not think that causation is reducible to pure regularity, he was not a fully fledged realist either. Simon Blackburn calls this a quasi-realist reading, saying that \"Someone talking of cause is voicing a distinct mental set: he is by no means in the same state as someone merely describing regular sequences.\" In Hume's words, \"nothing is more usual than to apply to external bodies every internal sensation, which they occasion\".\nThe 'self'.\nEmpiricist philosophers, such as Hume and Berkeley, favoured the bundle theory of personal identity. In this theory, \"the mind itself, far from being an independent power, is simply 'a bundle of perceptions' without unity or cohesive quality\". The self is nothing but a bundle of experiences linked by the relations of causation and resemblance; or, more accurately, the empirically warranted idea of the self is just the idea of such a bundle. According to Hume:\nThis view is supported by, for example, positivist interpreters, who have seen Hume as suggesting that terms such as \"self\", \"person\", or \"mind\" refer to collections of \"sense-contents\". A modern-day version of the bundle theory of the mind has been advanced by Derek Parfit in his \"Reasons and Persons\".\nHowever, some philosophers have criticised Hume's bundle-theory interpretation of personal identity. They argue that distinct selves can have perceptions that stand in relation to similarity and causality. Thus, perceptions must already come parcelled into distinct \"bundles\" before they can be associated according to the relations of similarity and causality. In other words, the mind must already possess a unity that cannot be generated, or constituted, by these relations alone. Since the bundle-theory interpretation portrays Hume as answering an ontological question, philosophers like Galen Strawson see Hume as not very concerned with such questions and have queried whether this view is really Hume's. Instead, Strawson suggests that Hume might have been answering an epistemological question about the causal origin of our concept of the self. In the Appendix to the \"Treatise\", Hume declares himself dissatisfied with his earlier account of personal identity in Book 1. Corliss Swain notes that \"Commentators agree that if Hume did find some new problem\" when he reviewed the section on personal identity, \"he wasn't forthcoming about its nature in the Appendix.\" One interpretation of Hume's view of the self, argued for by philosopher and psychologist James Giles, is that Hume is not arguing for a bundle theory, which is a form of reductionism, but rather for an eliminative view of the self. Rather than reducing the self to a bundle of perceptions, Hume rejects the idea of the self altogether. On this interpretation, Hume is proposing a \"no-self theory\" and thus has much in common with Buddhist thought (see \"anatt\u0101\"). Psychologist Alison Gopnik has argued that Hume was in a position to learn about Buddhist thought during his time in France in the 1730s.\nPractical reason.\n\"Practical reason\" relates to whether standards or principles exist that are also authoritative for all rational beings, dictating people's intentions and actions. Hume is mainly considered an anti-rationalist, denying the possibility for practical reason, although other philosophers such as Christine Korsgaard, Jean Hampton, and Elijah Millgram claim that Hume is not so much of an anti-rationalist as he is just a sceptic of practical reason.\nHume denied the existence of practical reason as a principle because he claimed reason does not have any effect on morality, since morality is capable of producing effects in people that reason alone cannot create. As Hume explains in \"A Treatise of Human Nature\" (1740): Morals excite passions, and produce or prevent actions. Reason of itself is utterly impotent in this particular. The rules of morality, therefore, are not conclusions of our reason.\"Since practical reason is supposed to regulate our actions (in theory), Hume denied practical reason on the grounds that reason cannot directly oppose passions. As Hume puts it, \"Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions, and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and obey them.\" Reason is less significant than any passion because reason has no original influence, while \"A passion is an original existence, or, if you will, modification of existence.\"\nPractical reason is also concerned with the value of actions rather than the truth of propositions, so Hume believed that reason's shortcoming of affecting morality proved that practical reason could not be authoritative for all rational beings, since morality was essential for dictating people's intentions and actions.\nEthics.\nHume's writings on ethics began in the 1740 \"Treatise\" and were refined in his \"An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals\" (1751). He understood \"feeling\", rather than \"knowing\", as that which governs ethical actions, stating that \"moral decisions are grounded in moral sentiment.\" Arguing that reason cannot be behind morality, he wrote:\nMorals excite passions, and produce or prevent actions. Reason itself is utterly impotent in this particular. The rules of morality, therefore, are not conclusions of our reason.\nHume's \"moral sentimentalism\" was shared by his close friend Adam Smith, and the two were mutually influenced by the moral reflections of their older contemporary, Francis Hutcheson. Peter Singer claims that Hume's argument that morals cannot have a rational basis alone \"would have been enough to earn him a place in the history of ethics.\"\nHume also put forward the \"is\u2013ought problem\", later known as \"Hume's Law\", denying the possibility of logically deriving what \"ought\" to be from what \"is\". According to the \"Treatise\" (1740), in every system of morality that Hume has read, the author begins by stating facts about the world as it \"is\" but always ends up suddenly referring to what \"ought\" to be the case. Hume demands that a reason should be given for inferring what \"ought to be\" the case, from \"what is\" the case. This is because it \"seems altogether inconceivable, how this new relation can be a deduction from others.\"\nHume's theory of ethics has been influential in modern-day meta-ethical theory, helping to inspire emotivism, and ethical expressivism and non-cognitivism, as well as Allan Gibbard's general theory of moral judgment and judgments of rationality.\nAesthetics.\nHume's ideas about aesthetics and the theory of art are spread throughout his works, but are particularly connected with his ethical writings, and also the essays \"Of the Standard of Taste\" and \"Of Tragedy\" (1757). His views are rooted in the work of Joseph Addison and Francis Hutcheson. In the \"Treatise\" (1740), he touches on the connection between beauty &amp; deformity and vice &amp; virtue. His later writings on the subject continue to draw parallels of beauty and deformity in art with conduct and character.\nIn \"Standard of Taste\", Hume argues that no rules can be drawn up about what is a tasteful object. However, a reliable critic of taste can be recognised as objective, sensible and unprejudiced, and as having extensive experience. \"Of Tragedy\" addresses the question of why humans enjoy tragic drama. Hume was concerned with the way spectators find pleasure in the sorrow and anxiety depicted in a tragedy. He argued that this was because the spectator is aware that he is witnessing a dramatic performance. There is pleasure in realising that the terrible events that are being shown are actually fiction. Furthermore, Hume laid down rules for educating people in taste and correct conduct, and his writings in this area have been very influential on English and Anglo-Saxon aesthetics.\nFree will, determinism, and responsibility.\nHume, along with Thomas Hobbes, is cited as a classical compatibilist about the notions of freedom and determinism. \"Compatibilism\" seeks to reconcile human freedom with the mechanist view that human beings are part of a deterministic universe, which is completely governed by physical laws. Hume, on this point, was influenced greatly by the scientific revolution, particularly by Sir Isaac Newton. Hume argued that the dispute between freedom and determinism continued over 2000 years due to ambiguous terminology. He wrote: \"From this circumstance alone, that a controversy has been long kept on foot\u2026we may presume that there is some ambiguity in the expression,\" and that different disputants use different meanings for the same terms.\nHume defines the concept of necessity as \"the uniformity, observable in the operations of nature; where similar objects are constantly conjoined together,\" and liberty as \"a power of acting or not acting, according to the determinations of the will.\" He then argues that, according to these definitions, not only are the two compatible, but liberty \"requires\" necessity. For if our actions were not necessitated in the above sense, they would \"have so little in connexion with motives, inclinations and circumstances, that one does not follow with a certain degree of uniformity from the other.\" But if our actions are not thus connected to the will, then our actions can never be free: they would be matters of \"chance; which is universally allowed to have no existence.\" Australian philosopher John Passmore writes that confusion has arisen because \"necessity\" has been taken to mean \"necessary connexion.\" Once this has been abandoned, Hume argues that \"liberty and necessity will be found not to be in conflict one with another.\"\nMoreover, Hume goes on to argue that in order to be held morally responsible, it is required that our behaviour be caused or necessitated, for, as he wrote:\nActions are, by their very nature, temporary and perishing; and where they proceed not from some \"cause\" in the character and disposition of the person who performed them, they can neither redound to his honour, if good; nor infamy, if evil.\nHume describes the link between causality and our capacity to rationally make a decision from this an inference of the mind. Human beings assess a situation based upon certain predetermined events and from that form a choice. Hume believes that this choice is made spontaneously. Hume calls this form of decision making the liberty of spontaneity.\nEducation writer Richard Wright considers that Hume's position rejects a famous moral puzzle attributed to French philosopher Jean Buridan. The Buridan's ass puzzle describes a donkey that is hungry. This donkey has separate bales of hay on both sides, which are of equal distances from him. The problem concerns which bale the donkey chooses. Buridan was said to believe that the donkey would die, because he has no autonomy. The donkey is incapable of forming a rational decision as there is no motive to choose one bale of hay over the other. However, human beings are different, because a human who is placed in a position where he is forced to choose one loaf of bread over another will make a decision to take one in lieu of the other. For Buridan, humans have the capacity of autonomy, and he recognises the choice that is ultimately made will be based on chance, as both loaves of bread are exactly the same. However, Wright says that Hume completely rejects this notion, arguing that a human will spontaneously act in such a situation because he is faced with impending death if he fails to do so. Such a decision is not made on the basis of chance, but rather on necessity and spontaneity, given the prior predetermined events leading up to the predicament.\nHume's argument is supported by modern-day compatibilists such as R. E. Hobart, a pseudonym of philosopher Dickinson S. Miller. However, P. F. Strawson argued that the issue of whether we hold one another morally responsible does not ultimately depend on the truth or falsity of a metaphysical thesis such as determinism. This is because our so holding one another is a non-rational human sentiment that is not predicated on such theses.\nReligion.\nPhilosopher Paul Russell (2005) contends that Hume wrote \"on almost every central question in the philosophy of religion,\" and that these writings \"are among the most important and influential contributions on this topic.\" Touching on the philosophy, psychology, history, and anthropology of religious thought, Hume's 1757 dissertation, \"The Natural History of Religion\", argues that the monotheistic religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam all derive from earlier polytheistic religions. He went on to suggest that all religious belief \"traces, in the end, to dread of the unknown.\" Hume had also written on religious subjects in the first \"Enquiry\", as well as later in the \"Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion\".\nReligious views.\nAlthough he wrote a great deal about religion, Hume's personal views have been the subject of much debate. Some modern critics have described Hume's religious views as agnostic or have described him as a \"Pyrrhonian skeptic.\" Contemporaries considered him to be an atheist, or at least un-Christian, enough so that the Church of Scotland seriously considered bringing charges of infidelity against him. Evidence of his un-Christian beliefs can especially be found in his writings on miracles, in which he attempts to separate historical method from the narrative accounts of miracles. The fact that contemporaries suspected him of atheism is exemplified by a story Hume liked to tell:\nThe best theologian he ever met, he used to say, was the old Edinburgh fishwife who, having recognized him as Hume the atheist, refused to pull him out of the bog into which he had fallen until he declared he was a Christian and repeated the Lord's prayer.\nHowever, in works such as \"Of Superstition and Enthusiasm\", Hume specifically seems to support the standard religious views of his time and place. This still meant that he could be very critical of the Catholic Church, dismissing it with the standard Protestant accusations of superstition and idolatry, as well as dismissing as idolatry what his compatriots saw as uncivilised beliefs. He also considered extreme Protestant sects, the members of which he called \"enthusiasts\", to be corrupters of religion. By contrast, in \"The Natural History of Religion\", Hume presents arguments suggesting that polytheism had much to commend it over monotheism. Additionally, when mentioning religion as a factor in his \"History of England\", Hume uses it to show the deleterious effect it has on human progress. In his \"Treatise on Human Nature\", Hume wrote: \"Generally speaking, the errors in religions are dangerous; those in philosophy only ridiculous.\"\nPaul Russell (2008) writes that Hume was plainly sceptical about religious belief, although perhaps not to the extent of complete atheism. He suggests that Hume's position is best characterised by the term \"irreligion,\" while philosopher David O'Connor (2013) argues that Hume's final position was \"weakly deistic.\" For O'Connor, Hume's \"position is deeply ironic. This is because, while inclining towards a weak form of deism, he seriously doubts that we can ever find a sufficiently favourable balance of evidence to justify accepting any religious position.\" He adds that Hume \"did not believe in the God of standard theism\u2026but he did not rule out all concepts of deity,\" and that \"ambiguity suited his purposes, and this creates difficulty in definitively pinning down his final position on religion.\"\nDesign argument.\nOne of the traditional topics of natural theology is that of the existence of God, and one of the \"a posteriori\" arguments for this is the \"argument from design\" or the teleological argument. The argument is that the existence of God can be proved by the design that is obvious in the complexity of the world, which \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" states is \"the most popular,\" because it is:\u2026the most accessible of the theistic arguments\u2026which identifies evidences of design in nature, inferring from them a divine designer.\u2026 The fact that the universe as a whole is a coherent and efficiently functioning system likewise, in this view, indicates a divine intelligence behind it.In \"An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding\", Hume wrote that the design argument seems to depend upon our experience, and its proponents \"always suppose the universe, an effect quite singular and unparalleled, to be the proof of a Deity, a cause no less singular and unparalleled.\" Philosopher Louise E. Loeb (2010) notes that Hume is saying that only experience and observation can be our guide to making inferences about the conjunction between events. However, according to Hume: We observe neither God nor other universes, and hence no conjunction involving them. There is no observed conjunction to ground an inference either to extended objects or to God, as unobserved causes.Hume also criticised the argument in his \"Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion\" (1779). In this, he suggested that, even if the world is a more or less smoothly functioning system, this may only be a result of the \"chance permutations of particles falling into a temporary or permanent self-sustaining order, which thus has the appearance of design.\"\nA century later, the idea of order without design was rendered more plausible by Charles Darwin's discovery that the adaptations of the forms of life result from the natural selection of inherited characteristics. For philosopher James D. Madden, it is \"Hume, rivaled only by Darwin, [who] has done the most to undermine in principle our confidence in arguments from design among all figures in the Western intellectual tradition.\"\nFinally, Hume discussed a version of the anthropic principle, which is the idea that theories of the universe are constrained by the need to allow for man's existence in it as an observer. Hume has his sceptical mouthpiece Philo suggest that there may have been many worlds, produced by an incompetent designer, whom he called a \"stupid mechanic\". In his \"Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion\", Hume wrote:\nMany worlds might have been botched and bungled throughout an eternity, ere this system was struck out: much labour lost: many fruitless trials made: and a slow, but continued improvement carried on during infinite ages in the art of world-making.\nAmerican philosopher Daniel Dennett has suggested that this mechanical explanation of teleology, although \"obviously\u00a0... an amusing philosophical fantasy\", anticipated the notion of natural selection, the 'continued improvement' being like \"any Darwinian selection algorithm.\"\nProblem of miracles.\nIn his discussion of miracles, Hume argues that we should not believe miracles have occurred and that they do not therefore provide us with any reason to think God exists. In \"An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding\" (Section 10), Hume defines a miracle as \"a transgression of a law of nature by a particular volition of the Deity, or by the interposition of some invisible agent\". Hume says we believe an event that has frequently occurred is likely to occur again, but we also take into account those instances where the event did not occur:\nA wise man\u2026considers which side is supported by the greater number of experiments.\u2026 A hundred instances or experiments on one side, and fifty on another, afford a doubtful expectation of any event; though a hundred uniform experiments, with only one that is contradictory, reasonably beget a pretty strong degree of assurance. In all cases, we must balance the opposite experiments\u2026and deduct the smaller number from the greater, in order to know the exact force of the superior evidence.\nHume discusses the testimony of those who report miracles. He wrote that testimony might be doubted even from some great authority in case the facts themselves are not credible: \"[T]he evidence, resulting from the testimony, admits of a diminution, greater or less, in proportion as the fact is more or less unusual.\"\nAlthough Hume leaves open the possibility for miracles to occur and be reported, he offers various arguments against this ever having happened in history. He points out that people often lie, and they have good reasons to lie about miracles occurring either because they believe they are doing so for the benefit of their religion or because of the fame that results. Furthermore, people by nature enjoy relating miracles they have heard without caring for their veracity and thus miracles are easily transmitted even when false. Also, Hume notes that miracles seem to occur mostly in \"ignorant and barbarous nations\" and times, and the reason they do not occur in the civilised societies is such societies are not awed by what they know to be natural events. Finally, the miracles of each religion argue against all other religions and their miracles, and so even if a proportion of all reported miracles across the world fit Hume's requirement for belief, the miracles of each religion make the other less likely.\nHume was extremely pleased with his argument against miracles in his \"Enquiry\". He states \"I flatter myself, that I have discovered an argument of a like nature, which, if just, will, with the wise and learned, be an everlasting check to all kinds of superstitious delusion, and consequently, will be useful as long as the world endures.\" Thus, Hume's argument against miracles had a more abstract basis founded upon the scrutiny, not just primarily of miracles, but of all forms of belief systems. It is a common sense notion of veracity based upon epistemological evidence, and founded on a principle of rationality, proportionality and reasonability.\nThe criterion for assessing Hume's belief system is based on the balance of probability whether something is more likely than not to have occurred. Since the weight of empirical experience contradicts the notion for the existence of miracles, such accounts should be treated with scepticism. Further, the myriad of accounts of miracles contradict one another, as some people who receive miracles will aim to prove the authority of Jesus, whereas others will aim to prove the authority of Muhammad or some other religious prophet or deity. These various differing accounts weaken the overall evidential power of miracles.\nDespite all this, Hume observes that belief in miracles is popular, and that \"the gazing populace\u2026 receive greedily, without examination, whatever soothes superstition, and promotes wonder.\"\nCritics have argued that Hume's position assumes the character of miracles and natural laws prior to any specific examination of miracle claims, thus it amounts to a subtle form of begging the question. To assume that testimony is a homogeneous reference group seems unwise- to compare private miracles with public miracles, unintellectual observers with intellectual observers and those who have little to gain and much to lose with those with much to gain and little to lose is not convincing to many. Indeed, many have argued that miracles not only do not contradict the laws of nature, but require the laws of nature to be intelligible as miraculous, and thus subverting the law of nature. For example, William Adams remarks that \"there must be an ordinary course of nature before anything can be extraordinary. There must be a stream before anything can be interrupted.\" They have also noted that it requires an appeal to inductive inference, as none have observed every part of nature nor examined every possible miracle claim, for instance those in the future. This, in Hume's philosophy, was especially problematic.\nLittle appreciated is the voluminous literature either foreshadowing Hume, in the likes of Thomas Sherlock or directly responding to and engaging with Hume- from William Paley, William Adams, John Douglas, John Leland, and George Campbell, among others. Regarding the latter, it is rumoured that, having read Campbell's Dissertation, Hume remarked that \"the Scotch theologue had beaten him.\"\nHume's main argument concerning miracles is that miracles by definition are singular events that differ from the established laws of nature. Such natural laws are codified as a result of past experiences. Therefore, a miracle is a violation of all prior experience and thus incapable on this basis of reasonable belief. However, the probability that something has occurred in contradiction of all past experience should always be judged to be less than the probability that either ones senses have deceived one, or the person recounting the miraculous occurrence is lying or mistaken. Hume would say, all of which he had past experience of. For Hume, this refusal to grant credence does not guarantee correctness. He offers the example of an Indian Prince, who, having grown up in a hot country, refuses to believe that water has frozen. By Hume's lights, this refusal is not wrong and the Prince \"reasoned justly;\" it is presumably only when he has had extensive experience of the freezing of water that he has warrant to believe that the event could occur.\nSo for Hume, either the miraculous event will become a recurrent event or else it will never be rational to believe it occurred. The connection to religious belief is left unexplained throughout, except for the close of his discussion where Hume notes the reliance of Christianity upon testimony of miraculous occurrences. He makes an ironic remark that anyone who \"is moved by faith to assent\" to revealed testimony \"is conscious of a continued miracle in his own person, which subverts all principles of his understanding, and gives him a determination to believe what is most contrary to custom and experience.\" Hume writes that \"All the testimony whichever was really given for any miracle, or ever will be given, is a subject of derision.\"\nAs a historian of England.\nFrom 1754 to 1762 Hume published \"The History of England\", a six-volume work, that extends (according to its subtitle) \"From the Invasion of Julius Caesar to the Revolution in 1688.\" Inspired by Voltaire's sense of the breadth of history, Hume widened the focus of the field away from merely kings, parliaments, and armies, to literature and science as well. He argued that the quest for liberty was the highest standard for judging the past, and concluded that after considerable fluctuation, England at the time of his writing had achieved \"the most entire system of liberty that was ever known amongst mankind\". It \"must be regarded as an event of cultural importance. In its own day, moreover, it was an innovation, soaring high above its very few predecessors.\" Hume's \"History of England\" made him famous as a historian before he was ever considered a serious philosopher. In this work, Hume uses history to tell the story of the rise of England and what led to its greatness and the disastrous effects that religion has had on its progress. For Hume, the history of England's rise may give a template for others who would also like to rise to its current greatness.\nHume's \"The History of England\" was profoundly impacted by his Scottish background. The science of sociology, which is rooted in Scottish thinking of the eighteenth century, had never before been applied to British philosophical history. Because of his Scottish background, Hume was able to bring an outsider's lens to English history that the insulated English whigs lacked.\nHume's coverage of the political upheavals of the 17th century relied in large part on the Earl of Clarendon's \"History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in England\" (1646\u201369). Generally, Hume took a moderate royalist position and considered revolution unnecessary to achieve necessary reform. Hume was considered a Tory historian, and emphasised religious differences more than constitutional issues. Laird Okie explains that \"Hume preached the virtues of political moderation, but\u00a0... it was moderation with an anti-Whig, pro-royalist coloring.\" For \"Hume shared the\u00a0... Tory belief that the Stuarts were no more high-handed than their Tudor predecessors\". \"Even though Hume wrote with an anti-Whig animus, it is, paradoxically, correct to regard the \"History\" as an establishment work, one which implicitly endorsed the ruling oligarchy\".\nHistorians have debated whether Hume posited a universal unchanging human nature, or allowed for evolution and development.\nThe debate between Tory and the Whig historians can be seen in the initial reception to Hume's \"History of England\". The whig-dominated world of 1754 overwhelmingly disapproved of Hume's take on English history. In later editions of the book, Hume worked to \"soften or expunge many villainous whig strokes which had crept into it.\"\nHume did not consider himself a pure Tory. Before 1745, he was more akin to an \"independent whig.\" In 1748, he described himself as \"a whig, though a very skeptical one.\" This description of himself as in between whiggism and toryism, helps one understand that his \"History of England\" should be read as his attempt to work out his own philosophy of history.\nRobert Roth argues that Hume's histories display his biases against Presbyterians and Puritans. Roth says his anti-Whig pro-monarchy position diminished the influence of his work, and that his emphasis on politics and religion led to a neglect of social and economic history.\nHume was an early cultural historian of science. His short biographies of leading scientists explored the process of scientific change. He developed new ways of seeing scientists in the context of their times by looking at how they interacted with society and each other. He covers over forty scientists, with special attention paid to Francis Bacon, Robert Boyle, and Isaac Newton. Hume particularly praised William Harvey, writing about his treatise of the circulation of the blood: \"Harvey is entitled to the glory of having made, by reasoning alone, without any mixture of accident, a capital discovery in one of the most important branches of science.\"\nThe \"History\" became a best-seller and made Hume a wealthy man who no longer had to take up salaried work for others. It was influential for nearly a century, despite competition from imitations by Smollett (1757), Goldsmith (1771) and others. By 1894, there were at least 50 editions as well as abridgements for students, and illustrated pocket editions, probably produced specifically for women.\nPolitical theory.\nHume's writings have been described as largely seminal to conservative theory, and he is considered a founding father of conservatism. Many of his ideas, such as limited government, private property when there is scarcity, and constitutionalism, are first principles of conservative political parties around the world. Thomas Jefferson banned the \"History\" from University of Virginia, feeling that it had \"spread universal toryism over the land.\" By comparison, Samuel Johnson thought Hume to be \"a Tory by chance [...] for he has no principle. If he is anything, he is a Hobbist.\" A major concern of Hume's political philosophy is the importance of the rule of law. He also stresses throughout his political essays the importance of moderation in politics, public spirit, and regard to the community.\nThroughout the period of the American Revolution, Hume had varying views. For instance, in 1768 he encouraged total revolt on the part of the Americans. In 1775, he became certain that a revolution would take place and said that he believed in the American principle and wished the British government would let them be. Hume's influence on some of the Founders can be seen in Benjamin Franklin's suggestion at the Philadelphia Convention of 1787 that no high office in any branch of government should receive a salary, which is a suggestion Hume had made in his emendation of James Harrington's \"Oceana\".\nThe legacy of religious civil war in 18th-century Scotland, combined with the relatively recent memory of the 1715 and 1745 Jacobite risings, had fostered in Hume a distaste for enthusiasm and factionalism. These appeared to him to threaten the fragile and nascent political and social stability of a country that was deeply politically and religiously divided. Hume thought that society is best governed by a general and impartial system of laws; he is less concerned about the form of government that administers these laws, so long as it does so fairly. However, he also clarified that a republic must produce laws, while \"monarchy, when absolute, contains even something repugnant to law.\"\nHume expressed suspicion of attempts to reform society in ways that departed from long-established custom, and he counselled peoples not to resist their governments except in cases of the most egregious tyranny. However, he resisted aligning himself with either of Britain's two political parties, the Whigs and the Tories:\nMy views of \"things\" are more conformable to Whig principles; my representations of \"persons\" to Tory prejudices.\nCanadian philosopher Neil McArthur writes that Hume believed that we should try to balance our demands for liberty with the need for strong authority, without sacrificing either. McArthur characterises Hume as a \"precautionary conservative,\" whose actions would have been \"determined by prudential concerns about the consequences of change, which often demand we ignore our own principles about what is ideal or even legitimate.\" Hume supported the liberty of the press, and was sympathetic to democracy, when suitably constrained. American historian Douglass Adair has argued that Hume was a major inspiration for James Madison's writings, and the essay \"Federalist No. 10\" in particular.\nHume offered his view on the best type of society in an essay titled \"Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth\", which lays out what he thought was the best form of government. He hoped that, \"in some future age, an opportunity might be afforded of reducing the theory to practice, either by a dissolution of some old government, or by the combination of men to form a new one, in some distant part of the world\". He defended a strict separation of powers, decentralisation, extending the franchise to anyone who held property of value and limiting the power of the clergy. The system of the Swiss militia was proposed as the best form of protection. Elections were to take place on an annual basis and representatives were to be unpaid. Political philosophers Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey, writing of Hume's thoughts about \"the wise statesman\", note that he \"will bear a reverence to what carries the marks of age.\" Also, if he wishes to improve a constitution, his innovations will take account of the \"ancient fabric\", in order not to disturb society.\nIn the political analysis of philosopher George Holland Sabine, the scepticism of Hume extended to the doctrine of government by consent. He notes that \"allegiance is a habit enforced by education and consequently as much a part of human nature as any other motive.\"\nIn the 1770s, Hume was critical of British policies toward the American colonies and advocated for American independence. He wrote in 1771 that \"our union with America\u2026in the nature of things, cannot long subsist.\"\nContributions to economic thought.\nHume expressed his economic views in his \"Political Discourses\", which were incorporated in \"Essays and Treatises\" as Part II of \"Essays, Moral and Political\". To what extent he was influenced by Adam Smith is difficult to stress; however, both of them had similar principles supported from historical events. At the same time Hume did not demonstrate concrete system of economic theory which could be observed in Smith's \"Wealth of Nations\". However, he introduced several new ideas around which the \"classical economics\" of the 18th century was built. Through his discussions on politics, Hume developed many ideas that are prevalent in the field of economics. This includes ideas on private property, inflation, and foreign trade. Referring to his essay \"Of the Balance of Trade\", economist Paul Krugman (2012) has remarked that \"David Hume created what I consider the first true economic model.\"\nIn contrast to Locke, Hume believes that private property is not a natural right. Hume argues it is justified, because resources are limited. Private property would be an unjustified, \"idle ceremonial,\" if all goods were unlimited and available freely. Hume also believed in an unequal distribution of property, because perfect equality would destroy the ideas of thrift and industry. Perfect equality would thus lead to impoverishment.\nDavid Hume anticipated modern monetarism. First, Hume contributed to the theory of quantity and of interest rate. Hume has been credited with being the first to prove that, on an abstract level, there is no quantifiable amount of nominal money that a country needs to thrive. He understood that there was a difference between \"nominal\" and \"real\" money.\nSecond, Hume has a theory of causation which fits in with the Chicago-school \"black box\" approach. According to Hume, cause and effect are related only through correlation. Hume shared the belief with modern monetarists that changes in the supply of money can affect consumption and investment.\nLastly, Hume was a vocal advocate of a stable private sector, though also having some non-monetarist aspects to his economic philosophy. Having a stated preference for rising prices, for instance, Hume considered government debt to be a sort of substitute for actual money, referring to such debt as \"a kind of paper credit.\" He also believed in heavy taxation, believing that it increases effort. Hume's economic approach evidently resembles his other philosophies, in that he does not choose one side indefinitely, but sees gray in the situation\nInfluence.\nDue to Hume's vast influence on contemporary philosophy, a large number of approaches in contemporary philosophy and cognitive science are today called \"Humean.\"\nThe writings of Thomas Reid, a Scottish philosopher and contemporary of Hume, were often critical of Hume's scepticism. Reid formulated his \"common sense\" philosophy, in part, as a reaction against Hume's views.\nHume influenced, and was influenced by, the Christian philosopher Joseph Butler. Hume was impressed by Butler's way of thinking about religion, and Butler may well have been influenced by Hume's writings.\nAttention to Hume's philosophical works grew after the German philosopher Immanuel Kant, in his \"Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics\" (1783), credited Hume with awakening him from his \"dogmatic slumber.\"\nAccording to Arthur Schopenhauer, \"there is more to be learned from each page of David Hume than from the collected philosophical works of Hegel, Herbart and Schleiermacher taken together.\"\nA. J. Ayer, while introducing his classic exposition of logical positivism in 1936, claimed:The views which are put forward in this treatise derive from\u2026doctrines\u2026which are themselves the logical outcome of the empiricism of Berkeley and David Hume.Albert Einstein, in 1915, wrote that he was inspired by Hume's positivism when formulating his theory of special relativity.\nHume's problem of induction was also of fundamental importance to the philosophy of Karl Popper. In his autobiography, \"Unended Quest\", he wrote: \"Knowledge\u00a0... is \"objective\"; and it is hypothetical or conjectural. This way of looking at the problem made it possible for me to reformulate Hume's \"problem of induction\".\" This insight resulted in Popper's major work \"The Logic of Scientific Discovery\". In his \"Conjectures and Refutations\", he wrote:\nI approached the problem of induction through Hume. Hume, I felt, was perfectly right in pointing out that induction cannot be logically justified.\nHume's rationalism in religious subjects influenced, via German-Scottish theologian Johann Joachim Spalding, the German neology school and rational theology, and contributed to the transformation of German theology in the age of enlightenment. Hume pioneered a comparative history of religion, tried to explain various rites and traditions as being based on deception and challenged various aspects of rational and natural theology, such as the argument from design.\nDanish theologian and philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard adopted \"Hume's suggestion that the role of reason is not to make us wise but to reveal our ignorance,\" though taking it as a reason for the necessity of religious faith, or \"fideism\". The \"fact that Christianity is contrary to reason\u2026is the necessary precondition for true faith.\" Political theorist Isaiah Berlin, who has also pointed out the similarities between the arguments of Hume and Kierkegaard against rational theology, has written about Hume's influence on what Berlin calls the \"counter-Enlightenment\" and on German anti-rationalism. Berlin has also once said of Hume that \"no man has influenced the history of philosophy to a deeper or more disturbing degree.\"\nAccording to philosopher Jerry Fodor, Hume's \"Treatise\" is \"the founding document of cognitive science.\"\nHume engaged with contemporary intellectuals including Jean-Jacques Rousseau, James Boswell, and Adam Smith (who acknowledged Hume's influence on his economics and political philosophy).\nMorris and Brown (2019) write that Hume is \"generally regarded as one of the most important philosophers to write in English.\"\nIn September 2020, the David Hume Tower, a University of Edinburgh building, was renamed to 40 George Square; this was following a campaign led by students of the university to rename it, in objection to Hume's writings related to race."}
{"id": "7927", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7927", "title": "DES (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "7928", "revid": "1022146648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7928", "title": "Dalton Trumbo", "text": "James Dalton Trumbo (December 9, 1905 \u2013 September 10, 1976) was an American screenwriter and novelist who scripted many award-winning films, including \"Roman Holiday\" (1953), \"Exodus\", \"Spartacus\" (both 1960), and \"Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo\" (1944). One of the Hollywood Ten, he refused to testify before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) in 1947 during the committee's investigation of Communist influences in the motion picture industry.\nTrumbo, the other members of the Hollywood Ten, and hundreds of other professionals in the industry were blacklisted by Hollywood. He was, however, able to continue working clandestinely on major films, writing under pseudonyms or other authors' names. His uncredited work won two Academy Awards for Best Story: for \"Roman Holiday\" (1953), which was presented to a front writer, and for \"The Brave One\" (1956), which was awarded to a pseudonym used by Trumbo. When he was given public screen credit for both \"Exodus\" and \"Spartacus\" in 1960, it marked the beginning of the end of the Hollywood Blacklist for Trumbo and other affected screenwriters. He finally was given full credit by the Writers' Guild for \"Roman Holiday\" in 2011, nearly 60 years after the fact.\nEarly life.\nTrumbo was born in Montrose, Colorado, the son of Maud (n\u00e9e Tillery) and Orus Bonham Trumbo. His family moved to Grand Junction in 1908. He was proud of his paternal immigrant ancestor, a Protestant of Swiss origin named Jacob Trumbo, who settled in the colony of Virginia in 1736. Trumbo graduated from Grand Junction High School. While still in high school, he worked for Walter Walker as a cub reporter for the \"Grand Junction Daily Sentinel,\" covering courts, the high school, the mortuary and civic organizations. He attended the University of Colorado at Boulder in 1924 and 1925, working as a reporter for the \"Boulder Daily Camera\" and contributing to the campus humor magazine, the yearbook, and the campus newspaper. He was a member of Delta Tau Delta International Fraternity.\nFor nine years after his father died, Trumbo worked the night shift wrapping bread at a Los Angeles bakery, and attended the University of California, Los Angeles (1926) and the University of Southern California (1928\u20131930). During this time, he wrote movie reviews, 88 short stories, and six novels, all of which were rejected for publication.\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nTrumbo began his professional writing career in the early 1930s, when several of his articles and stories were published in mainstream magazines, including \"McCall's\", \"Vanity Fair\", the \"Hollywood Spectator\" and \"The Saturday Evening Post\". Trumbo was hired as managing editor of the \"Hollywood Spectator\" in 1934. Later he left the magazine to become a reader in the story department at Warner Bros. studio.\nHis first published novel, \"Eclipse\" (1935), was released during the Great Depression. Writing in the social realist style, Trumbo drew on his years in Grand Junction to portray a town and its people. The book was controversial in his hometown, where many people took issue with his fictional portrayal.\nTrumbo started working in movies in 1937 but continued writing prose. His anti-war novel \"Johnny Got His Gun\" won one of the early National Book Awards: the Most Original Book of 1939. It was inspired by an article Trumbo had read several years earlier: an account of a hospital visit by the Prince of Wales to a Canadian soldier who had lost all his limbs in World War I.\nDuring the late 1930s and early 1940s, Trumbo became one of Hollywood's highest-paid screenwriters, at about $4,000 per week while on assignment, and earning as much as $80,000 in one year. He worked on such films as \"Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo\" (1944), \"Our Vines Have Tender Grapes\" (1945), and \"Kitty Foyle\" (1940), for which he was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay.\nPolitical advocacy and blacklisting.\nAligned with the Communist Party in the United States before the 1940s, Trumbo was an isolationist. He joined the Communist Party in 1943, and remained active until 1947. He reaffiliated himself with the party in 1954. His novel \"The Remarkable Andrew\" featured the ghost of President Andrew Jackson appearing to caution the United States against getting involved in World War II and in support of the Nazi-Soviet pact. In a review of the book, \"Time\" magazine wise-cracked, \"General Jackson's opinions need surprise no one who has observed George Washington and Abraham Lincoln zealously following the Communist Party Line in recent years.\"\nShortly after the Operation Barbarossa, the German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, Trumbo and his publisher decided to suspend reprinting \"Johnny Got His Gun\" until the end of the war. During the war, Trumbo received letters from individuals \"denouncing Jews\" and using \"Johnny\" to support their arguments for \"an immediate negotiated peace\" with Nazi Germany; Trumbo reported these correspondents to the FBI. Trumbo regretted this decision, which he called \"foolish\". After two FBI agents showed up at his home, he understood that \"their interest lay not in the letters but in me\".\nIn a 1946 article titled \"The Russian Menace\" published in Rob Wagner's \"Script Magazine\", Trumbo wrote from the perspective of a post-World War II Russian citizen. He argued that Russians were likely fearful of the mass of U.S. military power that surrounded them, at a time when any sympathetic view toward Communist countries was viewed with suspicion. He ended the article by stating, \"If I were a Russian ... I would be alarmed, and I would petition my government to take measures at once against what would seem an almost certain blow aimed at my existence. This is how it must appear in Russia today\". He argued that the U.S. was a \"menace\" to Russia, rather than the more popular American view of Russia as the \"red menace\". According to anti-Communist author Kenneth Billingsley, Trumbo had written in \"The Daily Worker\" that Communist influence in Hollywood had prevented films from being made from anti-Communist books, such as Arthur Koestler's \"Darkness at Noon\" and \"The Yogi and the Commissar\".\nWilliam R. Wilkerson, publisher and founder of \"The Hollywood Reporter\", published a July 29, 1946 \"TradeView\" column entitled \"A Vote For Joe Stalin\". It named Trumbo and several others as Communist sympathizers, the first persons identified on what became known as \"Billy's Blacklist\". In October 1947, drawing upon these names, the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) summoned Trumbo and nine others to testify for their investigation as to whether Communist agents and sympathizers had surreptitiously planted propaganda in U.S. films. The writers refused to give information about their own or any other person's involvement and were convicted for contempt of Congress. They appealed the conviction to the Supreme Court on First Amendment grounds and lost. Trumbo served eleven months in the federal penitentiary in Ashland, Kentucky in 1950. In the 1976 documentary \"Hollywood On Trial\", Trumbo said: \"As far as I was concerned, it was a completely just verdict. I had contempt for that Congress and have had contempt for it ever since. And on the basis of guilt or innocence, I could never really complain very much. That this was a crime or misdemeanor was the complaint, my complaint.\"\nThe MPAA issued a statement that Trumbo and his compatriots would not be permitted to work in the industry unless they disavowed Communism under oath. After completing his sentence, Trumbo sold his ranch and moved his family to Mexico City with Hugo Butler and his wife Jean Rouverol, who had also been blacklisted. In Mexico, Trumbo wrote 30 scripts (under pseudonyms) for B-movie studios such as King Brothers Productions. In the case of \"Gun Crazy\" (1950), adapted from a short story by MacKinlay Kantor, Kantor agreed to be the front for Trumbo's screenplay. Trumbo's role in the screenplay was not revealed until 1992.\nDuring this blacklist period, Trumbo also wrote \"The Brave One\" (1956) for the King Brothers. Like \"Roman Holiday\", it received an Academy Award for Best Story he could not claim. The script was credited to Robert Rich, a name borrowed from a nephew of the producers. Trumbo recalled earning an average fee of $1,750 per film for 18 screenplays written in two years and said, \"None was very good\".\nHe published \"The Devil in the Book\", an analysis of the conviction of 14 California Smith Act defendants, in 1956. The statute set criminal penalties for advocating the overthrow of the U.S. government and required all non-citizen adult residents to register with the government.\nLater career.\nGradually the blacklist weakened. With the support of director Otto Preminger, Trumbo was credited for the screenplay of the film \"Exodus\" (1960), adapted from the novel of the same name by Leon Uris. Shortly thereafter, actor Kirk Douglas announced Trumbo had written the screenplay for Stanley Kubrick's film \"Spartacus\" (also 1960), adapted from the novel by Howard Fast. With these actions, Preminger and Douglas helped end the power of the blacklist. Trumbo was reinstated into the Writers Guild of America, West and was credited on all subsequent scripts. The guild finally gave him full credit for the script of the 1953 film \"Roman Holiday\" in 2011. Trumbo directed the 1971 film adaptation of his novel \"Johnny Got His Gun\", starring Timothy Bottoms, Diane Varsi, Jason Robards and Donald Sutherland. One of the last films Trumbo wrote, \"Executive Action\" (1973), was based on the Kennedy assassination. The Academy officially recognized Trumbo as the winner of the Oscar for the 1956 film \"The Brave One\" in 1975, presenting him with a statuette.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1938, Trumbo married Cleo Fincher, who was born in Fresno, California on July 17, 1916 and had moved with her divorced mother and her brother and sister to Los Angeles. The Trumbos had three children: Nikola Trumbo (1939), who became a psychotherapist; Christopher Trumbo (1940), a filmmaker and screenwriter who became an expert on the Hollywood blacklist; and Melissa Trumbo (1945), known as Mitzi, a photographer. Mitzi Trumbo dated comedian Steve Martin when they were both in their early 20s, which is recounted in Martin's 2007 book \"Born Standing Up\". Martin wrote of her: \"Mitzi became my official photographer, and she snapped dozens of rolls of film, all to find the perfect publicity photo.\"\nCleo Trumbo died of natural causes at the age of 93 on October 9, 2009 at the home she shared with Mitzi Trumbo in Los Altos, California.\nDeath and legacy.\nTrumbo died in Los Angeles of a heart attack at the age of 70 on September 10, 1976. He donated his body to scientific research.\nIn 1993, Trumbo was posthumously awarded the Academy Award for writing \"Roman Holiday\" (1953). The screen credit and award were previously given to Ian McLellan Hunter, who had been a front for Trumbo. A new statue was made for this award because Hunter's son refused to hand over the one his father had received.\nIn 2003, Christopher Trumbo mounted an Off-Broadway play based on his father's letters called \"Trumbo: Red, White and Blacklisted\", in which a wide variety of actors played his father during the run, including Nathan Lane, Tim Robbins, Brian Dennehy, Ed Harris, Chris Cooper and Gore Vidal. He adapted it as the documentary \"Trumbo\" (2007), which added archival footage and new interviews.\nA dramatization of Trumbo's life, also called \"Trumbo\", was released in November 2015. It starred Bryan Cranston as the screenwriter and was directed by Jay Roach. For his portrayal of Trumbo, Cranston was nominated for Best Actor at the 88th Academy Awards.\nThe moving image collection of Trumbo is held at the Academy Film Archive and consists primarily of extensive 35 mm production materials relating to the 1971 anti-war film \"Johnny Got His Gun\". More than a hundred years after his birth, Trumbo was honored by the installation of a statue of him in front of the Avalon Theater on Main Street in Grand Junction, Colorado, his home town. He was depicted writing a screenplay in a bathtub.\nWorks.\nSelected film works\nNovels, plays and essays\nNon-fiction"}
{"id": "7929", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7929", "title": "Differentiability", "text": ""}
{"id": "7930", "revid": "39854622", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7930", "title": "Delaware", "text": "Delaware ( ) is a state in the Mid-Atlantic region of the United States, bordering Maryland to its south and west; Pennsylvania to its north; and New Jersey and the Atlantic Ocean to its east. The state takes its name from the nearby Delaware River named after Thomas West, 3rd Baron De La Warr, an English nobleman and Virginia's first colonial governor.\nDelaware occupies the northeastern portion of the Delmarva Peninsula and some islands and territory within the Delaware River. It is the second-smallest and sixth-least populous state, but also the sixth-most densely populated. Delaware's largest city is Wilmington, while the state capital is Dover, the second-largest city in the state. The state is divided into three counties, having the lowest number of any state; from north to south, they are New Castle County, Kent County, and Sussex County. While the southern two counties have historically been predominantly agricultural, New Castle is more urbanized. In a similar vein to Maryland, Delaware's geography, culture, and history combine elements of the Mid-Atlantic, Northeastern, and Southern regions of the country.\nBefore its coastline was explored by Europeans in the 16th century, Delaware was inhabited by several groups of Native Americans, including the Lenape in the north and Nanticoke in the south. It was initially colonized by Dutch traders at Zwaanendael, near the present town of Lewes, in 1631. Delaware was one of the 13 colonies participating in the American Revolution. On December 7, 1787, Delaware became the first state to ratify the Constitution of the United States, and has since been known as \"The First State\". Since the turn of the 20th century, Delaware is also a \"de facto\" onshore corporate haven, in which by virtue of its corporate laws, the state is the domicile of over 50% of all NYSE-listed business and 60% of the \"Fortune\" 500.\nToponymy.\nThe state was named after the Delaware River, which in turn derived its name from Thomas West, 3rd Baron De La Warr (1577\u20131618) who was the ruling governor of the Colony of Virginia at the time Europeans first explored the river. The Delaware people, a name used by Europeans for Lenape people indigenous to the Delaware Valley, also derive their name from the same source.\nThe name \"de La Warr\" is from Sussex and of Anglo-French origin.\n It came probably from a Norman lieu-dit \"La Guerre\". This toponymic could derive from Latin \"ager\", from the Breton \"gwern\" or from the Late Latin \"varectum\" (fallow). The toponyms Gara, Gare, Gaire (the sound [\u00e4] often mutated in [\u00e6]) also appear in old texts cited by Lucien Musset, where the word \"ga(i)ra\" means gore. It could also be linked with a patronymic from the Old Norse \"verr\".\nGeography.\nDelaware is long and ranges from to across, totaling , making it the second-smallest state in the United States after Rhode Island. Delaware is bounded to the north by Pennsylvania; to the east by the Delaware River, Delaware Bay, New Jersey and the Atlantic Ocean; and to the west and south by Maryland. Small portions of Delaware are also situated on the eastern side of the Delaware River sharing land boundaries with New Jersey. The state of Delaware, together with the Eastern Shore counties of Maryland and two counties of Virginia, form the Delmarva Peninsula, which stretches down the Mid-Atlantic Coast.\nThe definition of the northern boundary of the state is unusual. Most of the boundary between Delaware and Pennsylvania was originally defined by an arc extending from the cupola of the courthouse in the city of New Castle. This boundary is often referred to as the Twelve-Mile Circle. Although the Twelve-Mile Circle is often claimed to be the only territorial boundary in the U.S. that is a true arc, the Mexican boundary with Texas includes several arcs, and many cities in the South (such as Plains, Georgia) also have circular boundaries.\nThis border extends all the way east to the low-tide mark on the New Jersey shore, then continues south along the shoreline until it again reaches the arc in the south; then the boundary continues in a more conventional way in the middle of the main channel (thalweg) of the Delaware River. To the west, a portion of the arc extends past the easternmost edge of Maryland. The remaining western border runs slightly east of due south from its intersection with the arc. The Wedge of land between the northwest part of the arc and the Maryland border was claimed by both Delaware and Pennsylvania until 1921, when Delaware's claim was confirmed.\nTopography.\nDelaware is on a level plain, with the lowest mean elevation of any state in the nation. Its highest elevation, located at Ebright Azimuth, near Concord High School, is less than above sea level. The northernmost part of the state is part of the Piedmont Plateau with hills and rolling surfaces. The Atlantic Seaboard fall line approximately follows the Robert Kirkwood Highway between Newark and Wilmington; south of this road is the Atlantic Coastal Plain with flat, sandy, and, in some parts, swampy ground. A ridge about high extends along the western boundary of the state and separates the watersheds that feed Delaware River and Bay to the east and the Chesapeake Bay to the west.\nClimate.\nSince almost all of Delaware is a part of the Atlantic coastal plain, the effects of the ocean moderate its climate. The state lies in the humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") zone. Despite its small size (roughly from its northernmost to southernmost points), there is significant variation in mean temperature and amount of snowfall between Sussex County and New Castle County. Moderated by the Atlantic Ocean and Delaware Bay, the southern portion of the state has a milder climate and a longer growing season than the northern portion of the state. Delaware's all-time record high of was recorded at Millsboro on July 21, 1930. The all-time record low of was also recorded at Millsboro, on January 17, 1893. The hardiness zones are 7a and 7b.\nEnvironment.\nThe transitional climate of Delaware supports a wide variety of vegetation. In the northern third of the state are found Northeastern coastal forests and mixed oak forests typical of the northeastern United States. In the southern two-thirds of the state are found Middle Atlantic coastal forests. Trap Pond State Park, along with areas in other parts of Sussex County, for example, support the northernmost stands of bald cypress trees in North America.\nEnvironmental management.\nDelaware provides government subsidy support for the clean-up of property \"lightly contaminated\" by hazardous waste, the proceeds for which come from a tax on wholesale petroleum sales.\nHistory.\nNative Americans.\nBefore Delaware was settled by European colonists, the area was home to the Eastern Algonquian tribes known as the Unami Lenape, or Delaware, who lived mostly along the coast, and the Nanticoke who occupied much of the southern Delmarva Peninsula. John Smith also shows two Iroquoian tribes, the Kuskarawock and Tockwogh, living north of the Nanticoke\u2014they may have held small portions of land in the western part of the state before migrating across the Chesapeake Bay. The Kuskarawocks were most likely the Tuscarora.\nThe Unami Lenape in the Delaware Valley were closely related to Munsee Lenape tribes along the Hudson River. They had a settled hunting and agricultural society, and they rapidly became middlemen in an increasingly frantic fur trade with their ancient enemy, the Minqua or Susquehannock. With the loss of their lands on the Delaware River and the destruction of the Minqua by the Iroquois of the Five Nations in the 1670s, the remnants of the Lenape who wished to remain identified as such left the region and moved over the Alleghany Mountains by the mid-18th century. Generally, those who did not relocate out of the state of Delaware were baptized, became Christian and were grouped together with other persons of color in official records and in the minds of their non-Native American neighbors.\nColonial Delaware.\nThe Dutch were the first Europeans to settle in present-day Delaware in the middle region by establishing a trading post at Zwaanendael, near the site of Lewes in 1631. Within a year all the settlers were killed in a dispute with area Native American tribes. In 1638 New Sweden, a Swedish trading post and colony, was established at Fort Christina (now in Wilmington) by Peter Minuit at the head of a group of Swedes, Finns and Dutch. The colony of New Sweden lasted 17 years. In 1651 the Dutch, reinvigorated by the leadership of Peter Stuyvesant, established a fort at present-day New Castle, and in 1655 they conquered the New Sweden colony, annexing it into the Dutch New Netherland. Only nine years later, in 1664, the Dutch were conquered by a fleet of English ships by Sir Robert Carr under the direction of James, the Duke of York. Fighting off a prior claim by Cecil Calvert, 2nd Baron Baltimore, Proprietor of Maryland, the Duke passed his somewhat dubious ownership on to William Penn in 1682. Penn strongly desired access to the sea for his Pennsylvania province and leased what then came to be known as the \"Lower Counties on the Delaware\" from the Duke.\nPenn established representative government and briefly combined his two possessions under one General Assembly in 1682. However, by 1704 the Province of Pennsylvania had grown so large their representatives wanted to make decisions without the assent of the Lower Counties, and the two groups of representatives began meeting on their own, one at Philadelphia, and the other at New Castle. Penn and his heirs remained proprietors of both and always appointed the same person Governor for their Province of Pennsylvania and their territory of the Lower Counties. The fact that Delaware and Pennsylvania shared the same governor was not unique. From 1703 to 1738 New York and New Jersey shared a governor. Massachusetts and New Hampshire also shared a governor for some time.\nDependent in early years on indentured labor, Delaware imported more slaves as the number of English immigrants decreased with better economic conditions in England. The colony became a slave society and cultivated tobacco as a cash crop, although English immigrants continued to arrive.\nAmerican Revolution.\nLike the other middle colonies, the Lower Counties on the Delaware initially showed little enthusiasm for a break with Britain. The citizenry had a good relationship with the Proprietary government, and generally were allowed more independence of action in their Colonial Assembly than in other colonies. Merchants at the port of Wilmington had trading ties with the British.\nSo it was that New Castle lawyer Thomas McKean denounced the Stamp Act in the strongest terms, and Kent County native John Dickinson became the \"Penman of the Revolution.\" Anticipating the Declaration of Independence, Patriot leaders Thomas McKean and Caesar Rodney convinced the Colonial Assembly to declare itself separated from British and Pennsylvania rule on June 15, 1776. The person best representing Delaware's majority, George Read, could not bring himself to vote for a Declaration of Independence. Only the dramatic overnight ride of Caesar Rodney gave the delegation the votes needed to cast Delaware's vote for independence.\nInitially led by John Haslet, Delaware provided one of the premier regiments in the Continental Army, known as the \"Delaware Blues\" and nicknamed the \"Blue Hen's Chicks\". In August 1777 General Sir William Howe led a British army through Delaware on his way to a victory at the Battle of Brandywine and capture of the city of Philadelphia. The only real engagement on Delaware soil was the Battle of Cooch's Bridge, fought on September 3, 1777, at Cooch's Bridge in New Castle County, although there was a minor Loyalist rebellion in 1778.\nFollowing the Battle of Brandywine, Wilmington was occupied by the British, and State President John McKinly was taken prisoner. The British remained in control of the Delaware River for much of the rest of the war, disrupting commerce and providing encouragement to an active Loyalist portion of the population, particularly in Sussex County. Because the British promised slaves of rebels freedom for fighting with them, escaped slaves flocked north to join their lines.\nFollowing the American Revolution, statesmen from Delaware were among the leading proponents of a strong central United States with equal representation for each state.\nSlavery and race.\nMany colonial settlers came to Delaware from Maryland and Virginia, where the population had been increasing rapidly. The economies of these colonies were chiefly based on labor-intensive tobacco and increasingly dependent on African slaves because of a decline in working class immigrants from England. Most of the English colonists had arrived as indentured servants (contracted for a fixed period to pay for their passage), and in the early years the line between servant and slave was fluid.\nMost of the free African-American families in Delaware before the Revolution had migrated from Maryland to find more affordable land. They were descendants chiefly of relationships or marriages between white servant women and enslaved, servant or free African or African-American men. Under slavery law, children took the social status of their mothers, so children born to white women were free, regardless of their paternity, just as children born to enslaved women were born into slavery. As the flow of indentured laborers to the colony decreased with improving economic conditions in England, more slaves were imported for labor and the caste lines hardened.\nBy the end of the colonial period, the number of enslaved people in Delaware began to decline. Shifts in the agriculture economy from tobacco to mixed farming resulted in less need for slaves' labor. In addition local Methodists and Quakers encouraged slaveholders to free their slaves following the American Revolution, and many did so in a surge of individual manumissions for idealistic reasons. By 1810 three-quarters of all blacks in Delaware were free. When John Dickinson freed his slaves in 1777, he was Delaware's largest slave owner with 37 slaves. By 1860, the largest slaveholder owned 16 slaves.\nAlthough attempts to abolish slavery failed by narrow margins in the legislature, in practical terms the state had mostly ended the practice. By the 1860 census on the verge of the Civil War, 91.7% of the black population were free; 1,798 were slaves, as compared to 19,829 \"free colored persons\".\nAn independent black denomination was chartered in 1813 by freed slave Peter Spencer as the \"Union Church of Africans\". This followed the 1793 establishment in Philadelphia of the African Methodist Episcopal Church by Richard Allen, which had ties to the Methodist Episcopal Church until 1816. Spencer built a church in Wilmington for the new denomination. This was renamed as the African Union First Colored Methodist Protestant Church and Connection, more commonly known as the A.U.M.P. Church. In 1814, Spencer called for the first annual gathering, known as the Big August Quarterly, which continues to draw members of this denomination and their descendants together in a religious and cultural festival.\nDelaware voted against secession on January 3, 1861, and so remained in the Union. While most Delaware citizens who fought in the war served in the regiments of the state, some served in companies on the Confederate side in Maryland and Virginia Regiments. Delaware is notable for being the only slave state from which no Confederate regiments or militia groups were assembled. Delaware essentially freed the few slaves who were still in bondage shortly after the Civil War but rejected the 13th, 14th, and 15th Amendments to the Constitution; the 13th Amendment was rejected on February 8, 1865, the 14th Amendment was rejected on February 8, 1867, and the 15th Amendment was rejected on March 18, 1869. Delaware officially ratified the 13th, 14th, and 15th amendments on February 12, 1901.\nReconstruction and Industrialization.\nAfter the Civil War, Democratic governments led by the state's Bourbon aristocracy continued to dominate the state and imposed an explicitly white supremacist regime in the state. The Democratic legislatures declared blacks second-class citizens in 1866 and restricted their voting rights despite the Fifteenth Amendment, ensuring continued Democratic success throughout most of the nineteenth century.\nBeginning in the late nineteenth century, the Wilmington area grew into a manufacturing center. Investment in manufacturing in the city grew from $5.5 million in 1860 to $44 million in 1900. The most notable manufacturer in the state was the Du Pont Company. Because of Wilmington's growth, local politicians from the city and New Castle County pressured the state government to adopt a new constitution providing the north with more representation. However, the subsequent 1897 constitution did not proportionally represent the north and continued to give the southern counties disproportionate influence. \nAs manufacturing expanded, businesses became major players in state affairs and funders of politicians through families such as the Du Ponts. Republican John Addicks attempted to buy a US Senate seat multiple times in a rivalry with the Du Ponts until the passage of the Seventeenth Amendment. The allegiance of industries with the Republican party allowed them to gain control of the state's governorship throughout most of the twentieth century. The GOP ensured blacks could vote because of their general support for Republicans and thus undid restrictions on black suffrage.\nDelaware benefited greatly from World War I because of the state's large gunpowder industry. The Du Pont Company, the most dominant business in the state by WWI, produced an estimated 40% of all gunpowder used by the Allies during the war. It produced nylon in the state after the war and began investments into General Motors. Additionally, the company invested heavily in the expansion of public schools in the state and colleges such as the University of Delaware in the 1910s and 1920s. This included primary and secondary schools for blacks and women. Delaware suffered less during the Great Depression than other states, but the depression spurred further migration from the rural south to urban areas.\nWorld War II to present.\nLike in World War I, the state enjoyed a big stimulus to its gunpowder and shipyard industries in World War II. New job opportunities during and after the war in the Wilmington area coaxed African Americans from the southern counties to move to the city. The proportion of blacks constituting the city's population rose from 15% in 1950 to over 50% by 1980. The surge of black migrants to the north sparked white flight in which middle class whites moved from the city to suburban areas, leading to general segregation of Delaware's society. In the 1940s and 1950s, the state attempted to integrate its schools. The University of Delaware admitted its first black student in 1948, and local courts ruled that primary schools had to be integrated. Delaware's integration efforts partially inspired the US Supreme Court's decision in Brown v. Board of Education.\nHowever, integration only encouraged more white flight, and poor economic conditions for the black population led to some violence during the 1960s. Riots broke out in Wilmington in 1967 and again in 1968 in response to the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr after which the National Guard occupied the city for nine months to prevent further violence.\nSince WWII, the state has been generally economically prosperous and enjoyed relatively high per capita income because of its location between major cities like Philadelphia, New York, and Washington, DC. Its population grew rapidly, particularly in the suburbs in the north where New Castle county became an extension of the Philadelphia metropolitan area. Americans, including migrants from Puerto Rico, and immigrants from Latin America flocked to the state. By 1990, only 50% of Delaware's population consisted of natives to the state.\nDemographics.\nThe United States Census Bureau estimated that the population of Delaware was 990,837 on April 1, 2020, a 9.9% increase since the 2010 United States Census. \nDelaware's history as a border state has led it to exhibit characteristics of both the Northern and the Southern regions of the United States. Generally, the rural Southern (or \"Slower Lower\") regions of Delaware below the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal embody a Southern culture, while densely-populated Northern Delaware above the canal\u2014particularly Wilmington, a part of the Philadelphia metropolitan area\u2014has more in common with that of the Northeast. The U.S. Census Bureau designates Delaware as one of the South Atlantic States, but it is commonly associated with the Mid-Atlantic States and/or Northeastern United States by other federal agencies, the media, and some residents.\nAncestry.\nAccording to the 2010 United States Census, Delaware had a population of 897,934. The racial composition of the state was:\nEthnically, Hispanics and Latinos of any race made up 8.2% of the population.\nDelaware is the sixth most densely populated state, with a population density of 442.6 people per square mile, 356.4 per square mile more than the national average, and ranking 45th in population. Delaware is one of five states (Maine, Vermont, West Virginia, Wyoming) that do not have a single city with a population over 100,000 as of the 2010 census. The center of population of Delaware is in New Castle County, in the town of Townsend.\n, 49.7% of Delaware's population younger than one year of age belonged to minority groups (i.e., did not have two parents of non-Hispanic white ancestry). In 2000 approximately 19% of the population were African-American and 5% of the population is Hispanic (mostly of Puerto Rican or Mexican ancestry).\nBirth data.\n\"Note: Births in table do not add up because Hispanics are counted both by their ethnicity and by their race, giving a higher overall number.\"\nLanguages.\nAs of 2000, 91% of Delaware residents of age5 and older spoke only English at home; 5% spoke Spanish. French was the third-most spoken language at 0.7%, followed by Chinese at 0.5% and German at 0.5%.\nLegislation had been proposed in both the House and the Senate in Delaware to designate English as the official language. Neither bill was passed in the legislature.\nReligion.\n, Delaware is mostly Christian. Although Protestants account for almost half of the population, the Catholic Church is the largest single denomination in the state. The Association of Religion Data Archives reported in 2010 that the three largest denominational groups in Delaware by number of adherents are the Catholic Church at 182,532 adherents, the United Methodist Church with 53,656 members reported, and non-denominational Evangelical Protestant with 22,973 adherents reported. The religious body with the largest number of congregations is the United Methodist Church (with 158 congregations) followed by non-denominational Evangelical Protestant (with 106 congregations), then the Catholic Church (with 45 congregations).\nThe Roman Catholic Diocese of Wilmington and the Episcopal Diocese of Delaware oversee the parishes within their denominations. The A.U.M.P. Church, the oldest African-American denomination in the nation, was founded in Wilmington. It still has a substantial presence in the state. Reflecting new immigrant populations, an Islamic mosque has been built in the Ogletown area, and a Hindu temple in Hockessin.\nDelaware is home to an Amish community which resides west of Dover in Kent County, consisting of nine church districts and about 1,650 people. The Amish first settled in Kent County in 1915. In recent years, increasing development has led to the decline in the number of Amish living in the community.\nA 2012 survey of religious attitudes in the United States found that 34% of Delaware residents considered themselves \"moderately religious\", 33% \"very religious\", and 33% as \"non-religious\".\nSexual orientation.\nA 2012 Gallup poll found that Delaware's proportion of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender adults stood at 3.4 percent of the population. This constitutes a total LGBT adult population estimate of 23,698 people. The number of same-sex couple households in 2010 stood at 2,646. This grew by 41.65% from a decade earlier. On July 1, 2013, same-sex marriage was legalized, and all civil unions would be converted into marriages.\nEconomy.\nAffluence.\nAccording to a 2020 study by Kiplinger, Delaware had the seventeenth largest number of millionaires per capita in the United States, with a ratio of 6.98 percent, 0.7 percent from 2013 in ration but falling eight places in ranking. Delaware had 25,937 millionaires as of 2020. The median income for all Delaware households as of 2020 was $64,805. \nAgriculture.\nDelaware's agricultural output consists of poultry, nursery stock, soybeans, dairy products and corn.\nIndustries.\n, the state's unemployment rate was 3.7%.\nThe state's largest employers are:\nIndustrial decline.\nSince the mid-2000s, Delaware has seen the departure of the state's automotive manufacturing industry (General Motors Wilmington Assembly and Chrysler Newark Assembly), the corporate buyout of a major bank holding company (MBNA), the departure of the state's steel industry (Evraz Claymont Steel), the bankruptcy of a fiber mill (National Vulcanized Fibre), and the diminishing presence of AstraZeneca in Wilmington.\nIn late 2015, DuPont announced that 1,700 employees, nearly a third of its footprint in Delaware, would be laid off in early 2016. The merger of E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Co. and Dow Chemical Company into DowDuPont took place on September 1, 2017.\nIncorporation in Delaware.\nMore than half of all U.S. publicly traded companies, and 63% of the Fortune 500, are incorporated in Delaware. The state's attractiveness as a corporate haven is largely because of its business-friendly corporation law. Franchise taxes on Delaware corporations supply about a fifth of the state's revenue. Although \"USA (Delaware)\" ranked as the world's most opaque jurisdiction on the Tax Justice Network's 2009 Financial Secrecy Index, the same group's 2011 Index ranks the U.S. fifth and does not specify Delaware. In Delaware, there are more than a million registered corporations, meaning there are more corporations than people.\nFood and drink.\n stipulates that alcoholic liquor be sold only in specifically licensed establishments, and only between 9:00a.m. and 1:00a.m. Until 2003, Delaware was among the several states enforcing blue laws and banned the sale of liquor on Sunday.\nTransportation.\nThe transportation system in Delaware is under the governance and supervision of the Delaware Department of Transportation, also known as \"DelDOT\". Funding for DelDOT projects is drawn, in part, from the Delaware Transportation Trust Fund, established in 1987 to help stabilize transportation funding; the availability of the Trust led to a gradual separation of DelDOT operations from other Delaware state operations. DelDOT manages programs such as a Delaware Adopt-a-Highway program, major road route snow removal, traffic control infrastructure (signs and signals), toll road management, Delaware Division of Motor Vehicles, the Delaware Transit Corporation (branded as \"DART First State\", the state government public transportation organization), among others. In 2009, DelDOT maintained 13,507 lane-miles, totaling 89 percent of the state's public roadway system, the rest being under the supervision of individual municipalities. This far exceeds the national average (20 percent) for state department of transportation maintenance responsibility.\nRoads.\nOne major branch of the U.S. Interstate Highway System, Interstate95 (I-95), crosses Delaware southwest-to-northeast across New Castle County. In addition to I-95, there are six U.S. highways that serve Delaware: U.S.9, U.S.13, U.S.40, U.S.113, U.S.202, and U.S.301. There are also several state highways that cross the state of Delaware; a few of them include DE1, DE9, and DE404. U.S.13 and DE1 are primary north\u2013south highways connecting Wilmington and Pennsylvania with Maryland, with DE1 serving as the main route between Wilmington and the Delaware beaches. DE9 is a north\u2013south highway connecting Dover and Wilmington via a scenic route along the Delaware Bay. U.S.40 is a primary east\u2013west route, connecting Maryland with New Jersey. DE404 is another primary east\u2013west highway connecting the Chesapeake Bay Bridge in Maryland with the Delaware beaches. The state also operates three toll highways, the Delaware Turnpike, which is I-95, between Maryland and New Castle; the Korean War Veterans Memorial Highway, which is DE1, between Wilmington and Dover; and the U.S. 301 toll road between the Maryland border and DE1 in New Castle County.\nA bicycle route, Delaware Bicycle Route\u00a01, spans the north\u2013south length of the state from the Maryland border in Fenwick Island to the Pennsylvania border north of Montchanin. It is the first of several signed bike routes planned in Delaware.\nDelaware has about 1,450 bridges, 95 percent of which are under the supervision of DelDOT. About 30 percent of all Delaware bridges were built before 1950, and about 60 percent of the number are included in the National Bridge Inventory. Some bridges not under DelDOT supervision includes the four bridges on the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal, which are under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the Delaware Memorial Bridge, which is under the bi-state Delaware River and Bay Authority.\nIt has been noted that the tar and chip composition of secondary roads in Sussex County makes them more prone to deterioration than are the asphalt roadways in almost the rest of the state. Among these roads, Sussex (county road) 236 is among the most problematic.\nFerries.\nThree ferries operate in the state of Delaware:\nRail and bus.\nAmtrak has two stations in Delaware along the Northeast Corridor; the relatively quiet Newark Rail Station in Newark, and the busier Wilmington Rail Station in Wilmington. The Northeast Corridor is also served by SEPTA's Wilmington/Newark Line of Regional Rail, which serves Claymont, Wilmington, Churchmans Crossing, and Newark.\nTwo Class I railroads, Norfolk Southern and CSX, provide freight rail service in northern New Castle County. Norfolk Southern provides freight service along the Northeast Corridor and to industrial areas in Edgemoor, New Castle, and Delaware City. CSX's Philadelphia Subdivision passes through northern New Castle County parallel to the Amtrak Northeast Corridor. Multiple short-line railroads provide freight service in Delaware. The Delmarva Central Railroad operates the most trackage of the short-line railroads, running from an interchange with Norfolk Southern in Porter south through Dover, Harrington, and Seaford to Delmar, with another line running from Harrington to Frankford and branches from Ellendale to Milton and from Georgetown to Gravel Hill. The Delmarva Central Railroad connects with the Maryland and Delaware Railroad, which serves local customers in Sussex County. CSX connects with the freight/heritage operation, the Wilmington and Western Railroad, based in Wilmington and the East Penn Railroad, which operates a line from Wilmington to Coatesville, Pennsylvania.\nThe last north\u2013south passenger trains through the main part of Delaware was the Pennsylvania Railroad's local Wilmington-Delmar train in 1965. This was a successor to the \"Del-Mar-Va Express\" and \"Cavalier\", which had run from Philadelphia through the state's interior, to the end of the Delmarva Peninsula until the mid-1950s.\nThe DART First State public transportation system was named \"Most Outstanding Public Transportation System\" in 2003 by the American Public Transportation Association. Coverage of the system is broad within northern New Castle County with close association to major highways in Kent and Sussex counties. The system includes bus, subsidized passenger rail operated by Philadelphia transit agency SEPTA, and subsidized taxi and paratransit modes. The paratransit system, consisting of a statewide door-to-door bus service for the elderly and disabled, has been described by a Delaware state report as \"the most generous paratransit system in the United States\". , fees for the paratransit service have not changed since 1988.\nAir.\n, there is no scheduled air service from any Delaware airport, as has been the case in various years since 1991. Various airlines had served Wilmington Airport, the latest departure being Frontier Airlines in April 2015.\nDelaware is centrally situated in the Northeast megalopolis region of cities along I-95. Therefore, Delaware commercial airline passengers most frequently use Philadelphia International Airport (PHL), Baltimore-Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport (BWI) and Washington Dulles International Airport (IAD) for domestic and international transit. Residents of Sussex County will also use Wicomico Regional Airport (SBY), as it is located less than from the Delaware border. Atlantic City International Airport (ACY), Newark Liberty International Airport (EWR), and Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport (DCA) are also within a radius of New Castle County.\nOther general aviation airports in Delaware include Summit Airport near Middletown, Delaware Airpark near Cheswold, and Delaware Coastal Airport near Georgetown.\nDover Air Force Base, one of the largest in the country, is home to the 436th Airlift Wing and the 512th Airlift Wing. In addition to its other responsibilities in the Air Mobility Command, it serves as the entry point and mortuary for U.S. military personnel (and some civilians) who die overseas.\nLaw and government.\nDelaware's fourth and current constitution, adopted in 1897, provides for executive, judicial and legislative branches.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Delaware General Assembly consists of a House of Representatives with 41 members and a Senate with 21 members. It sits in Dover, the state capital. Representatives are elected to two-year terms, while senators are elected to four-year terms. The Senate confirms judicial and other nominees appointed by the governor.\nDelaware's U.S. Senators are Tom Carper (Democrat) and Chris Coons (Democrat). Delaware's single U.S. Representative is Lisa Blunt Rochester (Democrat).\nJudicial branch.\nThe Delaware Constitution establishes a number of courts:\nMinor non-constitutional courts include the Justice of the Peace Courts and Aldermen's Courts.\nSignificantly, Delaware has one of the few remaining Courts of Chancery in the nation, which has jurisdiction over equity cases, the vast majority of which are corporate disputes, many relating to mergers and acquisitions. The Court of Chancery and the Delaware Supreme Court have developed a worldwide reputation for rendering concise opinions concerning corporate law which generally (but not always) grant broad discretion to corporate boards of directors and officers. In addition, the Delaware General Corporation Law, which forms the basis of the Courts' opinions, is widely regarded as giving great flexibility to corporations to manage their affairs. For these reasons, Delaware is considered to have the most business-friendly legal system in the United States; therefore a great number of companies are incorporated in Delaware, including 60% of the companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange.\nDelaware was the last U.S. state to use judicial corporal punishment, in 1952.\nExecutive branch.\nThe executive branch is headed by the Governor of Delaware. The present governor is John Carney (Democrat), who took office January 17, 2017. The lieutenant governor is Bethany Hall-Long. The governor presents a \"State of the State\" speech to a joint session of the Delaware legislature annually.\nCounties.\nDelaware is subdivided into three counties; from north to south they are New Castle, Kent and Sussex. This is the fewest among all states. Each county elects its own legislative body (known in New Castle and Sussex counties as County Council, and in Kent County as Levy Court), which deal primarily in zoning and development issues. Most functions which are handled on a county-by-county basis in other states\u2014such as court and law enforcement\u2014have been centralized in Delaware, leading to a significant concentration of power in the Delaware state government. The counties were historically divided into hundreds, which were used as tax reporting and voting districts until the 1960s, but now serve no administrative role, their only current official legal use being in real estate title descriptions.\nPolitics.\nThe Democratic Party holds a plurality of registrations in Delaware. Until the 2000 presidential election, the state tended to be a Presidential bellwether, sending its three electoral votes to the winning candidate since 1952. This trend ended in 2000 when Delaware's electoral votes went to Al Gore by 13 percentage points. In 2004, John Kerry won Delaware by eight percentage points. In 2008, Democrat Barack Obama defeated Republican John McCain in Delaware by 25 percentage points. Obama's running mate was Joe Biden, who had represented Delaware in the United States Senate since 1973 and was later inaugurated President of the United States in 2021. Obama carried Delaware by 19 percentage points in 2012. In 2016, Delaware's electoral votes went to Hillary Clinton by 11 percentage points. In 2020, Democratic nominee, former vice president and Delaware resident Joe Biden beat incumbent President Donald Trump in the state by over 19 percentage points. Currently, Democrats hold all positions of authority in Delaware including Senate and House.\nDelaware's swing to the Democrats is in part due to a strong Democratic trend in New Castle County, home to 55 percent of Delaware's population (the two smaller counties have only 359,000 people between them to New Castle County's 535,000). New Castle County has not voted Republican in a presidential election since 1988. In 1992, 2000, 2004, and 2016, the Republican presidential candidate carried both Kent and Sussex but lost by double digits each time in New Castle County, which was a large enough margin to swing the state to the Democrats. New Castle County also elects a substantial majority of the legislature; 27 of the 41 state house districts and 14 of the 21 state senate districts are based in New Castle County.\nThe Democrats have held the governorship since 1993, having won the last seven gubernatorial elections in a row. Democrats presently hold all the nine statewide elected offices, while the Republicans last won two statewide offices in 2014, State Auditor and State Treasurer.\nFreedom of information.\nEach of the 50 states of the United States has passed some form of freedom of information legislation, which provides a mechanism for the general public to request information of the government. In 2011 Delaware passed legislation placing a 15 business day time limit on addressing freedom-of-information requests, to either produce information or an explanation of why such information would take longer than this time to produce.\nTaxation.\nTax is collected by the Delaware Division of Revenue.\nDelaware has six different income tax brackets, ranging from 2.2% to 5.95%. The state does not assess sales tax on consumers. The state does, however, impose a tax on the gross receipts of most businesses. Business and occupational license tax rates range from 0.096% to 1.92%, depending on the category of business activity.\nDelaware does not assess a state-level tax on real or personal property. Real estate is subject to county property taxes, school district property taxes, vocational school district taxes, and, if located within an incorporated area, municipal property taxes.\nGambling provides significant revenue to the state. For instance, the casino at Delaware Park Racetrack provided more than $100million to the state in 2010.\nIn June 2018, Delaware became the first U.S. state to legalize sports betting following the Supreme Court ruling to repeal The Professional and Amateur Sports Protection Act (PASPA).\nMunicipalities.\nWilmington is the state's most populous city (70,635) and its economic hub. It is located within commuting distance of both Philadelphia and Baltimore. Dover is the state capital and the second most populous city (38,079).\nUnincorporated places.\nThe table below lists the ten largest municipalities in the state based on the 2018 United States Census Estimate.\nEducation.\nIn the early 1920s, Pierre S. du Pont served as president of the state board of education. At the time, state law prohibited money raised from white taxpayers from being used to support the state's schools for black children. Appalled by the condition of the black schools, du Pont donated four million dollars to construct 86 new school buildings.\nDelaware was the origin of \"Belton v. Gebhart\" (1952), one of the four cases which were combined into \"Brown v. Board of Education\", the Supreme Court of the United States decision that led to the end of officially segregated public schools. Significantly, \"Belton\" was the only case in which the state court found for the plaintiffs, thereby ruling that segregation is unconstitutional.\nUnlike many states, Delaware's educational system is centralized in a state Superintendent of Education, with local school boards retaining control over taxation and some curriculum decisions. This centralized system, combined with the small size of the state, likely contributed to Delaware becoming the first state, after completion of a three-year, $30million program ending in 1999, to wire every K-12 classroom in the state to the Internet.\n, the Delaware Department of Education had authorized the founding of 25 charter schools in the state, one of them being all-girls.\nAll teachers in the State's public school districts are unionized. , none of the State's charter schools are members of a teachers union. One of the State's teachers' unions is Delaware State Education Association (DSEA), whose President is Frederika Jenner.\nSister state.\nDelaware's sister state in Japan is Miyagi Prefecture.\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\nTwo daily newspapers are based in Delaware, the \"Delaware State News\", based in Dover and covering the two southern counties, and \"The News Journal\" covering Wilmington and northern Delaware. The state is also served by several weekly, monthly and online publications.\nTelevision.\nNo standalone television stations are based solely in Delaware. The northern part of the state is served by network stations in Philadelphia and the southern part by network stations in Salisbury, Maryland. Philadelphia's ABC affiliate, WPVI-TV, maintains a news bureau in downtown Wilmington. Salisbury's CBS affiliate, WBOC-TV, maintains bureaus in Dover and Milton. Three Philadelphia-market stations\u2014PBS member WHYY-TV, Ion affiliate WPPX, and MeTV affiliate WDPN-TV\u2014all have Wilmington as their city of license, but maintain transmitters at the market antenna farm in Roxborough and do not produce any Delaware-centric programming.\nRadio.\n\"Main Article: List of radio stations in Delaware\"\nThere are a numerous radio stations licensed in Delaware. WDEL 1150AM, WHGE-LP 95.3 FM, WILM 1450 AM, WJBR-FM 99.5, WMPH 91.7 FM, WSTW 93.7 FM, WTMC 1380 AM and WWTX 1290AM are licensed from Wilmington. WRDX 92.9 FM is licensed from Smyrna. WDOV 1410AM, WDSD 94.7 FM and WRTX 91.7 FM are licensed from Dover.\nTourism.\nDelaware is home to First State National Historical Park, a National Park Service unit composed of historic sites across the state including the New Castle Court House, Green, and Sheriff's House, Dover Green, Beaver Valley, Fort Christina, Old Swedes' Church, John Dickinson Plantation, and the Ryves Holt House. Delaware has several museums, , , , , and other .\nRehoboth Beach, together with the towns of Lewes, Dewey Beach, Bethany Beach, South Bethany, and Fenwick Island, comprise Delaware's beach resorts. Rehoboth Beach often bills itself as \"The Nation's Summer Capital\" because it is a frequent summer vacation destination for Washington, D.C., residents as well as visitors from Maryland, Virginia, and in lesser numbers, Pennsylvania. Vacationers are drawn for many reasons, including the town's charm, artistic appeal, nightlife, and tax-free shopping. According to SeaGrant Delaware, the Delaware beaches generate $6.9billion annually and over $711million in tax revenue.\nDelaware is home to several festivals, fairs, and events. Some of the more notable festivals are the Riverfest held in Seaford, the World Championship Punkin Chunkin formerly held at various locations throughout the state since 1986, the Rehoboth Beach Chocolate Festival, the Bethany Beach Jazz Funeral to mark the end of summer, the Apple Scrapple Festival held in Bridgeville, the Clifford Brown Jazz Festival in Wilmington, the Rehoboth Beach Jazz Festival, the Sea Witch Halloween Festival and Parade in Rehoboth Beach, the Rehoboth Beach Independent Film Festival, the Nanticoke Indian Pow Wow in Oak Orchard, Firefly Music Festival, and the Return Day Parade held after every election in Georgetown.\nIn 2015, tourism in Delaware generated $3.1billion, which makes up five percent of the state's GDP. Delaware saw 8.5million visitors in 2015, with the tourism industry employing 41,730 people, making it the 4th largest private employer in the state. Major origin markets for Delaware tourists include Philadelphia, Baltimore, New York City, Washington, D.C., and Harrisburg, with 97% of tourists arriving to the state by car and 75% of tourists coming from a distance of or less.\nDelaware is also home to two large sporting venues. Dover International Speedway is a race track in Dover, and Frawley Stadium in Wilmington is the home of the Wilmington Blue Rocks, a Minor League Baseball team.\nCulture and entertainment.\nSports.\nAs Delaware has no franchises in the major American professional sports leagues, many Delawareans follow either Philadelphia or Baltimore teams. In the WNBA, the Washington Mystics enjoy a major following due to the presence of Wilmington native and University of Delaware product Elena Delle Donne. The University of Delaware's football team has a large following throughout the state, with the Delaware State University and Wesley College teams also enjoying a smaller degree of support.\nDelaware is home to Dover International Speedway and Dover Downs. DIS, also known as the \"Monster Mile\", is one of only 10 tracks in the nation to have hosted 100 or more NASCAR Cup Series races. Dover Downs is a popular harness racing facility. It is the only co-located horse- and car-racing facility in the nation, with the Dover Downs track located inside the DIS track.\nDelaware is represented in rugby by the Delaware Black Foxes, a 2015 expansion club.\nDelaware has been home to professional wrestling outfit Combat Zone Wrestling (CZW). CZW has been affiliated with the annual Tournament of Death and ECWA with its annual Super8 Tournament.\nDelaware's official state sport is bicycling.\nDelaware Native Americans.\nDelaware is also the name of a Native American group (called in their own language Lenni Lenape) which was influential in the colonial period of the United States and is today headquartered in Cheswold, Kent County, Delaware. A band of the Nanticoke tribe of American Indians today resides in Sussex County and is headquartered in Millsboro, Sussex County, Delaware.\nNamesakes.\nSeveral ships have been named USS \"Delaware\" in honor of this state.\nDelawareans.\nProminent Delawareans include the du Pont family of politicians and businesspersons and the Biden family among whom Joe Biden is notable as the 46th and current President of the United States."}
{"id": "7931", "revid": "13006032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7931", "title": "Dictionary", "text": "A dictionary is a listing of lexemes from the lexicon of one or more specific languages, often arranged alphabetically (or by radical and stroke for ideographic languages), which may include information on definitions, usage, etymologies, pronunciations, translation, etc.. It is a lexicographical reference that shows inter-relationships among the data.\nA broad distinction is made between general and specialized dictionaries. Specialized dictionaries include words in specialist fields, rather than a complete range of words in the language. Lexical items that describe concepts in specific fields are usually called terms instead of words, although there is no consensus whether lexicology and terminology are two different fields of study. In theory, general dictionaries are supposed to be semasiological, mapping word to definition, while specialized dictionaries are supposed to be onomasiological, first identifying concepts and then establishing the terms used to designate them. In practice, the two approaches are used for both types. There are other types of dictionaries that do not fit neatly into the above distinction, for instance bilingual (translation) dictionaries, dictionaries of synonyms (thesauri), and rhyming dictionaries. The word dictionary (unqualified) is usually understood to refer to a general purpose monolingual dictionary.\nThere is also a contrast between \"prescriptive\" or \"descriptive\" dictionaries; the former reflect what is seen as correct use of the language while the latter reflect recorded actual use. Stylistic indications (e.g. \"informal\" or \"vulgar\") in many modern dictionaries are also considered by some to be less than objectively descriptive.\nAlthough the first recorded dictionaries date back to Sumerian times (these were bilingual dictionaries), the systematic study of dictionaries as objects of scientific interest themselves is a 20th-century enterprise, called lexicography, and largely initiated by Ladislav Zgusta. The birth of the new discipline was not without controversy, the practical dictionary-makers being sometimes accused by others of \"astonishing\" lack of method and critical-self reflection.\nHistory.\nThe oldest known dictionaries were cuneiform tablets with bilingual Sumerian\u2013Akkadian wordlists, discovered in Ebla (modern Syria) and dated to roughly 2300 BCE, the time of the Akkadian Empire. The early 2nd millennium BCE \"Urra=hubullu\" glossary is the canonical Babylonian version of such bilingual Sumerian wordlists. A Chinese dictionary, the c. 3rd century BCE \"Erya\", is the earliest surviving monolingual dictionary; although some sources cite the c. 800 BCE Shizhoupian as a \"dictionary\", modern scholarship considers it a calligraphic compendium of Chinese characters from Zhou dynasty bronzes. Philitas of Cos (fl. 4th century BCE) wrote a pioneering vocabulary \"Disorderly Words\" (\u1f0c\u03c4\u03b1\u03ba\u03c4\u03bf\u03b9 \u03b3\u03bb\u1ff6\u03c3\u03c3\u03b1\u03b9, \"\") which explained the meanings of rare Homeric and other literary words, words from local dialects, and technical terms. Apollonius the Sophist (fl. 1st century CE) wrote the oldest surviving Homeric lexicon. The first Sanskrit dictionary, the Amarako\u015ba, was written by Amarasimha c. 4th century CE. Written in verse, it listed around 10,000 words. According to the \"Nihon Shoki\", the first Japanese dictionary was the long-lost 682 CE \"Niina\" glossary of Chinese characters. The oldest existing Japanese dictionary, the c. 835 CE \"Tenrei Bansh\u014d Meigi\", was also a glossary of written Chinese. In \"Frahang-i Pahlavig\", Aramaic heterograms are listed together with their translation in the Middle Persian language and phonetic transcription in the Pazend alphabet. A 9th-century CE Irish dictionary, Sanas Cormaic, contained etymologies and explanations of over 1,400 Irish words. In India around 1320, Amir Khusro compiled the Khaliq-e-bari, which mainly dealt with Hindustani and Persian words.\nArabic dictionaries were compiled between the 8th and 14th centuries CE, organizing words in rhyme order (by the last syllable), by alphabetical order of the radicals, or according to the alphabetical order of the first letter (the system used in modern European language dictionaries). The modern system was mainly used in specialist dictionaries, such as those of terms from the Qur'an and hadith, while most general use dictionaries, such as the \"Lisan al-`Arab\" (13th century, still the best-known large-scale dictionary of Arabic) and \"al-Qamus al-Muhit\" (14th century) listed words in the alphabetical order of the radicals. The \"Qamus al-Muhit\" is the first handy dictionary in Arabic, which includes only words and their definitions, eliminating the supporting examples used in such dictionaries as the \"Lisan\" and the \"Oxford English Dictionary\".\nIn medieval Europe, glossaries with equivalents for Latin words in vernacular or simpler Latin were in use (e.g. the Leiden Glossary). The \"Catholicon\" (1287) by Johannes Balbus, a large grammatical work with an alphabetical lexicon, was widely adopted. It served as the basis for several bilingual dictionaries and was one of the earliest books (in 1460) to be printed. In 1502 Ambrogio Calepino's \"Dictionarium\" was published, originally a monolingual Latin dictionary, which over the course of the 16th century was enlarged to become a multilingual glossary. In 1532 Robert Estienne published the \"Thesaurus linguae latinae\" and in 1572 his son Henri Estienne published the \"Thesaurus linguae graecae\", which served up to the 19th century as the basis of Greek lexicography. The first monolingual dictionary written in Europe was the Spanish, written by Sebasti\u00e1n Covarrubias' \"Tesoro de la lengua castellana o espa\u00f1ola\", published in 1611 in Madrid, Spain. In 1612 the first edition of the \"Vocabolario degli Accademici della Crusca\", for Italian, was published. It served as the model for similar works in French and English. In 1690 in Rotterdam was published, posthumously, the \"Dictionnaire Universel\" by Antoine Fureti\u00e8re for French. In 1694 appeared the first edition of the \"Dictionnaire de l'Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise\". Between 1712 and 1721 was published the \"Vocabulario portughez e latino\" written by Raphael Bluteau. The Real Academia Espa\u00f1ola published the first edition of the \"Diccionario de la lengua espa\u00f1ola\" in 1780, but their \"Diccionario de Autoridades\", which included quotes taken from literary works, was published in 1726. The \"Totius Latinitatis lexicon\" by Egidio Forcellini was firstly published in 1777; it has formed the basis of all similar works that have since been published.\nThe first edition of \"A Greek-English Lexicon\" by Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott appeared in 1843; this work remained the basic dictionary of Greek until the end of the 20th century. And in 1858 was published the first volume of the Deutsches W\u00f6rterbuch by the Brothers Grimm; the work was completed in 1961. Between 1861 and 1874 was published the \"Dizionario della lingua italiana\" by Niccol\u00f2 Tommaseo. Between 1862 and 1874 was published the six volumes of \"A magyar nyelv sz\u00f3t\u00e1ra\" (Dictionary of Hungarian Language) by Gergely Czuczor and J\u00e1nos Fogarasi. \u00c9mile Littr\u00e9 published the Dictionnaire de la langue fran\u00e7aise between 1863 and 1872. In the same year 1863 appeared the first volume of the \"Woordenboek der Nederlandsche Taal\" which was completed in 1998. Also in 1863 Vladimir Ivanovich Dahl published the \"Explanatory Dictionary of the Living Great Russian Language\". The Duden dictionary dates back to 1880, and is currently the prescriptive source for the spelling of German. The decision to start work on the \"Svenska Akademiens ordbok\" was taken in 1787.\nEnglish dictionaries in Britain.\nThe earliest dictionaries in the English language were glossaries of French, Spanish or Latin words along with their definitions in English. The word \"dictionary\" was invented by an Englishman called John of Garland in 1220 \u2014 he had written a book \"Dictionarius\" to help with Latin \"diction\". An early non-alphabetical list of 8000 English words was the \"Elementarie\", created by Richard Mulcaster in 1582.\nThe first purely English alphabetical dictionary was \"A Table Alphabeticall\", written by English schoolteacher Robert Cawdrey in 1604. The only surviving copy is found at the Bodleian Library in Oxford. This dictionary, and the many imitators which followed it, was seen as unreliable and nowhere near definitive. Philip Stanhope, 4th Earl of Chesterfield was still lamenting in 1754, 150 years after Cawdrey's publication, that it is \"a sort of disgrace to our nation, that hitherto we have had no\u2026 standard of our language; our dictionaries at present being more properly what our neighbors the Dutch and the Germans call theirs, word-books, than dictionaries in the superior sense of that title.\"\nIn 1616, John Bullokar described the history of the dictionary with his \"English Expositor\". \"Glossographia\" by Thomas Blount, published in 1656, contains more than 10,000 words along with their etymologies or histories. Edward Phillips wrote another dictionary in 1658, entitled \"The New World of English Words: Or a General Dictionary\" which boldly plagiarized Blount's work, and the two denounced each other. This created more interest in the dictionaries. John Wilkins' 1668 essay on philosophical language contains a list of 11,500 words with careful distinctions, compiled by William Lloyd. Elisha Coles published his \"English Dictionary\" in 1676.\nIt was not until Samuel Johnson's \"A Dictionary of the English Language\" (1755) that a more reliable English dictionary was produced. Many people today mistakenly believe that Johnson wrote the first English dictionary: a testimony to this legacy. By this stage, dictionaries had evolved to contain textual references for most words, and were arranged alphabetically, rather than by topic (a previously popular form of arrangement, which meant all animals would be grouped together, etc.). Johnson's masterwork could be judged as the first to bring all these elements together, creating the first \"modern\" dictionary.\nJohnson's dictionary remained the English-language standard for over 150 years, until the Oxford University Press began writing and releasing the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" in short fascicles from 1884 onwards. It took nearly 50 years to complete this huge work, and they finally released the complete \"OED\" in twelve volumes in 1928. It remains the most comprehensive and trusted English language dictionary to this day, with revisions and updates added by a dedicated team every three months. One of the main contributors to this modern dictionary was an ex-army surgeon, William Chester Minor, a convicted murderer who was confined to an asylum for the criminally insane.\nAmerican English dictionaries.\nIn 1806, American Noah Webster published his first dictionary, \"\". In 1807 Webster began compiling an expanded and fully comprehensive dictionary, \"An American Dictionary of the English Language;\" it took twenty-seven years to complete. To evaluate the etymology of words, Webster learned twenty-six languages, including Old English (Anglo-Saxon), German, Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish, French, Hebrew, Arabic, and Sanskrit.\nWebster completed his dictionary during his year abroad in 1825 in Paris, France, and at the University of Cambridge. His book contained seventy thousand words, of which twelve thousand had never appeared in a published dictionary before. As a spelling reformer, Webster believed that English spelling rules were unnecessarily complex, so his dictionary introduced American English spellings, replacing \"colour\" with \"color\", substituting \"wagon\" for \"waggon\", and printing \"center\" instead of \"centre\". He also added American words, like \"skunk\" and \"squash,\" which did not appear in British dictionaries. At the age of seventy, Webster published his dictionary in 1828; it sold 2500 copies. In 1840, the second edition was published in two volumes. Webster's dictionary was acquired by G &amp; C Merriam Co. in 1843, after his death, and has since been published in many revised editions. Merriam-Webster was acquired by Encyclopedia Britannica in 1964.\nControversy over the lack of usage advice in the 1961 \"Webster's Third New International Dictionary\" spurred publication of the 1969 \"The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language\", the first dictionary to use corpus linguistics.\nTypes.\nIn a general dictionary, each word may have multiple meanings. Some dictionaries include each separate meaning in the order of most common usage while others list definitions in historical order, with the oldest usage first.\nIn many languages, words can appear in many different forms, but only the undeclined or unconjugated form appears as the headword in most dictionaries. Dictionaries are most commonly found in the form of a book, but some newer dictionaries, like StarDict and the \"New Oxford American Dictionary\" are dictionary software running on PDAs or computers. There are also many online dictionaries accessible via the Internet.\nSpecialized dictionaries.\nAccording to the \"Manual of Specialized Lexicographies\", a specialized dictionary, also referred to as a technical dictionary, is a dictionary that focuses upon a specific subject field, as opposed to a dictionary that comprehensively contains words from the lexicon of a specific language or languages. Following the description in \"The Bilingual LSP Dictionary\", lexicographers categorize specialized dictionaries into three types: A multi-field dictionary broadly covers several subject fields (e.g. a business dictionary), a single-field dictionary narrowly covers one particular subject field (e.g. law), and a sub-field dictionary covers a more specialized field (e.g. constitutional law). For example, the 23-language Inter-Active Terminology for Europe is a multi-field dictionary, the American National Biography is a single-field, and the African American National Biography Project is a sub-field dictionary. In terms of the coverage distinction between \"minimizing dictionaries\" and \"maximizing dictionaries\", multi-field dictionaries tend to minimize coverage across subject fields (for instance, \"Oxford Dictionary of World Religions\" and \"Yadgar Dictionary of Computer and Internet Terms\") whereas single-field and sub-field dictionaries tend to maximize coverage within a limited subject field (\"The Oxford Dictionary of English Etymology\").\nAnother variant is the glossary, an alphabetical list of defined terms in a specialized field, such as medicine (medical dictionary).\nDefining dictionaries.\nThe simplest dictionary, a defining dictionary, provides a core glossary of the simplest meanings of the simplest concepts. From these, other concepts can be explained and defined, in particular for those who are first learning a language. In English, the commercial defining dictionaries typically include only one or two meanings of under 2000 words. With these, the rest of English, and even the 4000 most common English idioms and metaphors, can be defined.\nPrescriptive vs. descriptive.\nLexicographers apply two basic philosophies to the defining of words: \"prescriptive\" or \"descriptive\". Noah Webster, intent on forging a distinct identity for the American language, altered spellings and accentuated differences in meaning and pronunciation of some words. This is why American English now uses the spelling \"color\" while the rest of the English-speaking world prefers \"colour\". (Similarly, British English subsequently underwent a few spelling changes that did not affect American English; see further at American and British English spelling differences.)\nLarge 20th-century dictionaries such as the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" (OED) and \"Webster's Third\" are descriptive, and attempt to describe the actual use of words. Most dictionaries of English now apply the descriptive method to a word's definition, and then, outside of the definition itself, provide information alerting readers to attitudes which may influence their choices on words often considered vulgar, offensive, erroneous, or easily confused. \"Merriam-Webster\" is subtle, only adding italicized notations such as, \"sometimes offensive\" or \"stand\" (nonstandard). \"American Heritage\" goes further, discussing issues separately in numerous \"usage notes.\" \"Encarta\" provides similar notes, but is more prescriptive, offering warnings and admonitions against the use of certain words considered by many to be offensive or illiterate, such as, \"an offensive term for...\" or \"a taboo term meaning...\".\nBecause of the widespread use of dictionaries in schools, and their acceptance by many as language authorities, their treatment of the language does affect usage to some degree, with even the most descriptive dictionaries providing conservative continuity. In the long run, however, the meanings of words in English are primarily determined by usage, and the language is being changed and created every day. As Jorge Luis Borges says in the prologue to \"El otro, el mismo\": \"It is often forgotten that (dictionaries) are artificial repositories, put together well after the languages they define. The roots of language are irrational and of a magical nature.\"\nSometimes the same dictionary can be descriptive in some domains and prescriptive in others. For example, according to Ghil'ad Zuckermann, the \"Oxford English-Hebrew Dictionary\" is \"at war with itself\": whereas its coverage (lexical items) and glosses (definitions) are descriptive and colloquial, its vocalization is prescriptive. This internal conflict results in absurd sentences such as \"hi tahar\u00f3g ot\u00ed kshetir\u00e9 me as\u00edti lamkhon\u00edt\" (she'll tear me apart when she sees what I've done to the car). Whereas \"hi tahar\u00f3g ot\u00ed\", literally 'she will kill me', is colloquial, \"me\" (a variant of \"ma\" 'what') is archaic, resulting in a combination that is unutterable in real life.\nHistorical dictionaries.\nA historical dictionary is a specific kind of descriptive dictionary which describes the development of words and senses over time, usually using citations to original source material to support its conclusions.\nDictionaries for natural language processing.\nIn contrast to traditional dictionaries, which are designed to be used by human beings, dictionaries for natural language processing (NLP) are built to be used by computer programs. The final user is a human being but the direct user is a program. Such a dictionary does not need to be able to be printed on paper. The structure of the content is not linear, ordered entry by entry but has the form of a complex network (see Diathesis alternation). Because most of these dictionaries are used to control machine translations or cross-lingual information retrieval (CLIR) the content is usually multilingual and usually of huge size. In order to allow formalized exchange and merging of dictionaries, an ISO standard called Lexical Markup Framework (LMF) has been defined and used among the industrial and academic community.\nPronunciation.\nIn many languages, such as the English language, the pronunciation of some words is not consistently apparent from their spelling. In these languages, dictionaries usually provide the pronunciation. For example, the definition for the word \"dictionary\" might be followed by the International Phonetic Alphabet spelling (in British English) or (in American English). American English dictionaries often use their own pronunciation respelling systems with diacritics, for example \"dictionary\" is respelled as \"d\u012dk\u2032sh\u0259-n\u0115r\u2032\u0113\" in the American Heritage Dictionary. The IPA is more commonly used within the British Commonwealth countries. Yet others use their own pronunciation respelling systems without diacritics: for example, \"dictionary\" may be respelled as . Some online or electronic dictionaries provide audio recordings of words being spoken.\nExamples.\nDictionaries of other languages.\nHistories and descriptions of the dictionaries of other languages on Wikipedia include:\nOnline dictionaries.\nThe age of the Internet brought online dictionaries to the desktop and, more recently, to the smart phone. David Skinner in 2013 noted that \"Among the top ten lookups on Merriam-Webster Online at this moment are \"holistic, pragmatic, caveat, esoteric\" and \"bourgeois.\" Teaching users about words they don\u2019t already know has been, historically, an aim of lexicography, and modern dictionaries do this well.\"\nThere exist a number of websites which operate as online dictionaries, usually with a specialized focus. Some of them have exclusively user driven content, often consisting of neologisms. Some of the more notable examples are given in List of online dictionaries and ."}
{"id": "7932", "revid": "4057701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7932", "title": "Daubentoniidae", "text": ""}
{"id": "7933", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7933", "title": "Daffodil", "text": ""}
{"id": "7934", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7934", "title": "DavidFriedman", "text": ""}
{"id": "7935", "revid": "2666588", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7935", "title": "David D. Friedman", "text": "David Director Friedman (born February 12, 1945) is an American economist, physicist, legal scholar, and anarcho-capitalist theorist, described by Walter E. Block as a \"free-market anarchist\". He is known for his textbook writings on microeconomics and the libertarian theory of anarcho-capitalism, which is the subject of his most popular book, \"The Machinery of Freedom\". Besides \"The Machinery of Freedom\", he has authored several other books and articles, including \"Price Theory: An Intermediate Text\" (1986), \"Law's Order: What Economics Has to Do with Law and Why It Matters\" (2000), \"Hidden Order: The Economics of Everyday Life\" (1996), and \"Future Imperfect\" (2008).\nLife and work.\nDavid Friedman is the son of economists Rose and Milton Friedman. He graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University in 1965, with a bachelor's degree in chemistry and physics. He later earned a master's (1967) and a Ph.D. (1971) in theoretical physics from the University of Chicago. Despite his later career, he never took a class for credit in either economics or law. He is currently a professor of law at Santa Clara University, and a contributing editor for \"Liberty\" magazine. He is an atheist. His son, Patri Friedman, has also written about libertarian theory and market anarchism, particularly seasteading. \n\"The Machinery of Freedom\".\nIn his book \"The Machinery of Freedom\" (1973), Friedman sketched a form of anarcho-capitalism where all goods and services including law itself can be produced by the free market. Friedman advocates an incrementalist approach to achieve anarcho-capitalism by gradual privatization of areas that government is involved in, ultimately privatizing the law itself. In the book, he states his opposition to violent anarcho-capitalist revolution.\nHe advocates a consequentialist version of anarcho-capitalism, arguing for it on a cost-benefit analysis of state versus no state. It is contrasted with the natural-rights approach as propounded most notably by economist and libertarian theorist Murray Rothbard.\nNon-academic interests.\nFriedman is a longtime member of the Society for Creative Anachronism, where he is known as \"Duke Cariadoc of the Bow\". He is known throughout the worldwide society for his articles on the philosophy of recreationism and practical historical recreations, especially those relating to the medieval Middle East. His work is compiled in the popular \"Cariadoc's Miscellany\". He is sometimes credited with founding the largest and longest-running SCA event, the Pennsic War; as king of the Middle Kingdom he challenged the East Kingdom, and later as king of the East accepted the challenge and lost (to himself).\nHe was a teenage wargamer who taught his school friend, Jack Radey, founder of People's War Games, how to play such wargames as Tactics II. Radey relates how Friedman and himself wrote to Charles S. Roberts claiming that they had found a first turn winning strategy for each of the two sides. Roberts replied that their interpretation of the rules was valid.\nHe is a long-time science fiction fan, and has written two fantasy novels, \"Harald\" (Baen Books, 2006) and \"Salamander\" (2011).\nHe has spoken in favor of a non-interventionist foreign policy."}
{"id": "7937", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7937", "title": "Diagonal slash argument", "text": ""}
{"id": "7938", "revid": "39526041", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7938", "title": "Diatomic molecule", "text": "Diatomic molecules are molecules composed of only two atoms, of the same or different chemical elements. The prefix \"di-\" is of Greek origin, meaning \"two\". If a diatomic molecule consists of two atoms of the same element, such as hydrogen (H2) or oxygen (O2), then it is said to be homonuclear. Otherwise, if a diatomic molecule consists of two different atoms, such as carbon monoxide (CO) or nitric oxide (NO), the molecule is said to be heteronuclear. The bond in a homonuclear diatomic molecule is non-polar.\nThe only chemical elements that form stable homonuclear diatomic molecules at standard temperature and pressure (STP) (or typical laboratory conditions of 1 bar and 25\u00a0\u00b0C) are the gases hydrogen (H2), nitrogen (N2), oxygen (O2), fluorine (F2), and chlorine (Cl2).\nThe noble gases (helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and radon) are also gases at STP, but they are monatomic. The homonuclear diatomic gases and noble gases together are called \"elemental gases\" or \"molecular gases\", to distinguish them from other gases that are chemical compounds.\nAt slightly elevated temperatures, the halogens bromine (Br2) and iodine (I2) also form diatomic gases. All halogens have been observed as diatomic molecules, except for astatine and tennessine, which are uncertain.\nOther elements form diatomic molecules when evaporated, but these diatomic species repolymerize when cooled. Heating (\"cracking\") elemental phosphorus gives diphosphorus, P2. Sulfur vapor is mostly disulfur (S2). Dilithium (Li2) and disodium (Na2) are known in the gas phase. Ditungsten (W2) and dimolybdenum (Mo2) form with sextuple bonds in the gas phase. Dirubidium (Rb2) is diatomic.\nHeteronuclear molecules.\nAll other diatomic molecules are chemical compounds of two different elements. Many elements can combine to form heteronuclear diatomic molecules, depending on temperature and pressure.\nExamples are gases carbon monoxide (CO), nitric oxide (NO), and hydrogen chloride (HCl).\nMany 1:1 binary compounds are not normally considered diatomic because they are polymeric at room temperature, but they form diatomic molecules when evaporated, for example gaseous MgO, SiO, and many others.\nOccurrence.\nHundreds of diatomic molecules have been identified in the environment of the Earth, in the laboratory, and in interstellar space. About 99% of the Earth's atmosphere is composed of two species of diatomic molecules: nitrogen (78%) and oxygen (21%). The natural abundance of hydrogen (H2) in the Earth's atmosphere is only of the order of parts per million, but H2 is the most abundant diatomic molecule in the universe. The interstellar medium is dominated by hydrogen atoms.\nMolecular geometry.\nAll diatomic molecules are linear and characterized by a single parameter which is the bond length or distance between the two atoms. Diatomic nitrogen has a triple bond, diatomic oxygen has a double bond, and diatomic hydrogen, fluorine, chlorine, iodine, and bromine all have single bonds.\nHistorical significance.\nDiatomic elements played an important role in the elucidation of the concepts of element, atom, and molecule in the 19th century, because some of the most common elements, such as hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, occur as diatomic molecules. John Dalton's original atomic hypothesis assumed that all elements were monatomic and that the atoms in compounds would normally have the simplest atomic ratios with respect to one another. For example, Dalton assumed water's formula to be HO, giving the atomic weight of oxygen as eight times that of hydrogen, instead of the modern value of about 16. As a consequence, confusion existed regarding atomic weights and molecular formulas for about half a century.\nAs early as 1805, Gay-Lussac and von Humboldt showed that water is formed of two volumes of hydrogen and one volume of oxygen, and by 1811 Amedeo Avogadro had arrived at the correct interpretation of water's composition, based on what is now called Avogadro's law and the assumption of diatomic elemental molecules. However, these results were mostly ignored until 1860, partly due to the belief that atoms of one element would have no chemical affinity toward atoms of the same element, and also partly due to apparent exceptions to Avogadro's law that were not explained until later in terms of dissociating molecules.\nAt the 1860 Karlsruhe Congress on atomic weights, Cannizzaro resurrected Avogadro's ideas and used them to produce a consistent table of atomic weights, which mostly agree with modern values. These weights were an important prerequisite for the discovery of the periodic law by Dmitri Mendeleev and Lothar Meyer.\nExcited electronic states.\nDiatomic molecules are normally in their lowest or ground state, which conventionally is also known as the formula_1 state. When a gas of diatomic molecules is bombarded by energetic electrons, some of the molecules may be excited to higher electronic states, as occurs, for example, in the natural aurora; high-altitude nuclear explosions; and rocket-borne electron gun experiments. Such excitation can also occur when the gas absorbs light or other electromagnetic radiation. The excited states are unstable and naturally relax back to the ground state. Over various short time scales after the excitation (typically a fraction of a second, or sometimes longer than a second if the excited state is metastable), transitions occur from higher to lower electronic states and ultimately to the ground state, and in each transition results a photon is emitted. This emission is known as fluorescence. Successively higher electronic states are conventionally named formula_2, formula_3, formula_4, etc. (but this convention is not always followed, and sometimes lower case letters and alphabetically out-of-sequence letters are used, as in the example given below). The excitation energy must be greater than or equal to the energy of the electronic state in order for the excitation to occur.\nIn quantum theory, an electronic state of a diatomic molecule is represented by the molecular term symbol\nwhere formula_6 is the total electronic spin quantum number, formula_7 is the total electronic angular momentum quantum number along the internuclear axis, and formula_8 is the vibrational quantum number. formula_7 takes on values 0, 1, 2, ..., which are represented by the electronic state symbols formula_10, formula_11, formula_12...\nFor example, the following table lists the common electronic states (without vibrational quantum numbers) along with the energy of the lowest vibrational level (formula_13) of diatomic nitrogen (N2), the most abundant gas in the Earth's atmosphere. In the table, the subscripts and superscripts after formula_7 give additional quantum mechanical details about the electronic state.\nThe aforementioned fluorescence occurs in distinct regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, called \"emission bands\": each band corresponds to a particular transition from a higher electronic state and vibrational level to a lower electronic state and vibrational level (typically, many vibrational levels are involved in an excited gas of diatomic molecules). For example, N2 formula_2-formula_1 emission bands (a.k.a. Vegard-Kaplan bands) are present in the spectral range from 0.14 to 1.45 \u03bcm (micrometres). A given band can be spread out over several nanometers in electromagnetic wavelength space, owing to the various transitions that occur in the molecule's rotational quantum number, formula_17. These are classified into distinct sub-band branches, depending on the change in formula_17. The formula_19 branch corresponds to formula_20, the formula_21 branch to formula_22, and the formula_23 branch to formula_24. Bands are spread out even further by the limited spectral resolution of the spectrometer that is used to measure the spectrum. The spectral resolution depends on the instrument's point spread function.\nEnergy levels.\nThe molecular term symbol is a shorthand expression of the angular momenta that characterize the electronic quantum states of a diatomic molecule, which are also eigenstates of the electronic molecular Hamiltonian. It is also convenient, and common, to represent a diatomic molecule as two-point masses connected by a massless spring. The energies involved in the various motions of the molecule can then be broken down into three categories: the translational, rotational, and vibrational energies.\nTranslational energies.\nThe translational energy of the molecule is given by the kinetic energy expression:\nwhere formula_26 is the mass of the molecule and formula_8 is its velocity.\nRotational energies.\nClassically, the kinetic energy of rotation is\nFor microscopic, atomic-level systems like a molecule, angular momentum can only have specific discrete values given by\nAlso, for a diatomic molecule the moment of inertia is\nSo, substituting the angular momentum and moment of inertia into Erot, the rotational energy levels of a diatomic molecule are given by:\nVibrational energies.\nAnother type of motion of a diatomic molecule is for each atom to oscillate\u2014or vibrate\u2014along the line connecting the two atoms. The vibrational energy is approximately that of a quantum harmonic oscillator:\nComparison between rotational and vibrational energy spacings.\nThe spacing, and the energy of a typical spectroscopic transition, between vibrational energy levels is about 100 times greater than that of a typical transition between rotational energy levels.\nHund's cases.\nThe good quantum numbers for a diatomic molecule, as well as good approximations of rotational energy levels, can be obtained by modeling the molecule using Hund's cases.\nMnemonics.\nThe mnemonics \"BrINClHOF\", pronounced \"Brinklehof\", \"HONClBrIF\", pronounced \"Honkelbrif\", and \"HOFBrINCl\", pronounced \"Hofbrinkle\", have been coined to aid recall of the list of diatomic elements. Another method, for English-speakers, is the sentence: \"Never Have Fear of Ice Cold Beer\" as a representation of Nitrogen, Hydrogen, Fluorine, Oxygen, Iodine, Chlorine, Bromine."}
{"id": "7939", "revid": "1017089424", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7939", "title": "Duopoly", "text": "A duopoly (from Greek \u03b4\u03cd\u03bf, \"duo\" \"two\" and \u03c0\u03c9\u03bb\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bd, \"polein\" \"to sell\") is a type of oligopoly where two firms have dominant or exclusive control over a market. It is the most commonly studied form of oligopoly due to its simplicity. Duopolies sell to consumers in a competitive market where the choice of an individual consumer can not affect the firm. The defining characteristic of both duopolies and oligopolies is that decisions made by sellers are dependent on each other.\nDuopoly models in economics and game theory.\nThere are two principal duopoly models, Cournot duopoly and Bertrand duopoly:\nPolitics.\nLike a market, a political system can be dominated by two groups, which exclude other parties or ideologies from participation. One party or the other tends to dominate government at any given time (the Majority party), while the other has only limited power (the Minority party). According to Duverger's law, this tends to be caused by a simple winner-take-all voting system without runoffs or ranked choices. The United States and many Latin American countries have two-party government systems.\nExamples in business.\nA commonly cited example of a duopoly is that involving Visa and MasterCard, who between them control a large proportion of the electronic payment processing market. In 2000 they were the defendants in a U.S. Department of Justice antitrust lawsuit. An appeal was upheld in 2004.\nExamples where two companies control a overwhelming proportion of a market are:\nMedia.\nIn Finland, the state-owned broadcasting company Yleisradio and the private broadcaster Mainos-TV had a legal duopoly (in the economists' sense of the word) from the 1950s to 1993. No other broadcasters were allowed. Mainos-TV operated by leasing air time from Yleisradio, broadcasting in reserved blocks between Yleisradio's own programming on its two channels. This was a unique phenomenon in the world. Between 1986 and 1992 there was an independent third channel but it was jointly owned by Yle and MTV; only in 1993 did MTV get its own channel.\nIn the United Kingdom, the BBC and ITV formed an effective duopoly (with Channel 4 originally being economically dependent on ITV) until the development of multichannel from the 1990s onwards.\nIn Africa, mobile service providers Safaricom and Airtel in Kenya are examples of a Duopoly market in the telecommunication industry.\nBroadcasting.\nDuopoly is also used in the United States broadcast television and radio industry to refer to a single company owning two outlets in the same city.\nThis usage is technically incompatible with the normal definition of the word and may lead to confusion, inasmuch as there are generally more than two owners of broadcast television stations in markets with broadcast duopolies. In Canada, this definition is therefore more commonly called a \"twinstick\"."}
{"id": "7940", "revid": "32337724", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7940", "title": "Dungeons &amp; Dragons", "text": "Dungeons &amp; Dragons (commonly abbreviated as D&amp;D or DnD) is a fantasy tabletop role-playing game (RPG) originally designed by Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson. It was first published in 1974 by Tactical Studies Rules, Inc. (TSR). It has been published by Wizards of the Coast (now a subsidiary of Hasbro) since 1997. The game was derived from miniature wargames, with a variation of the 1971 game \"Chainmail\" serving as the initial rule system. \"D&amp;D\" publication is commonly recognized as the beginning of modern role-playing games and the role-playing game industry.\n\"D&amp;D\" departs from traditional wargaming by allowing each player to create their own character to play instead of a military formation. These characters embark upon imaginary adventures within a fantasy setting. A Dungeon Master (DM) serves as the game's referee and storyteller, while maintaining the setting in which the adventures occur, and playing the role of the inhabitants of the game world. The characters form a party and they interact with the setting's inhabitants and each other. Together they solve dilemmas, engage in battles, explore, and gather treasure and knowledge. In the process, the characters earn experience points (XP) in order to rise in levels, and become increasingly powerful over a series of separate gaming sessions.\nThe early success of \"D&amp;D\" led to a proliferation of similar game systems. Despite the competition, \"D&amp;D\" has remained the market leader in the role-playing game industry. In 1977, the game was split into two branches: the relatively rules-light game system of basic \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", and the more structured, rules-heavy game system of \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (abbreviated as \"AD&amp;D\"). \"AD&amp;D\" 2nd Edition was published in 1989. In 2000, a new system was released as \"D&amp;D\" 3rd edition, continuing the edition numbering from \"AD&amp;D\"; a revised version 3.5 was released in June 2003. These 3rd edition rules formed the basis of the d20 System, which is available under the Open Game License (OGL) for use by other publishers. \"D&amp;D\" 4th edition was released in June 2008. The 5th edition of \"D&amp;D\", the most recent, was released during the second half of 2014.\nIn 2004, \"D&amp;D\" remained the best-known, and best-selling, role-playing game in the US, with an estimated 20 million people having played the game, and more than US$1 billion in book and equipment sales worldwide. The year 2017 had \"the most number of players in its history\u201412 million to 15 million in North America alone\". \"D&amp;D 5th edition\" sales \"were up 41 percent in 2017 from the year before, and soared another 52 percent in 2018, the game's biggest sales year yet\". The game has been supplemented by many pre-made adventures, as well as commercial campaign settings suitable for use by regular gaming groups. \"D&amp;D\" is known beyond the game itself for other \"D&amp;D\"-branded products, references in popular culture, and some of the controversies that have surrounded it, particularly a moral panic in the 1980s falsely linking it to Satanism and suicide. The game has won multiple awards and has been translated into many languages.\nPlay overview.\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" is a structured, yet fundamentally open-ended role-playing game. It is normally played indoors with the participants seated around a tabletop. Typically, one player takes on the role of Dungeon Master (DM) while the others each control a single character, representing an individual in a fictional setting. When working together as a group, the player characters (PCs) are often described as a \"party\" of adventurers, with each member often having their own area of specialty which contributes to the success of the whole. During the course of play, each player directs the actions of their character and their interactions with other characters in the game. This activity is performed through the verbal impersonation of the characters by the players, while employing a variety of social and other useful cognitive skills, such as logic, basic mathematics and imagination. A game often continues over a series of meetings to complete a single adventure, and longer into a series of related gaming adventures, called a \"campaign\".\nThe results of the party's choices and the overall storyline for the game are determined by the DM according to the rules of the game and the DM's interpretation of those rules. The DM selects and describes the various non-player characters (NPCs) that the party encounters, the settings in which these interactions occur, and the outcomes of those encounters based on the players' choices and actions. Encounters often take the form of battles with \"monsters\"\u00a0\u2013 a generic term used in \"D&amp;D\" to describe potentially hostile beings such as animals, aberrant beings, or mythical creatures. The game's extensive rules\u00a0\u2013 which cover diverse subjects such as social interactions, magic use, combat, and the effect of the environment on PCs\u00a0\u2013 help the DM to make these decisions. The DM may choose to deviate from the published rules or make up new ones if they feel it is necessary.\nThe most recent versions of the game's rules are detailed in three core rulebooks: The \"Player's Handbook\", the \"Dungeon Master's Guide\" and the \"Monster Manual\".\nThe only items required to play the game are the rulebooks, a character sheet for each player, and a number of polyhedral dice. Many players also use miniature figures on a grid map as a visual aid, particularly during combat. Some editions of the game presume such usage. Many optional accessories are available to enhance the game, such as expansion rulebooks, pre-designed adventures and various campaign settings.\nGame mechanics.\nBefore the game begins, each player creates their player character and records the details (described below) on a character sheet. First, a player determines their character's ability scores, which consist of Strength, Constitution, Dexterity, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma. Each edition of the game has offered differing methods of determining these scores. The player then chooses a race (species) such as human or elf, a character class (occupation) such as fighter or wizard, an alignment (a moral and ethical outlook), and other features to round out the character's abilities and backstory, which have varied in nature through differing editions.\nDuring the game, players describe their PCs' intended actions, such as punching an opponent or picking a lock, and converse with the DM, who then describes the result or response. Trivial actions, such as picking up a letter or opening an unlocked door, are usually automatically successful. The outcomes of more complex or risky actions are determined by rolling dice. Different polyhedral dice are used for different actions, such as a twenty-sided die to see whether a hit was made in combat, but an eight-sided die to determine how much damage was dealt. Factors contributing to the outcome include the character's ability scores, skills and the difficulty of the task. In circumstances where a character does not have control of an event, such as when a trap or magical effect is triggered or a spell is cast, a saving throw can be used to determine whether the resulting damage is reduced or avoided. In this case the odds of success are influenced by the character's class, levels and ability scores.\nAs the game is played, each PC changes over time and generally increases in capability. Characters gain (or sometimes lose) experience, skills and wealth, and may even alter their alignment or gain additional character classes. The key way characters progress is by earning experience points (XP), which happens when they defeat an enemy or accomplish a difficult task. Acquiring enough XP allows a PC to advance a level, which grants the character improved class features, abilities and skills. XP can be lost in some circumstances, such as encounters with creatures that drain life energy, or by use of certain magical powers that come with an XP cost.\nHit points (HP) are a measure of a character's vitality and health and are determined by the class, level and constitution of each character. They can be temporarily lost when a character sustains wounds in combat or otherwise comes to harm, and loss of HP is the most common way for a character to die in the game. Death can also result from the loss of key ability scores or character levels. When a PC dies, it is often possible for the dead character to be resurrected through magic, although some penalties may be imposed as a result. If resurrection is not possible or not desired, the player may instead create a new PC to resume playing the game.\nAdventures and campaigns.\nA typical \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" game consists of an \"adventure\", which is roughly equivalent to a single story. The DM can either design an original adventure, or follow one of the many pre-made adventures (also known as \"modules\") that have been published throughout the history of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". Published adventures typically include a background story, illustrations, maps and goals for PCs to achieve. Some include location descriptions and handouts. Although a small adventure entitled \"Temple of the Frog\" was included in the \"Blackmoor\" rules supplement in 1975, the first stand-alone \"D&amp;D\" module published by TSR was 1978's \"Steading of the Hill Giant Chief\", written by Gygax.\nA linked series of adventures is commonly referred to as a \"campaign\". The locations where these adventures occur, such as a city, country, planet or an entire fictional universe, are referred to as \"campaign settings\" or \"world\". \"D&amp;D\" settings are based in various fantasy genres and feature different levels and types of magic and technology. Popular commercially published campaign settings for \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" include Greyhawk, Dragonlance, Forgotten Realms, Mystara, Spelljammer, Ravenloft, Dark Sun, Planescape, Birthright, and Eberron.\nIn addition to first-party campaigns and modules, two campaigns based on popular culture have been created. The first, based on \"Stranger Things\", was released in May 2019. A campaign based on the \"Rick and Morty vs. Dungeons and Dragons\" comic book series was later released in November 2019.\nAlternatively, DMs may develop their own fictional worlds to use as campaign settings.\nMiniature figures.\nThe wargames from which \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" evolved used miniature figures to represent combatants. \"D&amp;D\" initially continued the use of miniatures in a fashion similar to its direct precursors. The original \"D&amp;D\" set of 1974 required the use of the \"Chainmail\" miniatures game for combat resolution. By the publication of the 1977 game editions, combat was mostly resolved verbally. Thus miniatures were no longer required for game play, although some players continued to use them as a visual reference.\nIn the 1970s, numerous companies began to sell miniature figures specifically for \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and similar games. Licensed miniature manufacturers who produced official figures include Grenadier Miniatures (1980\u20131983), Citadel Miniatures (1984\u20131986), Ral Partha, and TSR itself. Most of these miniatures used the 25\u00a0mm scale.\nPeriodically, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" has returned to its wargaming roots with supplementary rules systems for miniatures-based wargaming. Supplements such as \"Battlesystem\" (1985 and 1989) and a new edition of \"Chainmail\" (2001) provided rule systems to handle battles between armies by using miniatures.\nDevelopment history.\nSources and influences.\nAn immediate predecessor of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" was a set of medieval miniature rules written by Jeff Perren. These were expanded by Gary Gygax, whose additions included a fantasy supplement, before the game was published as \"Chainmail\". When Dave Wesely entered the Army in 1970, his friend and fellow Napoleonics wargamer Dave Arneson began a medieval variation of Wesely's Braunstein games, where players control individuals instead of armies. Arneson used \"Chainmail\" to resolve combat. As play progressed, Arneson added such innovations as character classes, experience points, level advancement, armor class, and others. Having partnered previously with Gygax on \"Don't Give Up the Ship!\", Arneson introduced Gygax to his Blackmoor game and the two then collaborated on developing \"The Fantasy Game\", the game that became \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", with the final writing and preparation of the text being done by Gygax. The name was chosen by Gygax's two-year-old daughter Cindy; upon being presented with a number of choices of possible names, she exclaimed, \"Oh Daddy, I like Dungeons &amp; Dragons best!\", although less prevalent versions of the story gave credit to his wife Mary Jo.\nMany \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" elements appear in hobbies of the mid-to-late 20th century. For example, character-based role playing can be seen in improvisational theater. Game-world simulations were well developed in wargaming. Fantasy milieux specifically designed for gaming could be seen in Glorantha's board games among others. Ultimately, however, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" represents a unique blending of these elements.\nThe world of \"D&amp;D\" was influenced by world mythology, history, pulp fiction, and contemporary fantasy novels. The importance of J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\" and \"The Hobbit\" as an influence on \"D&amp;D\" is controversial. The presence in the game of halflings, elves, half-elves, dwarves, orcs, rangers, and the like, draw comparisons to these works. The resemblance was even closer before the threat of copyright action from Tolkien Enterprises prompted the name changes of hobbit to 'halfling', ent to 'treant', and balrog to 'balor'. For many years, Gygax played down the influence of Tolkien on the development of the game. However, in an interview in 2000, he acknowledged that Tolkien's work had a \"strong impact\" though he also said that the list of other influential authors was long.\nThe \"D&amp;D\" magic system, in which wizards memorize spells that are used up once cast and must be re-memorized the next day, was heavily influenced by the \"Dying Earth\" stories and novels of Jack Vance. The original alignment system (which grouped all characters and creatures into 'Law', 'Neutrality' and 'Chaos') was derived from the novel \"Three Hearts and Three Lions\" by Poul Anderson. A troll described in this work influenced the \"D&amp;D\" definition of that monster.\nOther influences include the works of Robert E. Howard, Edgar Rice Burroughs, A. Merritt, H. P. Lovecraft, Fritz Leiber, L. Sprague de Camp, Fletcher Pratt, Roger Zelazny, and Michael Moorcock. Monsters, spells, and magic items used in the game have been inspired by hundreds of individual works such as A. E. van Vogt's \"Black Destroyer\", Coeurl (the Displacer Beast), Lewis Carroll's \"Jabberwocky\" (vorpal sword) and the Book of Genesis (the clerical spell 'Blade Barrier' was inspired by the \"flaming sword which turned every way\" at the gates of Eden).\nEdition history.\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" has gone through several revisions. Parallel versions and inconsistent naming practices can make it difficult to distinguish between the different editions.\nOriginal game.\nThe original \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", now referred to as \"OD&amp;D\", was a small box set of three booklets published in 1974. With a very limited production budget of only $2000 \u2014 with only $100 budgeted for artwork \u2014 it was amateurish in production and assumed the player was familiar with wargaming. Nevertheless, it grew rapidly in popularity, first among wargamers and then expanding to a more general audience of college and high school students. Roughly 1,000 copies of the game were sold in the first year followed by 3,000 in 1975, and many more in the following years. This first set went through many printings and was supplemented with several official additions, such as the original Greyhawk and Blackmoor supplements (both 1975), as well as magazine articles in TSR's official publications and many fanzines.\nTwo-pronged strategy.\nIn early 1977, TSR created the first element of a two-pronged strategy that would divide \"D&amp;D\" for nearly two decades. A \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons Basic Set\" boxed edition was introduced that cleaned up the presentation of the essential rules, made the system understandable to the general public, and was sold in a package that could be stocked in toy stores. Later in 1977, the first part of \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (\"AD&amp;D\") was published, which brought together the various published rules, options and corrections, then expanded them into a definitive, unified game for hobbyist gamers. TSR marketed them as an introductory game for new players and a more complex game for experienced ones; the \"Basic Set\" directed players who exhausted the possibilities of that game to switch to the advanced rules.\nAs a result of this parallel development, the basic game included many rules and concepts which contradicted comparable ones in \"AD&amp;D\". John Eric Holmes, the editor of the basic game, preferred a lighter tone with more room for personal improvisation. \"AD&amp;D\", on the other hand, was designed to create a tighter, more structured game system than the loose framework of the original game. Between 1977 and 1979, three hardcover rulebooks, commonly referred to as the \"core rulebooks\", were released: the \"Player's Handbook\" (PHB), the \"Dungeon Master's Guide\" (DMG), and the \"Monster Manual\" (MM). Several supplementary books were published throughout the 1980s, notably \"Unearthed Arcana\" (1985) that included a large number of new rules. Confusing matters further, the original \"D&amp;D\" boxed set remained in publication until 1979, since it remained a healthy seller for TSR.\nRevised editions.\nIn the 1980s, the rules for \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and \"basic\" \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" remained separate, each developing along different paths.\nIn 1981, the basic version of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" was revised by Tom Moldvay to make it even more novice-friendly. It was promoted as a continuation of the original \"D&amp;D\" tone, whereas \"AD&amp;D\" was promoted as advancement of the mechanics. An accompanying \"Expert Set\", originally written by David \"Zeb\" Cook, allowed players to continue using the simpler ruleset beyond the early levels of play. In 1983, revisions of those sets by Frank Mentzer were released, revising the presentation of the rules to a more tutorial format. These were followed by \"Companion\" (1983), \"Master\" (1985), and \"Immortals\" (1986) sets. Each set covered game play for more powerful characters than the previous. The first four sets were compiled in 1991 as a single hardcover book, the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons Rules Cyclopedia\", which was released alongside a new introductory boxed set.\n\"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons 2nd Edition\" was published in 1989, again as three core rulebooks; the primary designer was David \"Zeb\" Cook. The \"Monster Manual\" was replaced by the \"Monstrous Compendium\", a loose-leaf binder that was subsequently replaced by the hardcover \"Monstrous Manual\" in 1993. In 1995, the core rulebooks were slightly revised, although still referred to by TSR as the 2nd Edition, and a series of \"Player's Option\" manuals were released as optional rulebooks.\nThe release of \"AD&amp;D 2nd Edition\" deliberately excluded some aspects of the game that had attracted negative publicity. References to demons and devils, sexually suggestive artwork, and playable, evil-aligned character types\u00a0\u2013 such as assassins and half-orcs\u00a0\u2013 were removed. The edition moved away from a theme of 1960s and 1970s \"sword and sorcery\" fantasy fiction to a mixture of medieval history and mythology. The rules underwent minor changes, including the addition of non-weapon proficiencies\u00a0\u2013 skill-like abilities that originally appeared in 1st Edition supplements. The game's magic spells were divided into schools and spheres. A major difference was the promotion of various game settings beyond that of traditional fantasy. This included blending fantasy with other genres, such as horror (Ravenloft), science fiction (Spelljammer), and apocalyptic (Dark Sun), as well as alternative historical and non-European mythological settings.\nWizards of the Coast.\nIn 1997, a near-bankrupt TSR was purchased by Wizards of the Coast. Following three years of development, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 3rd edition was released in 2000. The new release folded the Basic and Advanced lines back into a single unified game. It was the largest revision of the \"D&amp;D\" rules to date, and served as the basis for a multi-genre role-playing system designed around 20-sided dice, called the d20 System. The 3rd Edition rules were designed to be internally consistent and less restrictive than previous editions of the game, allowing players more flexibility to create the characters they wanted to play. Skills and feats were introduced into the core rules to encourage further customization of characters. The new rules standardized the mechanics of action resolution and combat. In 2003, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons v.3.5\" was released as a revision of the 3rd Edition rules. This release incorporated hundreds of rule changes, mostly minor, and expanded the core rulebooks.\nIn early 2005, Wizards of the Coast's R&amp;D team started to develop \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 4th Edition, prompted mainly by the feedback obtained from the \"D&amp;D\" playing community and a desire to make the game faster, more intuitive, and with a better play experience than under the 3rd Edition. The new game was developed through a number of design phases spanning from May 2005 until its release. \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 4th Edition was announced at Gen Con in August 2007, and the initial three core books were released June 6, 2008. 4th Edition streamlined the game into a simplified form and introduced numerous rules changes. Many character abilities were restructured into \"Powers\". These altered the spell-using classes by adding abilities that could be used at will, per encounter, or per day. Likewise, non-magic-using classes were provided with parallel sets of options. Software tools, including player character and monster building programs, became a major part of the game. This edition added the \"D&amp;D Encounters\" program; a weekly event held at local stores designed to draw players back to the game by giving \"the busy gamer the chance to play \"D&amp;D\" once a week as their schedules allow. In the past, \"D&amp;D\" games could take months, even years, and players generally had to attend every session so that the story flow wasn't interrupted. With \"Encounters\", players can come and go as they choose and new players can easily be integrated into the story continuity\".\nOn January 9, 2012, Wizards of the Coast announced that it was working on a 5th edition of the game. The company planned to take suggestions from players and let them playtest the rules. Public playtesting began on May 24, 2012. At Gen Con 2012 in August, Mike Mearls, lead developer for 5th Edition, said that Wizards of the Coast had received feedback from more than 75,000 playtesters, but that the entire development process would take two years, adding, \"I can't emphasize this enough\u00a0... we're very serious about taking the time we need to get this right.\" The release of the 5th Edition, coinciding with \"D&amp;D\"s 40th anniversary, occurred in the second half of 2014.\nSince the release of 5th edition, there have been over twenty \"Dungeon &amp; Dragons\" books published including new rulebooks, campaign guides and adventure modules. 2017 had \"the most number of players in its history \u2014 12 million to 15 million in North America alone\". Mary Pilon, for \"Bloomberg\", reported that sales of 5th edition \"Dungeon &amp; Dragons\" \"were up 41 percent in 2017 from the year before, and soared another 52 percent in 2018, the game\u2019s biggest sales year yet. [...] In 2017, 9 million people watched others play D&amp;D on Twitch, immersing themselves in the world of the game without ever having to pick up a die or cast a spell\". In 2018, Wizards of the Coast organized a massive live-stream event, the Stream of Many Eyes, where ten live-streamed sessions of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" were performed on Twitch over three days. This event won the Content Marketing Institute's 2019 award for best \"In-Person (Event) Content Marketing Strategy\". \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" continued to have a strong presence on Twitch throughout 2019; this included a growing number of celebrity players and dungeon masters, such as Joe Manganiello, Deborah Ann Woll and Stephen Colbert.\nIn 2020, Wizards of the Coast announced that \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" had its 6th annual year of growth in 2019 with a \"300 percent increase in sales of their introductory box sets, as well as a 65% increase on sales in Europe, a rate which has more than quadrupled since 2014\". In terms of player demographics in 2019, 39% of identified as female and 61% identified as male. 40% of players are considered Gen Z (24 years old or younger), 34% of players are in the age range of 25\u201334 and 26% of players are aged 35+. In January 2021, the \"Los Angeles Times\" reported that according to Liz Schuh, head of publishing and licensing for Dungeons &amp; Dragons, \"revenue was up 35% in 2020 compared with 2019, the seventh consecutive year of growth,\" and in 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, \"virtual play rose 86% [...] aided by online platforms such as Roll20 and Fantasy Grounds\". Sarah Parvini, for the \"Los Angeles Times\", wrote, \"players and scholars attribute the game\u2019s resurgent popularity not only to the longueurs of the pandemic, but also to its reemergence in pop culture \u2014 on the Netflix series \"Stranger Things\", whose main characters play D&amp;D in a basement; on the sitcom \"The Big Bang Theory\"; or via the host of celebrities who display their love for the game online\".\nLicensing.\nEarly in the game's history, TSR took no action against small publishers' production of \"D&amp;D\" compatible material, and even licensed Judges Guild to produce \"D&amp;D\" materials for several years, such as \"City State of the Invincible Overlord.\" This attitude changed in the mid-1980s when TSR took legal action to try to prevent others from publishing compatible material. This angered many fans and led to resentment by the other gaming companies. Although TSR took legal action against several publishers in an attempt to restrict third-party usage, it never brought any court cases to completion, instead settling out of court in every instance. TSR itself ran afoul of intellectual property law in several cases.\nWith the launch of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\"'s 3rd Edition, Wizards of the Coast made the d20 System available under the Open Game License (OGL) and d20 System trademark license. Under these licenses, authors were free to use the d20 System when writing games and game supplements. The OGL and d20 Trademark License made possible new games, some based on licensed products like \"Star Wars\", and new versions of older games, such as \"Call of Cthulhu\".\nWith the release of the fourth edition, Wizards of the Coast introduced its Game System License, which represented a significant restriction compared to the very open policies embodied by the OGL. In part as a response to this, some publishers (such as Paizo Publishing with its \"Pathfinder Roleplaying Game\") who previously produced materials in support of the \"D&amp;D\" product line, decided to continue supporting the 3rd Edition rules, thereby competing directly with Wizards of the Coast. Others, such as Kenzer &amp; Company, are returning to the practice of publishing unlicensed supplements and arguing that copyright law does not allow Wizards of the Coast to restrict third-party usage.\nDuring the 2000s, there has been a trend towards reviving and recreating older editions of \"D&amp;D\", known as the Old School Revival. This in turn inspired the creation of \"retro-clones\", games which more closely recreate the original rule sets, using material placed under the OGL along with non-copyrightable mechanical aspects of the older rules to create a new presentation of the games.\nAlongside the publication of the 5th Edition, Wizards of the Coast established a two-pronged licensing approach. The core of the 5th Edition rules have been made available under the OGL, while publishers and independent creators have also been given the opportunity to create licensed materials directly for Dungeons &amp; Dragons and associated properties like the Forgotten Realms under a program called the DM's Guild. The DM's Guild does not function under the OGL, but uses a community agreement intended to foster liberal cooperation among content creators.\nWizards of the Coast has started to release 5th Edition products that tie into other intellectual properties \u2014 such as \"\" with the \"Guildmasters' Guide to Ravnica\" (2018) and \"Mythic Odysseys of Theros\" (2020) source books. Two 5th Edition starter box sets based on TV shows, \"Stranger Things\" and \"Rick and Morty\", were released in 2019. Source books based on \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" live play series have also been released: \"Acquisitions Incorporated\" (2019) and \"Explorer's Guide to Wildemount\" (2020).\nReception.\nEric Goldberg reviewed \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" in \"Ares Magazine\" #1 (March 1980), rating it a 6 out of 9, and commented that \"\"Dungeons and Dragons\" is an impressive achievement based on the concept alone, and also must be credited with cementing the marriage between the fantasy genre and gaming.\" Eric Goldberg again reviewed \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" in \"Ares Magazine\" #3 and commented that \"\"D&amp;D\" is the FRP game played most often in most places.\"\nThe game had more than three million players around the world by 1981, and copies of the rules were selling at a rate of about 750,000 per year by 1984. Beginning with a French language edition in 1982, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" has been translated into many languages beyond the original English. By 1992, the game had been translated into 14 languages and sold over copies in 44 countries worldwide. By 2004, consumers had spent more than on \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" products and the game had been played by more than 20\u00a0million people. As many as six million people played the game in 2007.\nLater editions would lead to inevitable comparisons between the game series. Griffin McElroy, for \"Polygon\", wrote: \"The game has shifted in the past four decades, bouncing between different rules sets, philosophies and methods of play. Role-playing, character customization and real-life improvisational storytelling has always been at the game's core, but how those ideas are interpreted by the game system has changed drastically edition-to-edition\". Dieter Bohn, for \"The Verge\", wrote: \"Every few years there\u2019s been a new version of \"D&amp;D\" that tries to address the shortcomings of the previous version and also make itself more palatable to its age. [...] The third edition got a reputation (which it didn\u2019t necessarily deserve) for being too complex and rules-focused. The fourth edition got a reputation (which it didn\u2019t necessarily deserve) for being too focused on miniatures and grids, too mechanical. Meanwhile, the company that owns \"D&amp;D\" had released a bunch of its old material for free as a service to fans, and some of that was built up into a competing game called \"Pathfinder\". \"Pathfinder\" ultimately became more popular, by some metrics, than \"D&amp;D\" itself\". Bohn highlighted that the 5th Edition was \"designed for one purpose: to bring \"D&amp;D\" back to its roots and win back everybody who left during the edition wars\". Henry Glasheen, for \"SLUG Magazine\", highlighted that after jumping ship during the 4th Edition era he was drawn back to \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" with 5th Edition and he considers it \"the new gold standard for D20-based tabletop RPGs\". Glasheen wrote \"Fifth Edition is a compelling reason to get excited about D&amp;D again\" and \"while some will welcome the simplicity, I fully expect that plenty of people will stick to whatever system suits them best. However, this edition is easily my favorite, ranking even higher than D&amp;D 3.5, my first love in D&amp;D\".\nCurtis D. Carbonell, in the book \"Dread Trident: Tabletop Role-Playing Games and the Modern Fantastic\", wrote: \"Negative association with earlier niche 'nerd' culture have reversed. 5e has become inclusive in its reach of players, after years of focusing on a white, male demographic. [...] At its simplest, the game system now encourages different types of persons to form a party not just to combat evil [...] but to engage in any number of adventure scenarios\".\nAcclaim.\nThe various editions of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" have won many Origins Awards, including \"All Time Best Roleplaying Rules of 1977\", \"Best Roleplaying Rules of 1989\", \"Best Roleplaying Game of 2000\" and \"Best Role Playing Game and Best Role Playing Supplement of 2014\" for the flagship editions of the game. Both \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" are Origins Hall of Fame Games inductees as they were deemed sufficiently distinct to merit separate inclusion on different occasions. The independent \"Games\" magazine placed \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" on their \"Games 100\" list from 1980 through 1983, then entered the game into the magazine's Hall of Fame in 1984. \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" was ranked 2nd in the 1996 reader poll of \"Arcane\" magazine to determine the 50 most popular roleplaying games of all time. \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" was inducted into the National Toy Hall of Fame in 2016 and into the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame in 2017.\nLegacy and influence.\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" was the first modern role-playing game and it established many of the conventions that have dominated the genre. Particularly notable are the use of dice as a game mechanic, character record sheets, use of numerical attributes and gamemaster-centered group dynamics. Within months of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\"'s release, new role-playing game writers and publishers began releasing their own role-playing games, with most of these being in the fantasy genre. Some of the earliest other role-playing games inspired by \"D&amp;D\" include \"Tunnels &amp; Trolls\" (1975), \"Empire of the Petal Throne\" (1975), and \"Chivalry &amp; Sorcery\" (1976).\nThe role-playing movement initiated by \"D&amp;D\" would lead to release of the science fiction game \"Traveller\" (1977), the fantasy game \"RuneQuest\" (1978), and subsequent game systems such as Chaosium's \"Call of Cthulhu\" (1981), \"Champions\" (1982), \"GURPS\" (1986), and \"\" (1991). \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" and the games it influenced fed back into the genre's origin\u00a0\u2013 miniatures wargames\u00a0\u2013 with combat strategy games like \"Warhammer Fantasy Battles\". \"D&amp;D\" also had a large impact on modern video games.\n\"D&amp;D\" has been compared unfavorably to other role-playing games of its time. Writing for Slate, Erik Sofge makes unfavorable comparisons between the violent incentives of \"D&amp;D\" and the more versatile role-playing experience of \"GURPS\". He claims that \"for decades, gamers have argued that since D&amp;D came first, its lame, morally repulsive experience system can be forgiven. But the damage is still being done: New generations of players are introduced to RPGs as little more than a collective fantasy of massacre.\" This criticism generated backlash from \"D&amp;D\" fans. Writing for Ars Technica, Ben Kuchera responded that Sofge had experienced a \"small-minded Dungeon Master who only wanted to kill things\", and that better game experiences are possible.\nDirector Jon Favreau credits \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" with giving him \"...\u00a0a really strong background in imagination, storytelling, understanding how to create tone and a sense of balance.\"\nNoelle Stevenson and the crew of \"She-Ra and the Princesses of Power\" were strongly influenced by \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", with Stevenson calling it basically a D&amp;D campaign, with Adora, Glimmer, and Bow falling into \"specific classes in D&amp;D\".\nControversy and notoriety.\nThe game's commercial success was a factor that led to lawsuits regarding distribution of royalties between original creators Gygax and Arneson. Gygax later became embroiled in a political struggle for control of TSR which culminated in a court battle and Gygax's decision to sell his ownership interest in the company in 1985.\nAt various times in its history, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" has received negative publicity, in particular from some Christian groups, for alleged promotion of such practices as devil worship, witchcraft, suicide, and murder, and for the presence of naked breasts in drawings of female humanoids in the original \"AD&amp;D\" manuals (mainly monsters such as harpies, succubi, etc.). These controversies led TSR to remove many potentially controversial references and artwork when releasing the 2nd Edition of \"AD&amp;D\". Many of these references, including the use of the names \"devils\" and \"demons\", were reintroduced in the 3rd edition. The moral panic over the game led to problems for fans of \"D&amp;D\" who faced social ostracism, unfair treatment, and false association with the occult and Satanism, regardless of an individual fan's actual religious affiliation and beliefs.\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" has also been the subject of rumors regarding players having difficulty separating fantasy from reality, even leading to psychotic episodes. The most notable of these was the saga of James Dallas Egbert III, the facts of which were fictionalized in the novel \"Mazes and Monsters\" and later made into a TV movie in 1982 starring Tom Hanks. William Dear, the private investigator hired by the Egbert family to find their son when he went missing at college, wrote a book titled \"The Dungeon Master\" refuting any connection with D&amp;D and Egbert's personal issues. The game was blamed for some of the actions of Chris Pritchard, who was convicted in 1990 of murdering his stepfather. Research by various psychologists, starting with Armando Simon, has concluded that no harmful effects are related to the playing of \"D&amp;D\".\n\"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" has, however, been cited as encouraging people to socialize weekly or biweekly, teaching problem solving skills which can be beneficial in adult life, and teaching positive moral decisions.\nIn 2020, \"Polygon\" reported that \"the D&amp;D team announced that it would be making changes to portions of its 5th edition product line that fans have called out for being insensitive\". Sebastian Modak, for \"The Washington Post\", reported that the tabletop community has widely approved these changes. Modak wrote that \"in its statement addressing mistakes around portrayals of different peoples in the D&amp;D universe, Wizards of the Coast highlighted its recent efforts in bringing in more diverse voices to craft the new D&amp;D source books coming out in 2021. [...] These conversations \u2014 around depictions of race and alleged treatment of employees of marginalized backgrounds and identities \u2014 have encouraged players to seek out other tabletop roleplaying experiences\". Matthew Gault, for \"Wired\", reported positively on the roundtable discussions Wizards of the Coast has hosted with fans and community leaders on diversity and inclusion. However, Gault also highlighted that other efforts, such as revisions to old material and the release of new material, have been less great and at times minimal. Gault wrote, \"WotC appears to be trying to change things, but it keeps stumbling, and it\u2019s often the fans who pick up the pieces. [...] WotC is trying to make changes, but it often feels like lip service. [...] The loudest voices criticizing D&amp;D right now are doing it out of love. They don\u2019t want to see it destroyed, they want it to change with the times\".\nRelated products.\n\"D&amp;D\"'s commercial success has led to many other related products, including \"Dragon\" Magazine, \"Dungeon\" Magazine, an animated television series, a film series, an official role-playing soundtrack, novels, both ongoing and limited series licensed comics, and numerous computer and video games. Hobby and toy stores sell dice, miniatures, adventures, and other game aids related to \"D&amp;D\" and its game offspring.\nIn popular culture.\n\"D&amp;D\" grew in popularity through the late 1970s and 1980s. Numerous games, films, and cultural references based on \"D&amp;D\" or \"D&amp;D\"-like fantasies, characters or adventures have been ubiquitous since the end of the 1970s. \"D&amp;D\" players are (sometimes pejoratively) portrayed as the epitome of geekdom, and have become the basis of much geek and gamer humor and satire. \"In 2017, 9 million people watched others play D&amp;D on Twitch, immersing themselves in the world of the game without ever having to pick up a die or cast a spell\".\nFamous \"D&amp;D\" players include Pulitzer Prize-winning author Junot D\u00edaz, professional basketball player Tim Duncan, comedian Stephen Colbert, and actors Vin Diesel and Robin Williams. \"D&amp;D\" and its fans have been the subject of spoof films, including \"Fear of Girls\" and \"\"."}
{"id": "7941", "revid": "3158216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7941", "title": "Double jeopardy", "text": "Double jeopardy is a procedural defence (primarily in common law jurisdictions) that prevents an accused person from being tried again on the same (or similar) charges following an acquittal in the same jurisdiction. A variation in civil law countries is the peremptory plea, which may take the specific forms of ('previously acquitted') or ('previously convicted'). These doctrines appear to have originated in ancient Roman law, in the broader principle ('not twice against the same').\nAvailability as a legal defence.\nIf a double-jeopardy issue is raised, evidence will be placed before the court, which will typically rule as a preliminary matter whether the plea is substantiated; if it is, the projected trial will be prevented from proceeding. In some countries certain exemptions are permitted, such as in the United Kingdom, where in Scotland a new trial can be initiated if, for example, the acquitted has made a credible admission of guilt. Part of English law for over 800 years, it was partially abolished in England, Wales and Northern Ireland by the Criminal Justice Act 2003 where, following demand for change, serious offences may be re-tried following an acquittal if new and compelling evidence is found and for the trial to be in the public's interest. In some countries, including Canada, Mexico, and the United States, the guarantee against being \"twice put in jeopardy\" is a constitutional right. In other countries, the protection is afforded by statute.\nIn common law countries, a defendant may enter a peremptory plea of ('previously acquitted') or ('previously convicted'), with the same effect.\nDouble jeopardy is not a principle of international law. It does not apply between different countries, unless having been contractually agreed on between those countries as, for example, in the European Union (Art. 54 Schengen Convention), and in various extradition treaties between two countries.\nInternational Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.\nThe 72 signatories and 166 parties to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights recognise, under Article 14 (7): \"No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again for an offence for which he has already been finally convicted or acquitted in accordance with the law and penal procedure of each country.\" However, it does not apply to prosecutions by two different sovereigns (unless the relevant extradition treaty expresses a prohibition).\nEuropean Convention on Human Rights.\nAll members of the Council of Europe (which includes nearly all European countries and every member of the European Union) have adopted the European Convention on Human Rights. The optional Protocol No. 7 to the convention, Article 4, protects against double jeopardy: \"No one shall be liable to be tried or punished again in criminal proceedings under the jurisdiction of the same State for an offence for which he or she has already been finally acquitted or convicted in accordance with the law and penal procedure of that State.\"\nAll EU states ratified this optional protocol except for Germany, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. In those member states, national rules governing double jeopardy may or may not comply with the provision cited above.\nMember states may, however, implement legislation which allows reopening of a case if new evidence is found or if there was a fundamental defect in the previous proceedings:\nIn many European countries, the prosecution may appeal an acquittal to a higher court. This is not regarded as double jeopardy, but as a continuation of the same case. The European Convention on Human Rights permits this by using the phrase \"finally acquitted or convicted\" as the trigger for prohibiting subsequent prosecution.\nBy country.\nAustralia.\nIn contrast to other common law nations, Australian double jeopardy law has been held to further prevent the prosecution for perjury following a previous acquittal where a finding of perjury would controvert the acquittal. This was confirmed in the case of \"R v Carroll\", where the police found new evidence convincingly disproving Carroll's sworn alibi two decades after he had been acquitted of murder charges in the death of Ipswich child Deidre Kennedy, and successfully prosecuted him for perjury. Public outcry following the overturn of his conviction (for perjury) by the High Court has led to widespread calls for reform of the law along the lines of the England and Wales legislation.\nDuring a Council of Australian Governments (COAG) meeting of 2007, model legislation to rework double jeopardy laws was drafted, but there was no formal agreement for each state to introduce it. All states have now chosen to introduce legislation that mirrors COAG's recommendations on \"fresh and compelling\" evidence.\nIn New South Wales, retrials of serious cases with a minimum sentence of 20 years or more are now possible even if the original trial preceded the 2006 reform. On 17 October 2006, the New South Wales Parliament passed legislation abolishing the rule against double jeopardy in cases where:\nOn 30 July 2008, South Australia also introduced legislation to scrap parts of its double jeopardy law, legalising retrials for serious offences with \"fresh and compelling\" evidence, or if the acquittal was tainted.\nIn Western Australia, amendments introduced on 8 September 2011 allow retrial if \"new and compelling\" evidence is found. It applies to serious offences where the penalty was life imprisonment or imprisonment for 14 years or more. Acquittal because of tainting (witness intimidation, jury tampering, or perjury) also permits retrial.\nIn Tasmania, on 19 August 2008, amendments were introduced to allow retrial in serious cases if there is \"fresh and compelling\" evidence.\nIn Victoria on 21 December 2011, legislation was passed allowing new trials where there is \"fresh and compelling DNA evidence, where the person acquitted subsequently admits to the crime, or where it becomes clear that key witnesses have given false evidence\". However, retrial applications could only be made for serious offences such as murder, manslaughter, arson causing death, serious drug offences and aggravated forms of rape and armed robbery.\nIn Queensland on 18 October 2007, the double jeopardy laws were modified to allow a retrial where fresh and compelling evidence becomes available after an acquittal for murder or a \"tainted acquittal\" for a crime carrying a 25-year or more sentence. A \"tainted acquittal\" requires a conviction for an administration of justice offence, such as perjury, that led to the original acquittal. Unlike reforms in the United Kingdom, New South Wales, Tasmania, Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia, this law does not have a retrospective effect, which is unpopular with some advocates of the reform.\nCanada.\nThe Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms includes provisions such as section 11(h) prohibiting double jeopardy. However, the prohibition only applies after an accused person has been \"finally\" convicted or acquitted. Canadian law allows the prosecution to appeal an acquittal. If the acquittal is thrown out, the new trial is not considered to be double jeopardy since the verdict of the first trial is annulled. In rare circumstances, a court of appeal might also substitute a conviction for an acquittal. That is not considered double jeopardy since the appeal and the subsequent conviction are then deemed to be a continuation of the original trial.\nFor an appeal from an acquittal to be successful, the Supreme Court of Canada requires the Crown to show that an error in law was made during the trial and that it contributed to the verdict. It has been argued that this test is unfairly beneficial to the prosecution. For instance, in his book \"My Life in Crime and Other Academic Adventures\", Martin Friedland contends that the rule should be changed so that a retrial is granted only when the error is shown to be \"responsible\" for the verdict, not just a factor.\nA notable example is Guy Paul Morin, who was wrongfully convicted in his second trial after the acquittal in his first trial was vacated by the Supreme Court of Canada.\nIn the Guy Turcotte case, for instance, the Quebec Court of Appeal overturned Turcotte's not criminally responsible verdict and ordered a second trial after it found that the judge committed an error in the first trial while instructions were given to the jury. Turcotte was later convicted of second-degree murder in the second trial.\nFrance.\nOnce all appeals have been exhausted on a case, the judgement is final and the action of the prosecution is closed (code of penal procedure, art. 6), except if the final ruling was forged. Prosecution for a crime already judged is impossible even if incriminating evidence has been found. However, a person who has been convicted may request another trial on the grounds of new exculpating evidence through a procedure known as \"r\u00e9vision\".\nGermany.\nThe Basic Law (\"Grundgesetz\") for the Federal Republic of Germany protects against double jeopardy if a final verdict is pronounced. A verdict is final if nobody appeals against it.\nHowever, each trial party can appeal against a verdict in the first instance. The prosecution or the defendants can appeal against a judgement if they disagree with it. In this case, the trial starts again in the second instance, the court of appeal (\"Berufungsgericht\"), which reconsiders the facts and reasons and delivers a final judgement.\nIf one of the parties disagrees with the second instance's judgement, they can appeal it only for formal judicial reasons. The case will be checked in the third instance (\"Revisionsgericht\"), whether all laws are applied correctly.\nThe rule applies to the whole \"historical event, which is usually considered a single historical course of actions the separation of which would seem unnatural\". This is true even if new facts occur that indicate other crimes.\nThe Penal Procedural Code (\"Strafprozessordnung\") permits a retrial (\"Wiederaufnahmeverfahren\"), if it is in favour of the defendant or if the following events had happened:\nIn the case of an order of summary punishment, which can be issued by the court without a trial for lesser misdemeanours, there is a further exception:\nIn Germany, a felony is defined by \u00a7 12 (1) StGB as a crime that has a minimum of one year of imprisonment.\nIndia.\nA partial protection against double jeopardy is a Fundamental Right guaranteed under Article 20 (2) of the Constitution of India, which states \"No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once\". This provision enshrines the concept of \"autrefois convict\", that no one convicted of an offence can be tried or punished a second time. However, it does not extend to \"autrefois acquit\", and so if a person is acquitted of a crime he can be retried. In India, protection against \"autrefois acquit\" is a statutory right, not a fundamental one. Such protection is provided by provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure rather than by the Constitution.\nJapan.\nThe Constitution of Japan states in Article 39 that\nIn practice, however, if someone is acquitted in a lower District Court, the prosecutor can appeal to the High Court and to the Supreme Court. Only the acquittal in the Supreme Court prevents any further retrial. This process sometimes takes decades.\nThe above is not considered a violation of the constitution. Because of Supreme Court precedent, this process is all considered part of a single proceeding.\nThe Netherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, the state prosecution can appeal a not-guilty verdict at the bench. New evidence can be applied during a retrial at a district court. Thus one can be tried twice for the same alleged crime. If one is convicted at the district court, the defence can make an appeal on procedural grounds to the supreme court. The supreme court might admit this complaint, and the case will be reopened yet again, at another district court. Again, new evidence might be introduced by the prosecution.\nOn 9 April 2013 the Dutch senate voted 36 \"yes\" versus 35 \"no\" in favour of a new law that allows the prosecutor to re-try a person who was found not guilty in court. This new law is limited to crimes where someone died and new evidence must have been gathered. The new law also works retroactively.\nPakistan.\nArticle 13 of the Constitution of Pakistan protects a person from being punished or prosecuted more than once for the same offence. Section 403 of The Code of Criminal Procedure contemplates of a situation where as person having once been tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction and acquitted by such court cannot be tried again for the same offence or for any other offence based on similar facts. The scope of section 403 is restricted to criminal proceedings and not to civil proceedings and departmental inquiries.\nSerbia.\nThis principle is incorporated into the Constitution of the Republic of Serbia and further elaborated in its Criminal Procedure Act.\nSouth Africa.\nThe Bill of Rights in the Constitution of South Africa forbids a retrial when there has already been an acquittal or a conviction.\nSouth Korea.\nArticle 13 of the South Korean constitution provides that no citizen shall be placed in double jeopardy.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEngland and Wales.\nDouble jeopardy has been permitted in England and Wales in certain (exceptional) circumstances since the Criminal Justice Act 2003.\nPre-2003.\nThe doctrines of \"autrefois acquit\" and \"autrefois convict\" persisted as part of the common law from the time of the Norman conquest of England; they were regarded as essential elements for protection of the subject's liberty and respect for due process of law in that there should be finality of proceedings. There were only three exceptions, all relatively recent, to the rules:\nIn \"Connelly v DPP\" [1964] AC 1254, the Law Lords ruled that a defendant could not be tried for any offence arising out of substantially the same set of facts relied upon in a previous charge of which he had been acquitted, unless there are \"special circumstances\" proven by the prosecution. There is little case law on the meaning of \"special circumstances\", but it has been suggested that the emergence of new evidence would suffice.\nA defendant who had been convicted of an offence could be given a second trial for an aggravated form of that offence if the facts constituting the aggravation were discovered after the first conviction. By contrast, a person who had been acquitted of a lesser offence could not be tried for an aggravated form even if new evidence became available.\nPost-2003.\nFollowing the murder of Stephen Lawrence, the Macpherson Report recommended that the double jeopardy rule should be abrogated in murder cases, and that it should be possible to subject an acquitted murder suspect to a second trial if \"fresh and viable\" new evidence later came to light. The Law Commission later added its support to this in its report \"Double Jeopardy and Prosecution Appeals\" (2001). A parallel report into the criminal justice system by Lord Justice Auld, a past Senior Presiding Judge for England and Wales, had also commenced in 1999 and was published as the Auld Report six months after the Law Commission report. It opined that the Law Commission had been unduly cautious by limiting the scope to murder and that \"the exceptions should [...] extend to other grave offences punishable with life and/or long terms of imprisonment as Parliament might specify.\"\nBoth Jack Straw (then Home Secretary) and William Hague (then Leader of the Opposition) favoured this measure. These recommendations were implemented\u2014not uncontroversially at the time\u2014within the Criminal Justice Act 2003, and this provision came into force in April 2005. It opened certain serious crimes (including murder, manslaughter, kidnapping, rape, armed robbery, and serious drug crimes) to a retrial, regardless of when committed, with two conditions: the retrial must be approved by the Director of Public Prosecutions, and the Court of Appeal must agree to quash the original acquittal due to \"new and compelling evidence\". Then Director of Public Prosecutions, Ken Macdonald QC, said that he expected no more than a handful of cases to be brought in a year.\nPressure by Ann Ming, the mother of 1989 murder victim Julie Hogg\u2014whose killer, William Dunlop, was initially acquitted and subsequently confessed\u2014also contributed to the demand for legal change. On 11 September 2006, Dunlop became the first person to be convicted of murder following a prior acquittal for the same crime, in his case his 1991 acquittal of Hogg's murder. Some years later he had confessed to the crime, and was convicted of perjury, but was unable to be retried for the killing itself. The case was re-investigated in early 2005, when the new law came into effect, and his case was referred to the Court of Appeal, in November 2005, for permission for a new trial, which was granted. Dunlop pleaded guilty to murder and was sentenced to life imprisonment, with a recommendation he serve no less than 17 years.\nOn 13 December 2010, Mark Weston became the first person to be retried and found guilty of murder by a jury (Dunlop having confessed). In 1996 Weston had been acquitted of the murder of Vikki Thompson at Ascott-under-Wychwood on 12 August 1995, but following the discovery in 2009 of compelling new evidence (Thompson's blood on Weston's boots) he was arrested and tried for a second time. He was sentenced to life imprisonment, to serve a minimum of 13 years.\nIn December 2018, convicted paedophile Russell Bishop was also retried and found guilty by a jury for the Babes in the Wood murders of two 9-year-old girls, Nicola Fellows and Karen Hadaway, on 9 October 1986. At the original trial in 1987, a key piece of the prosecution's case rested on the recovery of a discarded blue sweatshirt. Under questioning, Bishop denied that the sweatshirt belonged to him, but his girlfriend, Jennifer Johnson, alleged the clothing was Bishop's, before she changed her story in the trial, telling the jury she had never seen the top before. Attributed to a series of blunders in the prosecution's case, Bishop was acquitted by the jury after two hours of deliberations. Three years later, Bishop was found guilty of the abduction, molestation, and attempted murder of a 7-year-old girl in February 1990. In 2014, re-examined by modern forensics, the sweatshirt contained traces of Bishop's DNA, and also had fibres on it from both of the girls' clothing. Tapings taken from Karen Hadaway's arm also yielded traces of Bishop's DNA. At the 2018 trial, a jury of seven men and five women returned a guilty verdict after two-and-a-half hours of deliberation.\nOn 14 November 2019, Michael Weir became the first person to be twice found guilty of a murder. He was originally convicted of the murder of Leonard Harris and Rose Seferian in 1999, but the conviction was quashed in 2000 by the Court of Appeal on a technicality. In 2018, new DNA evidence had been obtained and palm prints from both murder scenes were matched to Weir. Twenty years after the original conviction, Weir was convicted for the murders for a second time.\nScotland.\nThe double jeopardy rule no longer applies absolutely in Scotland since the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Act 2011 came into force on 28 November 2011. The Act introduced three broad exceptions to the rule: where the acquittal had been tainted by an attempt to pervert the course of justice; where the accused admitted their guilt after acquittal; and where there was new evidence.\nNorthern Ireland.\nIn Northern Ireland the Criminal Justice Act 2003, effective 18 April 2005, makes certain \"qualifying offence\" (including murder, rape, kidnapping, specified sexual acts with young children, specified drug offences, defined acts of terrorism, as well as in certain cases attempts or conspiracies to commit the foregoing) subject to retrial after acquittal (including acquittals obtained before passage of the Act) if there is a finding by the Court of Appeal that there is \"new and compelling evidence.\"\nUnited States.\nThe ancient protection of the Common Law against double jeopardy is maintained in its full rigour in the United States, beyond the reach of any change save that of a Constitutional Amendment. The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides:\nConversely, double jeopardy comes with a key exception. Under the multiple sovereignties doctrine, multiple sovereigns can indict a defendant for the same crime. The federal and state governments can have overlapping criminal laws, so a criminal offender may be convicted in individual states and federal courts for exactly the same crime or for different crimes arising out of the same facts. However, in 2016, the Supreme Court held that Puerto Rico is not a separate sovereign for purposes of the Double Jeopardy Clause. The dual sovereignty doctrine has been the subject of substantial scholarly criticism.\nAs described by the U.S. Supreme Court in its unanimous decision concerning \"Ball v. United States\" 163 U.S. 662 (1896), one of its earliest cases dealing with double jeopardy, \"the prohibition is not against being twice punished, but against being twice put in jeopardy; and the accused, whether convicted or acquitted, is equally put in jeopardy at the first trial.\" The Double Jeopardy Clause encompasses four distinct prohibitions: subsequent prosecution after acquittal, subsequent prosecution after conviction, subsequent prosecution after certain mistrials, and multiple punishment in the same indictment. Jeopardy \"attaches\" when the jury is impanelled, the first witness is sworn, or a plea is accepted.\nProsecution after acquittal.\nWith two exceptions, the government is not permitted to appeal or retry the defendant once jeopardy attaches to a trial unless the case does not conclude. Conditions which constitute \"conclusion\" of a case include\nIn these cases, the trial is concluded and the prosecution is precluded from appealing or retrying the defendant over the offence to which they were acquitted.\nThis principle does not prevent the government from appealing a pre-trial motion to dismiss or other non-merits dismissal, or a directed verdict after a jury conviction, nor does it prevent the trial judge from entertaining a motion for reconsideration of a directed verdict, if the jurisdiction has so provided by rule or statute. Nor does it prevent the government from retrying the defendant after an appellate reversal other than for sufficiency, including \"habeas corpus\", or \"thirteenth juror\" appellate reversals notwithstanding sufficiency on the principle that jeopardy has not \"terminated\".\nThe \"dual sovereignty\" doctrine allows a federal prosecution of an offence to proceed regardless of a previous state prosecution for that same offence and vice versa because \"an act denounced as a crime by both national and state sovereignties is an offence against the peace and dignity of both and may be punished by each\". The doctrine is solidly entrenched in the law, but there has been a traditional reluctance in the federal executive branch to gratuitously wield the power it grants, due to public opinion being generally hostile to such action.\nExceptions.\nThe first exception to a ban on retrying a defendant is if, in a trial, the defendant bribed the judge into acquitting him or her, since the defendant was not in jeopardy.\nThe other exception to a ban on retrying a defendant is that a member of the armed forces can be retried by court-martial in a military court, even if he or she has been previously acquitted by a civilian court.\nAn individual can be prosecuted by both the United States and a for the same acts that constituted crimes in both jurisdictions; it was established by the Supreme Court in \"United States v. Lara\" that as the two are separate sovereigns, prosecuting a crime under both tribal and federal law does not attach double jeopardy.\nMultiple punishment, including prosecution after conviction.\nIn \"Blockburger v. United States\" (1932), the Supreme Court announced the following test: the government may separately try and punish the defendant for two crimes if each crime contains an element that the other does not. \"Blockburger\" is the default rule, unless the governing statute legislatively intends to depart; for example, Continuing Criminal Enterprise (CCE) may be punished separately from its predicates, as can conspiracy.\nThe \"Blockburger\" test, originally developed in the multiple punishments context, is also the test for prosecution after conviction. In \"Grady v. Corbin\" (1990), the Court held that a double jeopardy violation could lie even where the \"Blockburger\" test was not satisfied, but \"Grady\" was overruled in \"United States v. Dixon\" (1993).\nProsecution after mistrial.\nThe rule for mistrials depends upon who sought the mistrial. If the defendant moves for a mistrial, there is no bar to retrial, unless the prosecutor acted in \"bad faith\", i.e. goaded the defendant into moving for a mistrial because the government specifically wanted a mistrial. If the prosecutor moves for a mistrial, there is no bar to retrial if the trial judge finds \"manifest necessity\" for granting the mistrial. The same standard governs mistrials granted sua sponte.\nRetrials are not common, due to the legal expenses to the government. However, in the mid-1980s Georgia antique dealer James Arthur Williams was tried a record four times for the murder of Danny Hansford and (after three mistrials) was finally acquitted on the grounds of self-defence. The case is recounted in the book \"Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil,\" which was adapted into a film directed by Clint Eastwood (the movie combines the four trials into one).\nExternal links.\nUnited Kingdom.\nResearch and Notes produced for the UK Parliament, summarising the history of legal change, views and responses, and analyses:"}
{"id": "7942", "revid": "30052052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7942", "title": "Disbarment", "text": "Disbarment is the removal of a lawyer from a bar association or the practice of law, thus revoking their law license or admission to practice law. Disbarment is usually a punishment for unethical or criminal conduct but may also be imposed for incompetence or incapacity. Procedures vary depending on the law society.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, states regulate the Legal Profession under state law, despite many participating in a uniform scheme. Admission as a lawyer is the business of the admissions board and the Supreme Court. Disciplinary proceedings may be commenced by the Bar Association or the Law Society of which one is a member, or the board itself.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, a \"Berufsverbot\" is a ban on practicing a profession, which the government can issue to a lawyer for misconduct, \"Volksverhetzung\" or for serious mismanagement of personal finances.\nIn April 1933, the Nazi government issued a \"Berufsverbot\" forbidding the practice of law by Jews, Communists, and other political opponents, except for those protected by the \"Frontk\u00e4mpferprivileg\".\nUnited States.\nOverview.\nGenerally disbarment is imposed as a sanction for conduct indicating that an attorney is not fit to practice law, willfully disregarding the interests of a client, commingling funds, or engaging in fraud which impedes the administration of justice. In addition, any lawyer who is convicted of a felony is automatically disbarred in most jurisdictions, a policy that, although opposed by the American Bar Association, has been described as a convicted felon's just deserts.\nIn the United States legal system, disbarment is specific to regions; one can be disbarred from some courts, while still being a member of the bar in another jurisdiction. However, under the American Bar Association's Model Rules of Professional Conduct, which have been adopted in most states, disbarment in one state or court is grounds for disbarment in a jurisdiction which has adopted the Model Rules.\nDisbarment is quite rare: in 2011, only 1,046 lawyers were disbarred. Instead, lawyers are usually sanctioned by their own clients through civil malpractice proceedings, or via fine, censure, suspension, or other punishments from the disciplinary boards. To be disbarred is considered a great embarrassment and shame, even if one no longer wishes to pursue a career in the law.\nBecause disbarment rules vary by area, different rules can apply depending on where a lawyer is disbarred. Notably, the majority of US states have no procedure for permanently disbarring a person. Depending on the jurisdiction, a lawyer may reapply to the bar immediately, after five to seven years, or be banned for life.\nNotable U.S. disbarments.\nThe 20th and the 21st centuries have seen one former U.S. president and one former U.S. vice president disbarred, and another former president suspended from one bar and caused to resign from another bar rather than face disbarment.\nFormer Vice President Spiro Agnew, having pleaded no contest (which subjects a person to the same criminal penalties as a guilty plea, but is not an admission of guilt for a civil suit) to charges of bribery and tax evasion, was disbarred from Maryland, the state of which he had previously been governor.\nFormer President Richard Nixon was disbarred from New York in 1976 for obstruction of justice related to the Watergate scandal. He had attempted to resign from the New York bar, as he had done with California and the Supreme Court, but his resignation was not accepted as he would not acknowledge that he was unable to defend himself from the charges brought against him.\nIn 2001, following a 5-year suspension by the Arkansas bar, the United States Supreme Court suspended Bill Clinton, providing 40 days for him to contest disbarment. He resigned before the end of the 40 day period, thus avoiding disbarment.\nAlger Hiss was disbarred for a felony conviction, but later became the first person reinstated to the bar in Massachusetts after disbarment.\nIn 2007, Mike Nifong, the District Attorney of Durham County, North Carolina who presided over the 2006 Duke University lacrosse case, was disbarred for prosecutorial misconduct related to his handling of the case.\nIn April 2012, a three-member panel appointed by the Arizona Supreme Court voted unanimously to disbar Andrew Thomas, former County Attorney of Maricopa County, Arizona, and a former close confederate of Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio. According to the panel, Thomas \"outrageously exploited power, flagrantly fostered fear, and disgracefully misused the law\" while serving as Maricopa County Attorney. The panel found \"clear and convincing evidence\" that Thomas brought unfounded and malicious criminal and civil charges against political opponents, including four state judges and the state attorney general. \"Were this a criminal case,\" the panel concluded, \"we are confident that the evidence would establish this conspiracy beyond a reasonable doubt.\"\nJack Thompson, the Florida lawyer noted for his activism against Howard Stern, video games, and rap music, was permanently disbarred for various charges of misconduct. The action was the result of several grievances claiming that Thompson had made defamatory, false statements and attempted to humiliate, embarrass, harass or intimidate his opponents. The order was made on September 25, 2008, effective October 25. However, Thompson attempted to appeal to the higher courts in order to avoid the penalty actually taking effect. Neither the US District court, nor the US Supreme Court would hear his appeal, rendering the judgment of the Florida Supreme Court final.\nEd Fagan, a New York lawyer who prominently represented Holocaust victims against Swiss banks, was disbarred in New York (in 2008) and New Jersey (in 2009) for failing to pay court fines and fees; and for misappropriating client and escrow trust funds.\nF. Lee Bailey, noted criminal defense attorney, was disbarred by the state of Florida in 2001, with reciprocal disbarment in Massachusetts in 2002. The Florida disbarment was the result of his handling of stock in the DuBoc marijuana case. Bailey was found guilty of 7 counts of attorney misconduct by the Florida Supreme Court. Bailey had transferred a large portion of DuBoc's assets into his own accounts, using the interest gained on those assets to pay for personal expenses. In March 2005, Bailey filed to regain his law license in Massachusetts. The book \"Florida Pulp Nonfiction\" details the peculiar facts of the DuBoc case along with extended interviews with Bailey that include his own defense. Bailey is also best known for representing murder suspect O. J. Simpson in 1994."}
{"id": "7944", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7944", "title": "Dancing music", "text": ""}
{"id": "7945", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7945", "title": "Dog Tag", "text": ""}
{"id": "7946", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7946", "title": "Dog tag", "text": " \nDog tag is an informal but common term for a specific type of identification tag worn by military personnel. The tags' primary use is for the identification of casualties; as such, they have information about the personnel written on them, and convey essential basic medical information such as their blood type and history of inoculations. They often indicate religious preference as well.\nDog tags are usually fabricated from a corrosion-resistant metal. They commonly contain two copies of the information, either in the form of a single tag that can be broken in half, or as two identical tags on the same chain. This purposeful duplication allows one tag, or half-tag, to be collected from a personnel's dead body for notification, while the duplicate remains with the corpse if the conditions of battle prevent it from being immediately recovered. The term arose and became popular because of the tags' resemblance to animal registration tags.\nHistory.\nThe earliest mention of an identification tag for soldiers comes in Polyaenus (Stratagems 1.17) where the Spartans wrote their names on sticks tied to their left wrists. A type of dog tag (\"signaculum\") was given to the Roman legionary at the moment of enrollment. The legionary \"signaculum\" was a lead disk with a leather string, worn around the neck, with the name of the recruit and the indication of the legion of which the recruit was part. This procedure, together with enrollment in the list of recruits, was made at the beginning of a four-month probatory period (\"probatio\"). The recruit got the military status only after the oath of allegiance (\"sacramentum\") at the end of \"probatio\", meaning that from a legal point of view the \"signaculum\" was given to a subject who was no longer a civilian, but not yet in the military.\nIn more recent times, dog tags were provided to Chinese soldiers as early as the mid-19th century. During the Taiping revolt (1851\u201366), both the Imperialists (i.e., the Chinese Imperial Army regular servicemen) and those Taiping rebels wearing a uniform wore a wooden dog tag at the belt, bearing the soldier's name, age, birthplace, unit, and date of enlistment.\nAmerican Civil War.\nDuring the American Civil War from 1861\u20131865, some soldiers pinned paper notes with their name and home address to the backs of their coats. Other soldiers stenciled identification on their knapsacks or scratched it in the soft lead backing of their army belt buckle.\nManufacturers of identification badges recognized a market and began advertising in periodicals. Their pins were usually shaped to suggest a branch of service, and engraved with the soldier's name and unit. Machine-stamped tags were also made of brass or lead with a hole and usually had (on one side) an eagle or shield, and such phrases as \"War for the Union\" or \"Liberty, Union, and Equality\". The other side had the soldier's name and unit, and sometimes a list of battles in which he had participated.\nFranco-Prussian War.\nOn a volunteer basis Prussian soldiers had decided to wear identification tags in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866. However, many rejected dog tags as a bad omen for their lives. So until eight months after the Battle of K\u00f6niggr\u00e4tz, with almost 8,900 Prussian casualties, only 429 of them could be identified. With the formation of the North German Confederation in 1867 Prussian military regulations became binding for the militaries of all North German member states. With the Prussian \"Instruktion \u00fcber das Sanit\u00e4tswesen der Armee im Felde\" (i.e., instruction on the medical corps organisation of the army afield) issued on 29 April 1869 the identification tags (then called \"Recognitionsmarke\"; literally \"recognition mark\") were obligatorily to be handed out to each soldier before marching afield. The Prussian Army issued identification tags for its troops at the beginning of the Franco-Prussian War in 1870. They were nicknamed \"Hundemarken\" (the German equivalent of \"dog tags\") and compared to a similar identification system instituted by the dog licence fee, adding tags to collars of those dogs whose owners paid the fee, in the Prussian capital city of Berlin at around the same time period.\nWorld War I.\nThe British Army introduced identity discs in place of identity cards in 1907, in the form of aluminium discs, typically made at regimental depots using machines similar to those common at fun fairs, the details being pressed into the thin metal one letter at a time.\nArmy Order 287 of September 1916 required the British Army provide all soldiers with two official tags, both made of vulcanised asbestos fibre (which were more comfortable to wear in hot climates) carrying identical details, again impressed one character at a time. The first tag, an octagonal green disc, was attached to a long cord around the neck. The second tag, a circular red disc, was threaded on a 6-inch cord suspended from the first tag. The first tag was intended to remain on the body for future identification, while the second tag could be taken to record the death.\nBritish and Empire/Commonwealth forces (Australia, Canada, and New Zealand) were issued essentially identical identification discs of basic pattern during the Great War, Second World War and Korea, though official identity discs were frequently supplemented by private-purchase items such as identity bracelets, particularly favoured by sailors who rightly believed the official discs were unlikely to survive long immersion in water.\nThe U.S. Army first authorized identification tags in War Department General Order No. 204, dated December 20, 1906, which essentially prescribes the Kennedy identification tag:\nThe U.S. Army changed regulations on July 6, 1916, so that all soldiers were issued two tags: one to stay with the body and the other to go to the person in charge of the burial for record-keeping purposes. In 1918, the U.S. Army adopted and allotted the service number system, and name and service numbers were ordered stamped on the identification tags.\nWorld War II \"notched\" tags.\nThere is a recurring myth about the notch situated in one end of the dog tags issued to United States Army personnel during World War II, and up until the Vietnam War era. It was rumored that the notch's purpose was that, if a soldier found one of his comrades on the battlefield, he could take one tag to the commanding officer and stick the other between the teeth of the soldier to ensure that the tag would remain with the body and be identified.\nIn reality, the notch was used with the Model 70 Addressograph Hand Identification Imprinting Machine (a pistol-type imprinter used primarily by the Medical Department during World War II). American dogtags of the 1930s through 1980s were produced using a Graphotype machine, in which characters are debossed into metal plates. Some tags are still debossed, using earlier equipment, and some are embossed (with raised letters) on computer-controlled equipment.\nIn the Graphotype process, commonly used commercially from the early 1900s through the 1980s, a debossing machine was used to stamp characters into metal plates; the plates could then be used to repetitively stamp such things as addresses onto paper in the same way that a typewriter functions, except that a single stroke of the printer could produce a block of text, rather than requiring each character to be printed individually. The debossing process creates durable, easily legible metal plates, well-suited for military identification tags, leading to adoption of the system by the American military. It was also realized that debossed tags can function the same way the original Graphotype plates do.\nThe Model 70 took advantage of this fact, and was intended to rapidly print all of the information from a soldier's dogtag directly onto medical and personnel forms, with a single squeeze of the trigger. However, this requires that the tag being inserted with the proper orientation (stamped characters facing down), and it was believed that battlefield stress could lead to errors. To force proper orientation of the tags, the tags are produced with a notch, and there is a locator tab inside the Model 70 which prevents the printer from operating if the tag is inserted with the notch in the wrong place (as it is if the tag is upside down).\nThis feature was not as useful in the field as had been hoped, however, due to adverse conditions such as weather, dirt and dust, water, etc. In addition, the Model 70 resembled a pistol, thus attracting the attention of snipers (who might assume that a man carrying a pistol was an officer). As a result, use of the Model 70 hand imprinter by field medics was rapidly abandoned (as were most of the Model 70s themselves), and eventually the specification that tags include the locator notch was removed from production orders. Existing stocks of tags were used until depleted, and in the 1960s it was not uncommon for a soldier to be issued one tag with the notch and one tag without. Notched tags are still in production, to satisfy the needs of hobbyists, film production, etc., while the Model 70 imprinter has become a rare collector's item.\nIt appears instructions that would confirm the notch's mythical use were issued at least unofficially by the Graves Registration Service during the Vietnam War to Army troops headed overseas.\nDog tags are traditionally part of the makeshift battlefield memorials soldiers created for their fallen comrades. The casualty's rifle with bayonet affixed is stood vertically atop the empty boots, with the helmet over the rifle's stock. The dog tags hang from the rifle's handle or trigger guard.\nNon-military usage.\nMedical condition identification.\nSome tags (along with similar items such as MedicAlert bracelets) are used also by civilians to identify their wearers and specify them as having health problems that may &lt;br&gt;\n\"(a)\" suddenly incapacitate their wearers and render them incapable of providing treatment guidance (as in the cases of heart problems, epilepsy, diabetic coma, accident or major trauma) and/or &lt;br&gt; \n\"(b)\" interact adversely with medical treatments, especially standard or \"first-line\" ones (as in the case of an allergy to common medications) and/or &lt;br&gt;\n\"(c)\" provide in case of emergency (\"ICE\") contact information and/or &lt;br&gt; \n\"(d)\" state a religious, moral, or other objection to artificial resuscitation, if a first responder attempts to administer such treatment when the wearer is non-responsive and thus unable to warn against doing so. A DNR signed by a physician is still required in some states. \nMilitary personnel in some jurisdictions may wear a supplementary medical information tag.\nFashion.\nDog tags have found their way into youth fashion by way of military chic. Originally worn as a part of a military uniform by youth wishing to present a tough or militaristic image, dog tags have since seeped out into wider fashion circles. They may be inscribed with a person's details, their beliefs or tastes, a favorite quote, or may bear the name or logo of a band or performer.\nSince the late 1990s, custom dog tags have been fashionable amongst musicians (particularly rappers), and as a marketing give-away item. Numerous companies offer customers the opportunity to create their own personalized dog tags with their own photos, logos, and text. Even high-end jewelers have featured gold and silver dog tags encrusted with diamonds and other jewels.\nVariations by country.\nAustria.\nThe Austrian Bundesheer used a single long, rectangular tag, with oval ends, stamped with blood group &amp; Rh factor at the end, with ID number underneath. Two slots and a hole stamped beneath allows the tag to be broken in halves, and the long bottom portion has both the ID number and a series of holes which allows the tag to be inserted into a dosimeter. This has been replaced with a more conventional, wider and rounded rectangle which can still be halved, but lacks the dosimeter reading holes.\nAustralia.\nThe Australian Defence Force issues soldiers two tags of different shapes, one octagonal and one circular, containing the following information:\nThe information is printed exactly the same on both discs. In the event of a casualty, the circular tag is removed from the body.\nBelgium.\nBelgian Forces identity tags are, like the Canadian and Norwegian, designed to be broken in two in case of fatality; the lower half is returned to Belgian Defence tail, while the upper half remains on the body. The tags contain the following information:\nCanada.\nCanadian Forces identity discs (abbreviated \"I discs\") are designed to be broken in two in the case of fatality; the lower half is returned to National Defence Headquarters with the member's personal documents, while the upper half remains on the body. The tags contain the following information:\nBefore the Service Number was introduced in the 1990s, military personnel were identified on the I discs (as well as other documents) by their Social Insurance Number.\nChina.\nThe People's Liberation Army issues two long, rectangular tags. All information is stamped in Simplified Chinese:\nPLA is introducing a two-dimensional matrix code on the second tag, the matrix code contains a link to the official database. This allows the inquirer get more details about the military personnel.\nColombia.\nThe Ej\u00e9rcito Nacional de Colombia uses long, rectangular metal tags with oval ends tags stamped with the following information:\nDuplicate tags are issued. Often, tags are issued with a prayer inscribed on the reverse.\nCyprus.\nIn Cyprus, identification tags include the following information:\nDenmark.\nThe military of Denmark use dog tags made from small, rectangular metal plates. The tag is designed to be broken into two pieces each with the following information stamped onto it:\nAdditionally, the right hand side of each half-tag is engraved 'DANMARK', .\nStarting in 1985, the individual's service number (which is the same as the social security number) is included on the tag. In case the individual dies, the lower half-tag is supposed to be collected, while the other will remain with the corpse. In the army, navy, and air force but not in the national guard, the individual's blood type is indicated on the lower half-tag only, since this information becomes irrelevant if the individual dies. In 2009, Danish dog tags were discontinued for conscripts.\nEast Germany.\nThe Nationale Volksarmee used a tag nearly identical to that used by both the Wehrmacht and the West German Bundeswehr. The oval aluminum tag was stamped \"DDR\" (Deutsche Demokratische Republik) above the personal ID number; this information was repeated on the bottom half, which was intended to be broken off in case of death. Oddly, the tag was not worn, but required to be kept in a plastic sleeve in the back of the WDA identity booklet.\nEcuador.\nThe \"Placas de identificaci\u00f3n de campa\u00f1a\" consists of two long, rectangular steel or aluminum tags with rounded corners and a single hole punched in one end. It is suspended by a US-type ball chain, with a shorter chain for the second tag. The information on the tag is:\nEstonia.\nEstonian dog tags are designed to be broken in two. The dog tag is a metallic rounded rectangle suspended by a ball chain. Information consists of four fields:\nExample: \nFinland.\nIn the Finnish Defence Forces, \"tunnuslevy\" or WWII term \"tuntolevy\" (Finnish for \"Identification plate\") is made of stainless steel and designed to be broken in two; however, the only text on it is the personal identification number and the letters \"FI\" or \"SF\" in older models, which stands for Suomi Finland, within a tower stamped atop of the upper half.\nFrance.\nFrance issues either a metallic rounded rectangle (army) or disk (navy), designed to be broken in half, bearing family name &amp; first name above the ID number.\nGermany.\nSee above for former \"East Germany\".\nGerman Bundeswehr ID tags are an oval-shaped disc designed to be broken in half. They are made of stainless steel, heigh and width. The two sides contain different information which are mirrored upside-down on the lower half of the ID tag. They feature the following information on segmented and numbered fields:\nOn the front:\nOn the back:\nBundesamt f\u00fcr Wehrtechnik und Beschaffung of 2009-12-21 spcifies shape, materials and characteristics for 4 Parts:\nThe ID tag is landscape-oval, breakable in two halves with 4\u20138 manually bends. On the backside every half ist 0.2 mm deep marked with \"DEU\" for \"Deutschland\", the non-magnetic type on both halves und both sides with \"NM\".\nThe metal sheet is 0.7 mm thick, material codes X5CrNi1810 or 1.4301, weighs about 16 g. NM-variant shall consist of 1.4311 or 1.4401. Sharp edges have to be smoothened, then the plate electropolished. Mechanical deburring and ball polishing is allowed. \nThe letters stamped in for the person must stay readable after a glow test for 10 minutes in air at 1200 \u00b0C.\nThe ball chain is of X5CrNi1810, diameter of ball is 3.5 mm, that of the wire 1.5 mm. Closure is of 1.4301, stainless steel, too. The long chain is 680 + 30 mm long, the short one 145 + 7 mm. Breaking force of the chain including the closure must reach 100 N, after 10 min glow at 1200 \u00b0C in air at least 10 N.\nGreece.\nIn Greece, identification tags include the following information:\nHungary.\nThe Hungarian army dog tag is made out of steel, forming a 25\u00d735\u00a0mm tag designed to split diagonally. Both sides contain the same information: the soldier's personal identity code, blood group and the word HUNGARIA. Some may not have the blood group on them. These are only issued to soldiers who are serving outside of the country. If the soldier should die, one side is removed and kept for the army's official records, while the other side is left attached to the body.\nIraq.\nThe Saddam-era Iraqi Army used a single, long, rectangular metal tag with oval ends, inscribed (usually by hand) with Name and Number or Unit, and occasionally Blood Type.\nIsrael.\nDog tags of the Israel Defense Forces are designed to be broken in two. The information appears in three lines (twice):\nRecruits are issued with 2 Dogtags (4 halves total), one remains whole and worn on a necklace, and the second is broken into its halves and placed in each military boot for the purpose of Identifying dead soldiers (IDF Military Boots contain pouches on their inner sides at the 1/3 calf height, the pouches have holes corresponding in size and placement to those on the discs, allowing for fastening, often via small cable ties).\nOriginally the IDF issued two circular aluminum tags (1948 \u2013 late 1950s) stamped in three lines with serial number, family name, and first name. The tags were threaded together through a single hole onto a cord worn around the neck.\nItaly.\nRectangular piece, 35x45 mm, designed to be broken in two. Includes soldier's first and last name, coded date and place of birth, identification number, religious affiliation, and blood group.\nJapan.\nJapan follows a similar system to the US Army for its Japan Self-Defense Forces personnel, and the appearance of the tags is similar, although laser etched. The exact information order is as follows.\nMalaysia.\nMalaysian Armed Forces have two identical oval tags with this information:\nIf more information needed, another two oval wrist tags are provided. The term \"wrist tags\" can be used to refer to the bracelet-like wristwatch. The additional tags only need to be worn on the wrist, with the main tags still on the neck. All personnel are allowed to attach a small religious pendant or locket; this makes a quick identifiable reference for their funeral services.\nMexico.\nThe Ej\u00e9rcito Mexicano uses two long, very similar to the us army specification, rectangular metal tag with oval ends, embossed with Name, serial number, and blood type plus Rh factor.\nNetherlands.\nDutch military identity tags, like the Canadian and Norwegian ones, are designed to be broken in two in case of a fatality; the lower end is returned to Dutch Defence Headquarters, while the upper half remains on the body. \nThe tags contain the following information:\nThere is a difference in the Army and Air Force service number and the Navy service number:\nNorway.\nNorwegian dog tags are designed to be broken in two like the Canadian and the Dutch version:\nPoland.\nThe first dog tags were issued in Poland following the order of the General Staff of December 12, 1920. The earliest design (dubbed \"kapala\" in Polish, more properly called \"kapsel legitymacyjny\" - meaning \"identification cap\") consisted of a tin-made 30\u00d750\u00a0mm rectangular frame and a rectangular cap fitting into the frame. Soldiers' details were filled in a small ID card placed inside the frame, as well as on the inside of the frame itself. The dog tag was similar to the tags used by the Austro-Hungarian Army during World War I. In case the soldier died, the frame was left with his body, while the lid was returned to his unit together with a note on his death. The ID card was handed over to the chaplain or the rabbi.\nIn 1928, a new type of dog tag was proposed by gen. bryg. Stanis\u0142aw Rouppert, Poland's representative at the International Red Cross. It was slightly modified and adopted in 1931 under the name of Nie\u015bmiertelnik wz. 1931 (literally \"Immortalizer mark 1931\"). The new design consisted of an oval piece of metal (ideally steel, but in most cases aluminum alloy was used), roughly 40 by 50 millimeters. There were two notches on both sides of the tag, as well as two rectangular holes in the middle to allow for easier breaking of the tag in two halves. The halves contained the same set of data and were identical, except the upper half had two holes for a string or twine to go through. The data stamped on the dog tag from 2008 (wz. 2008) included:\nwith the name of Polish Army \"Si\u0142y Zbrojne RP\" and Polish Emblem.\nRhodesia.\nThe former Republic of Rhodesia used two WW2 British-style compressed asbestos fiber tags, a No. 1 octagonal (grey) tag and a No. 2 circular (red) tag, stamped with identical information. The red tag was supposedly fireproof and the grey tag rotproof. The following information was stamped on the tags: Number, Name, Initials, &amp; Religion; Blood Type was stamped on reverse. The air force and BSAP often stamped their service on the reverse side above the blood group.\nRussian Federation.\nThe Russian Armed Forces use oval metal tags, similar to the dog tags of the Soviet Army. Each tag contains the title \" () and the individual's alphanumeric number, as shown on the photo.\nSingapore.\nThe Singapore Armed Forces-issued dog tags are inscribed (not embossed) with up to four items:\nThe dog tags consist of two metal pieces, one oval with two holes and one round with one hole. A synthetic lanyard is threaded through both holes in the oval piece and tied around the wearer's neck. The round piece is tied to the main loop on a shorter loop.\nSouth Africa.\nThe South African Defense Force use two long, rectangular stainless steel tags with oval ends, stamped with serial number, name and initials, religion, and blood type.\nSouth Korea.\nThe South Korean Army issues two long, rectangular tags with oval ends, stamped (in Korean lettering). The tags are worn on the neck with a ball chain. The tags contain the information listed below:\nSouth Vietnam.\nThe South Vietnamese Army and the South Vietnamese Navy used two American-style dog tags. Some tags added religion on the back, e.g., Ph\u1eadt Gi\u00e1o for Buddhist. They were stamped or inscribed with: \nSoviet Union.\nDuring World War II, the Red Army did not issue metal dog tags to its troops. They were issued small black Bakelite cylinders containing a slip of paper with a soldier's particulars written on it. These do not hold up as well as metal dog tags.\nAfter World War II, the Soviet Army used oval metal tags, similar to today's dog tags of the Russian Armed forces. Each tag contains the title \" () and the individual's alphanumeric number.\nSpain.\nIssues a single metal oval, worn vertically, stamped \"\" above and below the 3-slot horizontal break line. It is stamped in 4 lines with:\nSweden.\nSwedish identification tags are designed to be able to break apart. The information on them was prior to 2010:\nSwedish dog tags issued to Armed Forces personnel after 2010 are, for personal security reasons, only marked with a personal identity number.\nDuring the Cold War, dog tags were issued to everyone, often soon after birth, since the threat of total war also meant the risk of severe civilian casualties. However, in 2010, the Government decided that the dog tags were not needed anymore.\nSwitzerland.\nSwiss Armed Forces ID tag is an oval shaped non reflective plaque, containing the following information:\nOn the back side the letters CH (standing for \"Confoederatio Helvetica\") are engraved next to a Swiss cross.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe British Armed Forces currently use two circular non-reflecting stainless steel tags, referred to as \"ID Disks\", engraved with the following 'Big 5' details:\nThe discs are suspended from one long chain (24 inches long) and one short chain (4.5 inches long)\nDuring World War One and Two, service personnel were issued pressed fibre identity disks, one green octagonal shaped disc, and a red round disc (some army units issued a second red round disc to be attached to the service respirator). The identity disks were hand stamped with the surname, initials, service number and religion of the holder and if in the Royal Air Force, the initials RAF. The disks were worn around the neck on a 38\" length of cotton cord, this was often replaced by the wearer with a leather bootlace. One tag was suspended below the main tag.\nThe fibre identity disks in the RAF were still in use in 1999.\nFrom 1960 these were replaced with stainless steel ID tags on a green nylon cord, two circular and one oval. The oval was withdrawn around 1990.\nUnited States.\nTags are properly known as identification tags; the term \"dog tags\" has never been used in regulations.\nThe U.S. Armed Forces typically carry two identical oval dog tags containing:\nReligious designation.\nDuring World War II, an American dog tag could indicate only one of three religions through the inclusion of one letter: \"P\" for Protestant, \"C\" for Catholic, or \"H\" for Jewish (from the word, \"Hebrew\"), or (according to at least one source) \"NO\" to indicate no religious preference. Army regulations (606-5) soon included X and Y in addition to P, C, and H: the X indicating any religion not included in the first three, and the Y indicating either no religion or a choice not to list religion.\nBy the time of the Vietnam War, some IDs spelled out the broad religious choices such as PROTESTANT and CATHOLIC, rather than using initials, and also began to show individual denominations such as \"METHODIST\" or \"BAPTIST.\" Tags did vary by service, however, such as the use of \"CATH,\" not \"CATHOLIC\" on some Navy tags. For those with no religious affiliation and those who chose not to list an affiliation, either the space for religion was left blank or the words \"NO PREFERENCE\" or \"NO RELIGIOUS PREF\" (or the abbreviation \"NO PREF\") were included.\nAlthough American dog tags currently include the recipient's religion as a way of ensuring that religious needs will be met, some personnel have them reissued without religious affiliation listed\u2014or keep two sets, one with the designation and one without\u2014out of fear that identification as a member of a particular religion could increase the danger to their welfare or their lives if they fell into enemy hands. Some Jewish personnel avoided flying over German lines during WWII with ID tags that indicated their religion, and some Jewish personnel avoid the religious designation today out of concern that they could be captured by extremists who are anti-Semitic. Additionally, when American troops were first sent to Saudi Arabia during the Gulf War there were allegations that some U.S. military authorities were pressuring Jewish military personnel to avoid listing their religions on their ID tags."}
{"id": "7949", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7949", "title": "Didjeridu", "text": ""}
{"id": "7950", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7950", "title": "Drum", "text": "The drum is a member of the percussion group of musical instruments. In the Hornbostel-Sachs classification system, it is a membranophone. Drums consist of at least one membrane, called a drumhead or drum skin, that is stretched over a shell and struck, either directly with the player's hands, or with a percussion mallet, to produce sound. There is usually a \"resonance head\" on the underside of the drum, typically tuned to a slightly lower pitch than the top drumhead. Other techniques have been used to cause drums to make sound, such as the thumb roll. Drums are the world's oldest and most ubiquitous musical instruments, and the basic design has remained virtually unchanged for thousands of years.\nDrums may be played individually, with the player using a single drum, and some drums such as the djembe are almost always played in this way. Others are normally played in a set of two or more, all played by the one player, such as bongo drums and timpani. A number of different drums together with cymbals form the basic modern drum kit.\nUses.\nDrums are usually played by striking with the hand, a beater attached to a pedal, or with one or two sticks with or without padding. A wide variety of sticks are used, including wooden sticks and sticks with soft beaters of felt on the end. In jazz, some drummers use brushes for a smoother, quieter sound. In many traditional cultures, drums have a symbolic function and are used in religious ceremonies. Drums are often used in music therapy, especially hand drums, because of their tactile nature and easy use by a wide variety of people.\nIn popular music and jazz, \"drums\" usually refers to a drum kit or a set of drums (with some cymbals, or in the case of harder rock music genres, many cymbals), and \"drummer\" to the person who plays them.\nDrums acquired even divine status in places such as Burundi, where the \"karyenda\" was a symbol of the power of the king.\nConstruction.\nThe shell almost always has a circular opening over which the drumhead is stretched, but the shape of the remainder of the shell varies widely. In the Western musical tradition, the most usual shape is a cylinder, although timpani, for example, use bowl-shaped shells. Other shapes include a frame design (tar, Bodhr\u00e1n), truncated cones (bongo drums, Ashiko), goblet shaped (djembe), and joined truncated cones (talking drum).\nDrums with cylindrical shells can be open at one end (as is the case with timbales), or can have two drum heads, one head on each end. Single-headed drums typically consist of a skin stretched over an enclosed space, or over one of the ends of a hollow vessel. Drums with two heads covering both ends of a cylindrical shell often have a small hole somewhat halfway between the two heads; the shell forms a resonating chamber for the resulting sound. Exceptions include the African slit drum, also known as a log drum as it is made from a hollowed-out tree trunk, and the Caribbean steel drum, made from a metal barrel. Drums with two heads can also have a set of wires, called snares, held across the bottom head, top head, or both heads, hence the name snare drum. On some drums with two heads, a hole or bass reflex port may be cut or installed onto one head, as with some 2010s era bass drums in rock music.\nOn modern band and orchestral drums, the drumhead is placed over the opening of the drum, which in turn is held onto the shell by a \"counterhoop\" (or \"rim\"), which is then held by means of a number of tuning screws called \"tension rods\" that screw into lugs placed evenly around the circumference. The head's tension can be adjusted by loosening or tightening the rods. Many such drums have six to ten tension rods. The sound of a drum depends on many variables\u2014including shape, shell size and thickness, shell materials, counterhoop material, drumhead material, drumhead tension, drum position, location, and striking velocity and angle.\nPrior to the invention of tension rods, drum skins were attached and tuned by rope systems\u2014as on the Djembe\u2014or pegs and ropes such as on Ewe drums. These methods are rarely used today, though sometimes appear on regimental marching band snare drums. The head of a talking drum, for example, can be temporarily tightened by squeezing the ropes that connect the top and bottom heads. Similarly, the tabla is tuned by hammering a disc held in place around the drum by ropes stretching from the top to bottom head. Orchestral timpani can be quickly tuned to precise pitches by using a foot pedal.\nSound.\nSeveral factors determine the sound a drum produces, including the type, shape and construction of the drum shell, the type of drum heads it has, and the tension of these drumheads. Different drum sounds have different uses in music. For example, the modern Tom-tom drum. A jazz drummer may want drums that are high pitched, resonant and quiet whereas a rock drummer may prefer drums that are loud, dry and low-pitched.\nThe drum head has the most effect on how a drum sounds. Each type of drum head serves its own musical purpose and has its own unique sound. Double-ply drumheads dampen high frequency harmonics because they are heavier and they are suited to heavy playing. Drum heads with a white, textured coating on them muffle the overtones of the drum head slightly, producing a less diverse pitch. Drum heads with central silver or black dots tend to muffle the overtones even more, while drum heads with perimeter sound rings mostly eliminate overtones. Some jazz drummers avoid using thick drum heads, preferring single ply drum heads or drum heads with no muffling. Rock drummers often prefer the thicker or coated drum heads.\nThe second biggest factor that affects drum sound is head tension against the shell. When the hoop is placed around the drum head and shell and tightened down with tension rods, the tension of the head can be adjusted. When the tension is increased, the amplitude of the sound is reduced and the frequency is increased, making the pitch higher and the volume lower.\nThe type of shell also affects the sound of a drum. Because the vibrations resonate in the shell of the drum, the shell can be used to increase the volume and to manipulate the type of sound produced. The larger the diameter of the shell, the lower the pitch. The larger the depth of the drum, the louder the volume. Shell thickness also determines the volume of drums. Thicker shells produce louder drums. Mahogany raises the frequency of low pitches and keeps higher frequencies at about the same speed. When choosing a set of shells, a jazz drummer may want smaller maple shells, while a rock drummer may want larger birch shells.\nHistory.\nDrums made with alligator skins have been found in Neolithic cultures located in China, dating to a period of 5500\u20132350 BC. In literary records, drums manifested shamanistic characteristics and were often used in ritual ceremonies.\nThe bronze Dong Son drum was fabricated by the Bronze Age Dong Son culture of northern Vietnam. They include the ornate Ngoc Lu drum.\nAnimal drumming.\nMacaque monkeys drum objects in a rhythmic way to show social dominance and this has been shown to be processed in a similar way in their brains to vocalizations, suggesting an evolutionary origin to drumming as part of social communication. Other primates make drumming sounds by chest beating or hand clapping, and rodents such as kangaroo rats also make similar sounds using their paws on the ground.\nTalking drums.\nDrums are used not only for their musical qualities, but also as a means of communication over great distances. The talking drums of Africa are used to imitate the tone patterns of spoken language. Throughout Sri Lankan history drums have been used for communication between the state and the community, and Sri Lankan drums have a history stretching back over 2500 years.\nDrums in art.\nDrumming may be a purposeful expression of emotion for entertainment, spiritualism and communication. Many cultures practice drumming as a spiritual or religious passage and interpret drummed rhythm similarly to spoken language or prayer. Drumming has developed over millennia to be a powerful art form. Drumming is commonly viewed as the root of music and is sometimes performed as a kinesthetic dance. As a discipline, drumming concentrates on training the body to punctuate, convey and interpret musical rhythmic intention to an audience and to the performer.\nMilitary uses.\nChinese troops used t\u00e0ig\u01d4 drums to motivate troops, to help set a marching pace, and to call out orders or announcements. For example, during a war between Qi and Lu in 684 BC, the effect of drum on soldiers' morale is employed to change the result of a major battle. Fife-and-drum corps of Swiss mercenary foot soldiers also used drums. They used an early version of the snare drum carried over the player's right shoulder, suspended by a strap (typically played with one hand using traditional grip). It is to this instrument that the English word \"drum\" was first used. Similarly, during the English Civil War rope-tension drums would be carried by junior officers as a means to relay commands from senior officers over the noise of battle. These were also hung over the shoulder of the drummer and typically played with two drum sticks. Different regiments and companies would have distinctive and unique drum beats only they recognized. In the mid-19th century, the Scottish military started incorporating pipe bands into their Highland regiments.\nDuring pre-Columbian warfare, Aztec nations were known to have used drums to send signals to the battling warriors. The Nahuatl word for drum is roughly translated as \"huehuetl\".\nThe Rig Veda, one of the oldest religious scriptures in the world, contains several references to the use of the \"Dundhubi\" (war drum). Arya tribes charged into battle to the beating of the war drum and chanting of a hymn that appears in Book VI of the Rig Veda and also the Atharva Veda where it is referred to as the \"Hymn to the battle drum\"."}
{"id": "7951", "revid": "1023245943", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7951", "title": "Delphi", "text": "Delphi (; ), in legend previously called Pytho (\u03a0\u03c5\u03b8\u03ce), in ancient times was a sacred precinct that served as the seat of Pythia, the major oracle who was consulted about important decisions throughout the ancient classical world. The oracle was international in character and also fostered sentiments of Greek nationality, even though the nation of Greece was centuries away from realization. The ancient Greeks considered the centre of the world to be in Delphi, marked by the stone monument known as the omphalos (navel). The sacred precinct was in the region of Phocis, but its management had been taken away from the Phocians, who were trying to extort money from its visitors, and had been placed in the hands of an amphictyony, or committee of persons chosen mainly from Central Greece. According to the Suda, Delphi took its name from the Delphyne, the she-serpent (\"drakaina\") who lived there and was killed by the god Apollo (in other accounts the serpent was the male serpent (\"drakon \") Python).\nThe sacred precinct occupies a delineated region on the south-western slope of Mount Parnassus. It is now an extensive archaeological site, and since 1938 a part of Parnassos National Park. Adjacent to the sacred precinct is a small modern town of the same name. The precinct is recognized by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site in having had a great influence in the ancient world, as evidenced by the various monuments built there by most of the important ancient Greek city-states, demonstrating their fundamental Hellenic unity. It would be impossible to remove the influence of the Delphic oracle from the written history of the times.\nDelphi and the Delphic region.\nToday Delphi is a municipality of Greece as well as a modern town adjacent to the ancient precinct. The modern town was created by moving its predecessor off the sacred precinct so that the latter could be excavated by the French School of Archaeology working in conjunction with Greek authorities. The two Delphis, old and new, are located on Greek National Road 48 between Amfissa in the west and Livadeia, capital of Voiotia, in the east. The road follows the northern slope of a pass between Mount Parnassus on the north and the mountains of the Desfina Peninsula on the south. The peninsula, triangular in shape, juts into the Gulf of Corinth. The pass is entirely one river valley, that of the river Pleistos, running from east to west, forming a natural boundary across the north of the Desfina Peninsula, and providing an easy route across it.\nOn the east side the valley joins the north-south valley leading from Davleia to Distomo, both good-sized towns. South of Distomo the valley intersects the Bay of Antikyra, which offers no port at that location. The site is known as Paralia Distomou, \"the beach of Distomo.\" Antikyra, the major port of Phocis, is a little down the coast of the peninsula.\nOn the west side the valley joins the north-south valley between Amfissa and Itea. The valley dead-ends at Amphissa. This city is more important today because a route to the Aegean side of Greece has been pushed through the mountain passes. These now strategic locations were the scenes of heavy fighting and reprisals during World War II.\nOn the north side of the valley junction a spur of Parnassus looming over the valley made narrower by it is the site of ancient Krisa, which once was the ruling power of the entire valley system. Both Amphissa and Krissa are mentioned in the \"Iliad's\" Catalogue of Ships. It was a Mycenaean stronghold. Archaeological dates of the valley go back to the Early Helladic. Krisa itself is Middle Helladic. These early dates are comparable to the earliest dates at Delphi, suggesting Delphi was appropriated and transformed by Phocians from ancient Krisa. It is believed that the ruins of Kirra, now part of the port of Itea, were the port of Krisa of the same name as it, and that etymologically Kirra comes from Krisa.\nArchaeology of the precinct.\nThe end of Delphi.\nMost cursory accounts of Delphi include a phase they call the end of Delphi. After all, ruins are in evidence, so there must have been a time when the structures they represent were unruined. Many give the impression that the emperor's sheriff drove up the hill with a bulldozer and a wrecking ball, or a least an army of wreckers, and went back down the hill the same day having levelled the site, and that from then on it remained uninhabited. Although such a sudden event is possible with the equipment of modern times, it did not generally happen that way in ancient times, except in unusual cases, such as the fall of Carthage, when the Romans leveled the city and sowed the bare ground with salt so that nothing would grow there. Even so, the city was rebuilt. Such was never the case for Delphi. It transitioned from phase to phase. There may never have been a time when the site had no inhabitants or structures, and no one was interested in living there. It had the spring and the view.\nThe ruins in evidence date from the ancient classical period with some in the late antique period. In order to place them in evidence, the first excavators, the French School of Athens, had to clear away many tons of rubble. But that rubble contained the habitation levels of post-classical settlements, which were sacrificed in favor of the earlier ruins. The lack of this transitional material also gives the impression of a sudden ruination, which is false. History portrays Delphi as a very popular site. Once in a century or two it was burned by some interloper, and then promptly rebuilt better than before. After Hellenic society transitioned from pagan to Christian, Delphi remained just as popular as it had been. Still pagan, it often honored the Christian emperors, while they allowed it to stand. Both religions were practiced there side-by-side. Finally, however, use of the oracle fell off to such a degree that it could no longer be maintained. The other aspects went on: the Pythian games, the worship of Apollo in the temple. Regretfully the Christian emperors dealt with all the pagan sites as a loose end. Delphi transitioned to a secular site in which churches were built. Without the oracle, there was not much point in frequenting a high-altitude, out-of-the-way place. The population fell off to a small village.\nThe place had not ended, however. Archaeology and tourism infused it with a whole new life. It may well be frequented by just as many people as frequented it in classical days. It earns its own revenue. The geologic problems are just as bad as they were in ancient times: faults, slippery slopes, earthquakes, rockslides, runoff. As at all major archaeological sites, the effort to maintain the ruins rivals the original effort to maintain the structures.\nThe classical site had flourished because of its popularity. After the change of religion, popularity and frequentation fell off sharply. The oracle could no longer cover operating expenses. After a line of Christian emperors, Julian, reigning 361-363 (not long), rejecting Christianity in favor of Neoplatonism, for which he is called Julian the Apostate, attempted to restore the prior religions, Paganism and Judaism. He sent his physician to Delphi to rebuild the Temple of Apollo, and received an oracle for his efforts that \"the speaking water has been silenced,\" which became known as \"the last oracle\" and is recorded by George Kedrenos.\nExcavation.\nThe site was first briefly excavated in 1880 by Bernard Haussoullier (1852-1926) on behalf of the French School at Athens, of which he was a sometime member. The site was then occupied by the village of Kastri, about 100 houses, 200 people. Kastri (\"fort\") had been there since the destruction of the place by Theodosius I in 390. He probably left a fort to make sure it was not repopulated, except that the fort became the new village. They were mining the stone for re-use in their own buildings. British and French travelers visiting the site suspected it was ancient Delphi. Before a systematic excavation of the site could be undertaken, the village had to be relocated but the residents resisted.\nThe opportunity to relocate the village occurred when it was substantially damaged by an earthquake, with villagers offered a completely new village in exchange for the old site. In 1893 the French Archaeological School removed vast quantities of soil from numerous landslides to reveal both the major buildings and structures of the sanctuary of Apollo and of Athena Pronoia along with thousands of objects, inscriptions and sculptures.\nDuring the Great Excavation were discovered architectural members from a 5th-century Christian basilica, when Delphi was a bishopric. Other important Late Roman buildings are the Eastern Baths, the house with the peristyle, the Roman Agora, the large cistern usw. At the outskirts of the city there were located late Roman cemeteries.\nTo the southeast of the precinct of Apollo lay the so-called Southeastern Mansion, a building with a 65-meter-long fa\u00e7ade, spread over four levels, with four triclinia and private baths. Large storage jars kept the provisions, whereas other pottery vessels and luxury items were discovered in the rooms. Among the finds stands out a tiny leopard made of mother of pearl, possibly of Sassanian origin, on display in the ground floor gallery of the Delphi Archaeological Museum. The mansion dates to the beginning of the 5th century and functioned as a private house until 580, later however it was transformed into a potters' workshop. It is only then, in the beginning of the 6th century, that the city seems to decline: its size is reduced and its trade contacts seem to be drastically diminished. Local pottery production is produced in large quantities: it is coarser and made of reddish clay, aiming at satisfying the needs of the inhabitants.\nThe Sacred Way remained the main street of the settlement, transformed, however, into a street with commercial and industrial use. Around the agora were built workshops as well as the only intra muros early Christian basilica. The domestic area spread mainly in the western part of the settlement. The houses were rather spacious and two large cisterns provided running water to them.\nDelphi Archaeological Museum.\nThe Delphi Archaeological Museum is at the foot of the main archaeological complex, on the east side of the village, and on the north side of the main road. The museum houses artifacts associated with ancient Delphi, including the earliest known notation of a melody, the Charioteer of Delphi, Kleobis and Biton, golden treasures discovered beneath the Sacred Way, the Sphinx of Naxos, and fragments of reliefs from the Siphnian Treasury. Immediately adjacent to the exit is the inscription that mentions the Roman proconsul Gallio.\nEntries to the museum and to the main complex are separate and chargeable. A reduced rate ticket gets entry to both. There is a small cafe, and a post office by the museum.\nArchitecture of the precinct.\nMost of the ruins that survive today date from the most intense period of activity at the site in the 6th century BC.\nTemple of Apollo.\nThe ruins of the Temple of Delphi visible today date from the 4th century\u00a0BC, and are of a peripteral Doric building. It was erected by Spintharus, Xenodoros, and Agathon on the remains of an earlier temple, dated to the 6th century\u00a0BC which itself was erected on the site of a 7th-century\u00a0BC construction attributed in legend to the architects Trophonios and Agamedes.\nAncient tradition accounted for four temples that successively occupied the site before the 548/7\u00a0BC fire, following which the Alcmaeonids built a fifth. The poet Pindar celebrated the Alcmaeonids' temple in \"Pythian\" 7.8-9 and he also provided details of the third building (\"Paean\" 8. 65-75). Other details are given by Pausanias (10.5.9-13) and the Homeric Hymn to Apollo (294 ff.). The first temple was said to have been constructed out of olive branches from Tempe. The second was made by bees out of wax and wings but was miraculously carried off by a powerful wind and deposited among the Hyperboreans. The third, as described by Pindar, was created by the gods Hephaestus and Athena, but its architectural details included Siren-like figures or \"Enchantresses\", whose baneful songs eventually provoked the Olympian gods to bury the temple in the earth (according to Pausanias, it was destroyed by earthquake and fire). In Pindar's words addressed to the Muses:\nThe fourth temple was said to have been constructed from stone by Trophonius and Agamedes.\nHowever, a new theory gives a completely new explanation of the above myth of the four temples of Delphi.\nTreasuries.\nFrom the entrance of the upper site, continuing up the slope on the Sacred Way almost to the Temple of Apollo, are a large number of votive statues, and numerous so-called treasuries. These were built by many of the Greek city-states to commemorate victories and to thank the oracle for her advice, which was thought to have contributed to those victories. These buildings held the offerings made to Apollo; these were frequently a \"tithe\" or tenth of the spoils of a battle. The most impressive is the now-restored Athenian Treasury, built to commemorate their victory at the Battle of Marathon in 490\u00a0BC.\nThe Siphnian Treasury was dedicated by the city of Siphnos whose citizens gave a tithe of the yield from their silver mines until the mines came to an abrupt end when the sea flooded the workings.\nOne of the largest of the treasuries was that of Argos. Having built it in the late classical period, the Argives took great pride in establishing their place at Delphi amongst the other city-states. Completed in 380 BC, the treasury seems to draw inspiration mostly from the Temple of Hera located in the Argolis. However, recent analysis of the Archaic elements of the treasury suggest that its founding preceded this.\nOther identifiable treasuries are those of the Sikyonians, the Boeotians and the Thebans.\nAltar of the Chians.\nLocated in front of the Temple of Apollo, the main altar of the sanctuary was paid for and built by the people of Chios. It is dated to the 5th century BC by the inscription on its cornice. Made entirely of black marble, except for the base and cornice, the altar would have made a striking impression. It was restored in 1920.\n&lt;br&gt;\nStoa of the Athenians.\nThe stoa, or open-sided, covered porch, is placed in an approximately E-W alignment along the base of the polygonal wall retaining the terrace on which the Temple of Apollo sits. There is no archaeological suggestion of a connection to the temple. The stoa opened to the Sacred Way. The nearby presence of the Treasury of the Athenians suggests that this quarter of Delphi was used for Athenian business or politics, as stoas are generally found in market-places.\nAlthough the architecture at Delphi is generally Doric, a plain style, in keeping with the Phocian traditions, which were Doric, the Athenians did not prefer the Doric. The stoa was built in their own preferred style, the Ionic order, the capitals of the columns being a sure indicator. In the Ionic order they are floral and ornate, although not as much as the Corinthian, which is in deficit there. The remaining porch structure contains seven fluted columns, unusually carved from single pieces of stone (most columns were constructed from a series of discs joined together). The inscription on the stylobate indicates that it was built by the Athenians after their naval victory over the Persians in 478\u00a0BC, to house their war trophies. At that time the Athenians and the Spartans were on the same side.\nSibyl rock.\nThe Sibyl rock is a pulpit-like outcrop of rock between the Athenian Treasury and the Stoa of the Athenians upon the sacred way which leads up to the temple of Apollo in the archaeological area of Delphi. It is claimed to be where an ancient Sibyl pre-dating the Pythia of Apollo sat to deliver her prophecies. Or, the Pythia might have stood there, or an acolyte whose function was to deliver the final prophecy. The rock seems ideal for public speaking.\nTheatre.\nThe ancient theatre at Delphi was built further up the hill from the Temple of Apollo giving spectators a view of the entire sanctuary and the valley below. It was originally built in the 4th\u00a0century\u00a0BC but was remodeled on several occasions, particularly in 160/159 B.C. at the expenses of king Eumenes II of Pergamon and in 67 A.D. on the occasion of emperor Nero's visit.\nThe koilon (cavea) leans against the natural slope of the mountain whereas its eastern part overrides a little torrent that led the water of the fountain Cassotis right underneath the temple of Apollo. The orchestra was initially a full circle with a diameter measuring 7 meters. The rectangular scene building ended up in two arched openings, of which the foundations are preserved today. Access to the theatre was possible through the parodoi, i.e. the side corridors. On the support walls of the parodoi are engraved large numbers of manumission inscriptions recording fictitious sales of the slaves to the god. The koilon was divided horizontally in two zones via a corridor called diazoma. The lower zone had 27 rows of seats and the upper one only 8. Six radially arranged stairs divided the lower part of the koilon in seven tiers. The theatre could accommodate about 4,500 spectators.\nOn the occasion of Nero's visit to Greece in 67 A.D. various alterations took place. The orchestra was paved and delimited by a parapet made of stone. The proscenium was replaced by a low pedestal, the pulpitum; its fa\u00e7ade was decorated with scenes from Hercules' myth in relief. Further repairs and transformations took place in the 2nd century A.D. Pausanias mentions that these were carried out under the auspices of Herod Atticus. In antiquity, the theatre was used for the vocal and musical contests which formed part of the programme of the Pythian Games in the late Hellenistic and Roman period. The theatre was abandoned when the sanctuary declined in Late Antiquity. After its excavation and initial restoration it hosted theatrical performances during the Delphic Festivals organized by A. Sikelianos and his wife, Eva Palmer, in 1927 and in 1930. It has recently been restored again as the serious landslides posed a grave threat for its stability for decades.\nTholos.\nThe tholos at the sanctuary of Athena Pronoia (\u1f08\u03b8\u03b7\u03bd\u1fb6 \u03a0\u03c1\u03cc\u03bd\u03bf\u03b9\u03b1, \"Athena of forethought\") is a circular building that was constructed between 380 and 360\u00a0BC. It consisted of 20 Doric columns arranged with an exterior diameter of 14.76\u00a0meters, with 10 Corinthian columns in the interior.\nThe Tholos is located approximately a half a mile (800 m) from the main ruins at Delphi (at ). Three of the Doric columns have been restored, making it the most popular site at Delphi for tourists to take photographs.\nThe architect of the \"vaulted temple at Delphi\" is named by Vitruvius, in \"De architectura\" Book VII, as Theodorus Phoceus (not Theodorus of Samos, whom Vitruvius names separately).\nGymnasium.\nThe gymnasium, which is half a mile away from the main sanctuary, was a series of buildings used by the youth of Delphi. The building consisted of two levels: a stoa on the upper level providing open space, and a palaestra, pool and baths on lower floor. These pools and baths were said to have magical powers, and imparted the ability to communicate to Apollo himself.\nStadium.\nThe stadium is located further up the hill, beyond the \"via sacra\" and the theatre. It was originally built in the 5th century\u00a0BC but was altered in later centuries. The last major remodelling took place in the 2nd century\u00a0AD under the patronage of Herodes Atticus when the stone seating was built and (arched) entrance. It could seat 6500 spectators and the track was 177\u00a0metres long and 25.5\u00a0metres wide.\nHippodrome.\nIt was at the Pythian games that prominent political leaders, such as Cleisthenes, tyrant of Sikyon, and Hieron, tyrant of Syracuse, competed with their chariots. The hippodrome where these events took place was referred to by Pindar, and this monument was sought by archaeologists for over two centuries.\nIts traces have recently been found at Gonia in the plain of Krisa in the place where the original stadium was sited.\nPolygonal wall.\nThe retaining wall was built to support the terrace housing the construction of the second temple of Apollo in 548\u00a0BC. Its name is taken from the polygonal masonry of which it is constructed. At a later date, from 200\u00a0BC onwards, the stones were inscribed with the manumission contracts of slaves who were consecrated to Apollo. Approximately a thousand manumissions are recorded on the wall.\nCastalian spring.\nThe sacred spring of Delphi lies in the ravine of the Phaedriades. The preserved remains of two monumental fountains that received the water from the spring date to the Archaic period and the Roman, with the latter cut into the rock.\nAthletic statues.\nDelphi is famous for its many preserved athletic statues. It is known that Olympia originally housed far more of these statues, but time brought ruin to many of them, leaving Delphi as the main site of athletic statues. Kleobis and Biton, two brothers renowned for their strength, are modeled in two of the earliest known athletic statues at Delphi. The statues commemorate their feat of pulling their mother's cart several miles to the Sanctuary of Hera in the absence of oxen. The neighbors were most impressed and their mother asked Hera to grant them the greatest gift. When they entered Hera's temple, they fell into a slumber and never woke, dying at the height of their admiration, the perfect gift.\nThe Charioteer of Delphi is another ancient relic that has withstood the centuries. It is one of the best known statues from antiquity. The charioteer has lost many features, including his chariot and his left arm, but he stands as a tribute to athletic art of antiquity.\nMyths regarding the origin of the precinct.\nA myth is a story based on fantasy or belief rather than known fact. Ancient Greek culture used them frequently in many different contexts. They are only known to moderns through mention in ancient Greek writings. A writer typically had access to writings at a library or private archive, unless he was wealthy enough to have his own copies made. All books were hand-written. Authors referred to other authors whose books they had before them, or had taken notes from. Often the source of the story was not identified, but even if it was, the source may have taken it from some other book. Sometimes authors wrote down myths related to them orally.\nIt is thus not possible to date myths. They could have come from any prior time. Often the date of the book relating the myth cannot be determined within centuries. A myth cannot with any certainty be attributed to any century, although the written source may be. Scholars are not entirely without dating methods, however. The content of the myth may resemble or imply circumstances of known or probable provenience. The Iliad, for example, most likely relates myths passed down from the Trojan War, a known Late Bronze Age event.\nThe Greeks were aided and abetted in their myth-making by the oracles in which they typically devoutly believed. When asked a question, an oracle never gave a direct answer, but spoke in allegories with \"hidden meanings\" and \"ambiguities,\" said Plutarch, priest of Apollo and historian. It was then incumbent on the inquiring party to interpret them. As the prophecy was regarded as the true word of divinity, the actual meaning, if it could be known, must be historical truth. Believing this principle to be true, many of the best historians spent time trying to intepret oracular myths as actual circumstances.\nSome Temple of Apollo appears in the Homeric Literature. In the Iliad, Achilles would not accept Agamemnon's peace offering even if it included all the wealth in the \"stone floor\" of \"rocky Pytho\" (I 404). In the Odyssey (\u03b8 79) Agamemnon crosses a \"stone floor\" to receive a prophecy from Apollo in Pytho, the first known of proto-history. Hesiod also refers to Pytho \"in the hollows of Parnassus\" (Theogony 498). These references imply that the earliest known date of the oracle's existence is the 8th century BC, the probable date of composition of the Homeric works. Earlier times of existence cannot be excluded if the written poems are adaptations of earlier oral ones.\nBeyond these proto-historic tidbits the main myths of Delphi are given in three literary loci. H.W Parke, the Delphi scholar, complained that they are self-contradictory, thus unconsciously falling into the Plutarchian epistemology, that they reflect some common, objective historic reality against which the accounts can be compared. Missing is the reality, nor can it be assumed ever to have existed. There is no Apollo, no Zeus, no Hera, and certainly never was a great, serpent-like monster. The myths are pure Plutarchian figures of speech, meant to be aetiologies of some oracular tradition.\nHomeric Hymn 3, \"To Apollo,\" is the oldest of the three loci, dating to the 7th century BC (estimate). Apollo travels about after his birth on Delos seeking a place for an oracle. He is advised by Telephus to choose Crissa \"below the glade of Parnassus,\" which he does, and has a temple built. Killing the serpent that guards the spring. Subsequently, some Cretans from Knossos sail up on a mission to reconnoitre Pylos. Changing into a dolphin, Apollo casts himself on deck. The Cretans do not dare to remove him but sail on. Apollo guides the ship around Greece, ending back at Crisa, where the ship grounds. Apollo enters his shrine with the Cretans to be its priests, worshipping him as \"Delphineus\", \"of the dolphin.\"\nZeus determined the site of Delphi when he sought to find the centre of his \"Grandmother Earth\" (Gaia). He sent two eagles flying from the eastern and western extremities, and the path of the eagles crossed over Delphi where the omphalos, or navel of Gaia was found.\nAccording to Aeschylus in the prologue of the \"Eumenides\", the oracle had origins in prehistoric times and the worship of Gaia, a view echoed by H.W. Parke.\nOne tale of the sanctuary's discovery states that a goatherd, who grazed his flocks on Parnassus, one day observed his goats playing with great agility upon nearing a chasm in the rock; the goatherd noticing this held his head over the chasm causing the fumes to go to his brain; throwing him into a strange trance.\nThe Homeric Hymn to Delphic Apollo recalled that the ancient name of this site had been \"Krisa\".\nOthers relate that it was named Pytho (\u03a0\u03c5\u03b8\u03ce) and that Pythia, the priestess serving as the oracle, was chosen from their ranks by a group of priestesses who officiated at the temple. Apollo was said to have slain Python, a \"drako\" (a male serpent or a dragon) who lived there and protected the navel of the Earth. \"Python\" (derived from the verb \u03c0\u03cd\u03b8\u03c9 (\"pyth\u014d\"), \"to rot\") is claimed by some to be the original name of the site in recognition of Python which Apollo defeated.\nThe name \"Delphi\" comes from the same root as \u03b4\u03b5\u03bb\u03c6\u03cd\u03c2 \"delphys\", \"womb\" and may indicate archaic veneration of Gaia at the site.\nApollo is connected with the site by his epithet \u0394\u03b5\u03bb\u03c6\u03af\u03bd\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 \"Delphinios\", \"the Delphinian\". The epithet is connected with dolphins (Greek \u03b4\u03b5\u03bb\u03c6\u03af\u03c2,-\u1fd6\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2) in the Homeric \"Hymn to Apollo\" (line 400), recounting the legend of how Apollo first came to Delphi in the shape of a dolphin, carrying Cretan priests on his back. The Homeric name of the oracle is \"Pytho\" (\u03a0\u03c5\u03b8\u03ce). Another legend held that Apollo walked to Delphi from the north and stopped at Tempe, a city in Thessaly, to pick laurel (also known as bay tree) which he considered to be a sacred plant. In commemoration of this legend, the winners at the Pythian Games received a wreath of laurel picked in the temple.\nOracle of Delphi.\nThe prophetic process.\nDelphi is perhaps best known for its oracle, the Pythia, or sibyl, the duty priestess prophesying from the tripod in the sunken adyton of the Temple of Apollo. Apollo spoke through his oracle. She had to be an older woman of blameless life chosen from among the peasants of the area. Alone in an enclosed inner sanctum (Ancient Greek \"adyton\" \u2013 \"do not enter\") she sat on a tripod seat over an opening in the earth (the \"chasm\"). According to legend, when Apollo slew Python its body fell into this fissure and fumes arose from its decomposing body. Intoxicated by the vapors, the sibyl would fall into a trance, allowing Apollo to possess her spirit. In this state she prophesied. The oracle could not be consulted during the winter months, for this was traditionally the time when Apollo would live among the Hyperboreans. Dionysus would inhabit the temple during his absence.\nThe time to consult pythia for an oracle during the year is determined from astronomical and geological grounds related to the constellations of Lyra and Cygnus but the hydrocarbon vapors emitted from the chasm. Similar practice was followed in other Apollo oracles too.\nWhile in a trance the Pythia \"raved\" \u2013 probably a form of ecstatic speech \u2013 and her ravings were \"translated\" by the priests of the temple into elegant hexameters. It has been speculated that the ancient writers, including Plutarch who had worked as a priest at Delphi, were correct in attributing the oracular effects to the sweet-smelling \"pneuma\" (Ancient Greek for breath, wind or vapor) escaping from the chasm in the rock. That exhalation could have been high in the known anaesthetic and sweet-smelling ethylene or other hydrocarbons such as ethane known to produce violent trances. Though this theory remains debatable the authors put up a detailed answer to their critics.\nAncient sources describe the priestess using \u201claurel\u201d to inspire her prophecies. Several alternative plant candidates have been suggested including Cannabis, Hyoscyamus, Rhododendron and Oleander. Harissis claims that a review of contemporary toxicological literature indicates that oleander causes symptoms similar to those shown by the Pythia, and his study of ancient texts shows that oleander was often included under the term \"laurel\". The Pythia may have chewed oleander leaves and inhaled their smoke prior to her oracular pronouncements and sometimes dying from the toxicity. The toxic substances of oleander resulted in symptoms similar to those of epilepsy, the \u201csacred disease,\u201d which may have been seen as the possession of the Pythia by the spirit of Apollo.\nThe Delphic oracle exerted considerable influence throughout the Greek world, and she was consulted before all major undertakings including wars and the founding of colonies. She also was respected by the Greek-influenced countries around the periphery of the Greek world, such as Lydia, Caria, and even Egypt.\nThe oracle was also known to the early Romans. Rome's seventh and last king, Lucius Tarquinius Superbus, after witnessing a snake near his palace, sent a delegation including two of his sons to consult the oracle.\nIn 83 BCE a Thracian tribe raided Delphi, burned the temple, plundered the sanctuary and stole the \"unquenchable fire\" from the altar. During the raid, part of the temple roof collapsed. The same year, the temple was severely damaged by an earthquake, thus it fell into decay and the surrounding area became impoverished. The sparse local population led to difficulties in filling the posts required. The oracle's credibility waned due to doubtful predictions.\nThe oracle flourished again in the second century CE during the rule of emperor Hadrian, who is believed to have visited the oracle twice and offered complete autonomy to the city.\nBy the 4th century, Delphi had acquired the status of a city. \nDespite the rise of Christianity across the Roman Empire, the oracle remained a religious center throughout the 4th century, and the Pythian Games continued to be held at least until 424 CE; however, the decline continued. The attempt of Emperor Julian to revive polytheism did not survive his reign. Excavations have revealed a large three-aisled basilica in the city, as well as traces of a church building in the sanctuary's gymnasium. The site was abandoned in the 6th or 7th centuries, although a single bishop of Delphi is attested in an episcopal list of the late 8th and early 9th centuries.\nReligious significance of the oracle.\nDelphi became the site of a major temple to Phoebus Apollo, as well as the Pythian Games and the prehistoric oracle. Even in Roman times, hundreds of votive statues remained, described by Pliny the Younger and seen by Pausanias. Carved into the temple were three phrases: (\"gn\u014dthi seaut\u00f3n\" = \"know thyself\") and (\"m\u0113d\u00e9n \u00e1gan\" = \"nothing in excess\"), and (\"eng\u00fda p\u00e1ra d'at\u0113\" = \"make a pledge and mischief is nigh\"), In antiquity, the origin of these phrases was attributed to one or more of the Seven Sages of Greece by authors such as Plato and Pausanias. Additionally, according to Plutarch's essay on the meaning of the \"E at Delphi\"\u2014the only literary source for the inscription\u2014there was also inscribed at the temple a large letter E. Among other things epsilon signifies the number 5. However, ancient as well as modern scholars have doubted the legitimacy of such inscriptions. According to one pair of scholars, \"The actual authorship of the three maxims set up on the Delphian temple may be left uncertain. Most likely they were popular proverbs, which tended later to be attributed to particular sages.\"\nAccording to the Homeric hymn to the Pythian Apollo, Apollo shot his first arrow as an infant which effectively slew the serpent Pytho, the son of Gaia, who guarded the spot. To atone the murder of Gaia's son, Apollo was forced to fly and spend eight years in menial service before he could return forgiven. A festival, the Septeria, was held every year, at which the whole story was represented: the slaying of the serpent, and the flight, atonement, and return of the god.\nThe Pythian Games took place every four years to commemorate Apollo's victory. Another regular Delphi festival was the \"Theophania\" (\u0398\u03b5\u03bf\u03c6\u03ac\u03bd\u03b5\u03b9\u03b1), an annual festival in spring celebrating the return of Apollo from his winter quarters in Hyperborea. The culmination of the festival was a display of an image of the gods, usually hidden in the sanctuary, to worshippers.\nThe \"theoxenia\" was held each summer, centred on a feast for \"gods and ambassadors from other states.\" Myths indicate that Apollo killed the chthonic serpent Python guarding the Castalian Spring and named his priestess Pythia after her. Python, who had been sent by Hera, had attempted to prevent Leto, while she was pregnant with Apollo and Artemis, from giving birth.\nThis spring flowed toward the temple but disappeared beneath, creating a cleft which emitted chemical vapors that purportedly caused the oracle at Delphi to reveal her prophecies. Apollo killed Python but had to be punished for it, since he was a child of Gaia. The shrine dedicated to Apollo was originally dedicated to Gaia and shared with Poseidon. The name Pythia remained as the title of the Delphic oracle.\nErwin Rohde wrote that the Python was an earth spirit, who was conquered by Apollo, and buried under the omphalos, and that it is a case of one deity setting up a temple on the grave of another. Another view holds that Apollo was a fairly recent addition to the Greek pantheon coming originally from Lydia. The Etruscans coming from northern Anatolia also worshipped Apollo, and it may be that he was originally identical with Mesopotamian Aplu, an Akkadian title meaning \"son\", originally given to the plague God Nergal, son of Enlil. Apollo Smintheus (Greek ), the mouse killer eliminates mice, a primary cause of disease, hence he promotes preventive medicine.\nHistory.\nOccupation of the site at Delphi can be traced back to the Neolithic period with extensive occupation and use beginning in the Mycenaean period (1600\u20131100 BC). In Mycenaean times Krissa was a major Greek land and sea power, perhaps one of the first in Greece, if the Early Helladic date of Kirra is to be believed. The ancient sources indicate that the previous name of the Gulf of Corinth was the \"Krisaean Gulf.\" Like Krisa, Corinth was a Dorian state, and Gulf of Corinth was a Dorian lake, so to speak, especially since the migration of Dorians into the Peloponnesus starting about 1000 BC. Krisa's power was broken finally by the recovered Aeolic and Attic-Ionic speaking states of southern Greece over the issue of access to Delphi. Control of it was assumed by the Amphictyonic League, an organization of states with an interest in Delphi, in the early classical period. Krisa was destroyed for its arrogance. The gulf was given Corinth's name. Corinth by then was like the Ionic states: ornate and innovative, not like the spartan style of the Doric.\nAncient Delphi.\nEarlier myths include traditions that Pythia, or the Delphic oracle, already was the site of an important oracle in the pre-classical Greek world (as early as 1400\u00a0BC) and, rededicated from about 800\u00a0BC, when it served as the major site during classical times for the worship of the god Apollo.\nDelphi was since ancient times a place of worship for Gaia, the mother goddess connected with fertility. The town started to gain pan-Hellenic relevance as both a shrine and an oracle in the 7th century BC. Initially under the control of Phocaean settlers based in nearby Kirra (currently Itea), Delphi was reclaimed by the Athenians during the First Sacred War (597\u2013585 BC). The conflict resulted in the consolidation of the Amphictyonic League, which had both a military and a religious function revolving around the protection of the Temple of Apollo. This shrine was destroyed by fire in 548 BC and then fell under the control of the Alcmaeonids banned from Athens. In 449\u2013448 BC, the Second Sacred War (fought in the wider context of the First Peloponnesian War between the Peloponnesian League led by Sparta and the Delian-Attic League led by Athens) resulted in the Phocians gaining control of Delphi and the management of the Pythian Games.\nIn 356 BC the Phocians under Philomelos captured and sacked Delphi, leading to the Third Sacred War (356\u2013346 BC), which ended with the defeat of the former and the rise of Macedon under the reign of Philip II. This led to the Fourth Sacred War (339 BC), which culminated in the Battle of Chaeronea (338 BC) and the establishment of Macedonian rule over Greece.\nIn Delphi, Macedonian rule was superseded by the Aetolians in 279 BC, when a Gallic invasion was repelled, and by the Romans in 191 BC. The site was sacked by Lucius Cornelius Sulla in 86 BC, during the Mithridatic Wars, and by Nero in 66 AD. Although subsequent Roman emperors of the Flavian dynasty contributed towards to the restoration of the site, it gradually lost importance. In the course of the 3rd century mystery cults became more popular than the traditional Greek pantheon. Christianity, which started as yet one more mystery cult, soon gained ground, and this eventually resulted in the persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire. The anti-pagan legislation of the Flavian dynasty deprived ancient sanctuaries of their assets. The emperor Julian attempted to reverse this religious climate, yet his \"pagan revival\" was particularly short-lived. When the doctor Oreibasius visited the oracle of Delphi, in order to question the fate of paganism, he received a pessimistic answer:\n[Tell the king that the flute has fallen to the ground. Phoebus does not have a home any more, neither an oracular laurel, nor a speaking fountain, because the talking water has dried out.]\nIt was shut down during the persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire by Theodosius I in 381 AD.\nAmphictyonic Council.\nThe Amphictyonic Council was a council of representatives from six Greek tribes that controlled Delphi and also the quadrennial Pythian Games. They met biannually and came from Thessaly and central Greece. Over time, the town of Delphi gained more control of itself and the council lost much of its influence.\nThe sacred precinct in the Iron Age.\nExcavation at Delphi, which was a post-Mycenaean settlement of the late 9th\u00a0century, has uncovered artifacts increasing steadily in volume beginning with the last quarter of the 8th century\u00a0BC. Pottery and bronze as well as tripod dedications continue in a steady stream, in contrast to Olympia. Neither the range of objects nor the presence of prestigious dedications proves that Delphi was a focus of attention for a wide range of worshippers, but the large quantity of valuable goods, found in no other mainland sanctuary, encourages that view.\nApollo's sacred precinct in Delphi was a Panhellenic Sanctuary, where every four years, starting in 586\u00a0BC athletes from all over the Greek world competed in the Pythian Games, one of the four Panhellenic Games, precursors of the Modern Olympics. The victors at Delphi were presented with a laurel crown (\"stephanos\") which was ceremonially cut from a tree by a boy who re-enacted the slaying of the Python. (These competitions are also called stephantic games, after the crown.) Delphi was set apart from the other games sites because it hosted the mousikos agon, musical competitions.\nThese Pythian Games rank second among the four stephantic games chronologically and in importance. These games, though, were different from the games at Olympia in that they were not of such vast importance to the city of Delphi as the games at Olympia were to the area surrounding Olympia. Delphi would have been a renowned city regardless of whether it hosted these games; it had other attractions that led to it being labeled the \"omphalos\" (navel) of the earth, in other words, the centre of the world.\nIn the inner \"hestia\" (hearth) of the Temple of Apollo, an eternal flame burned. After the battle of Plataea, the Greek cities extinguished their fires and brought new fire from the hearth of Greece, at Delphi; in the foundation stories of several Greek colonies, the founding colonists were first dedicated at Delphi.\nAbandonment and rediscovery.\nThe Ottomans finalized their domination over Phocis and Delphi in about 1410CE. Delphi itself remained almost uninhabited for centuries. It seems that one of the first buildings of the early modern era was the monastery of the Dormition of Mary or of Panagia (the Mother of God) built above the ancient gymnasium at Delphi. It must have been towards the end of the 15th or in the 16th century that a settlement started forming there, which eventually ended up forming the village of Kastri.\nOttoman Delphi gradually began to be investigated. The first Westerner to describe the remains in Delphi was Ciriaco de' Pizzicolli (Cyriacus of Ancona), a 15th-century merchant turned diplomat and antiquarian. He visited Delphi in March 1436 and remained there for six days. He recorded all the visible archaeological remains based on Pausanias for identification. He described the stadium and the theatre at that date as well as some freestanding pieces of sculpture. He also recorded several inscriptions, most of which are now lost. His identifications however were not always correct: for example he described a round building he saw as the temple of Apollo while this was simply the base of the Argives' ex-voto. A severe earthquake in 1500 caused much damage.\nIn 1766 an English expedition funded by the Society of Dilettanti included the Oxford epigraphist Richard Chandler, the architect Nicholas Revett, and the painter William Pars. Their studies were published in 1769 under the title \"Ionian Antiquities\", followed by a collection of inscriptions, and two travel books, one about Asia Minor (1775), and one about Greece (1776). Apart from the antiquities, they also related some vivid descriptions of daily life in Kastri, such as the crude behaviour of the Turco-Albanians who guarded the mountain passes.\nIn 1805 Edward Dodwell visited Delphi, accompanied by the painter Simone Pomardi. Lord Byron visited in 1809, accompanied by his friend John Cam Hobhouse:\nYet there I've wandered by the vaulted rill;&lt;br&gt;\nYes! Sighed o'er Delphi's long deserted shrine, &lt;br&gt;\nwhere, save that feeble fountain, all is still.\nHe carved his name on the same column in the gymnasium as Lord Aberdeen, later Prime Minister, who had visited a few years before. Proper excavation did not start until the late 19th century (see \"Excavations\" section) after the village had moved.\nDelphi in later art.\nFrom the 16th century onward, woodcuts of Delphi began to appear in printed maps and books. The earliest depictions of Delphi were totally imaginary; for example, those created by Nikolaus Gerbel, who published in 1545 a text based on the map of Greece by N. Sofianos. The ancient sanctuary was depicted as a fortified city.\nThe first travelers with archaeological interests, apart from the precursor Cyriacus of Ancona, were the British George Wheler and the French Jacob Spon, who visited Greece in a joint expedition in 1675\u20131676. They published their impressions separately. In Wheler's \"Journey into Greece\", published in 1682, a sketch of the region of Delphi appeared, where the settlement of Kastri and some ruins were depicted. The illustrations in Spon's publication \"Voyage d'Italie, de Dalmatie, de Gr\u00e8ce et du Levant, 1678\" are considered original and groundbreaking.\nTravelers continued to visit Delphi throughout the 19th century and published their books which contained diaries, sketches, views of the site as well as pictures of coins. The illustrations often reflected the spirit of romanticism, as evident by the works of Otto Magnus von Stackelberg, where, apart from the landscapes (\"La Gr\u00e8ce. Vues pittoresques et topographiques\", Paris 1834) are depicted also human types (\"Costumes et usages des peuples de la Gr\u00e8ce moderne dessin\u00e9s sur les lieux\", Paris 1828). The philhellene painter W. Williams has comprised the landscape of Delphi in his themes (1829). Influential personalities such as F.Ch.-H.-L. Pouqueville, W.M. Leake, Chr. Wordsworth and Lord Byron are amongst the most important visitors of Delphi.\nAfter the foundation of the modern Greek state, the press became also interested in these travelers. Thus \"Ephemeris\" writes (17 March 1889):\nIn the \"Revues des Deux Mondes\" Paul Lefaivre published his memoirs from an excursion to Delphi. The French author relates in a charming style his adventures on the road, praising particularly the ability of an old woman to put back in place the dislocated arm of one of his foreign traveling companions, who had fallen off the horse. \"In Arachova the Greek type is preserved intact. The men are rather athletes than farmers, built for running and wrestling, particularly elegant and slender under their mountain gear.\" Only briefly does he refer to the antiquities of Delphi, but he refers to a pelasgian wall 80\u00a0meters long, \"on which innumerable inscriptions are carved, decrees, conventions, manumissions.\"\nGradually the first travelling guides appeared. The revolutionary \"pocket\" books invented by Karl Baedeker, accompanied by maps useful for visiting archaeological sites such as Delphi (1894) and the informed plans, the guides became practical and popular. The photographic lens revolutionized the way of depicting the landscape and the antiquities, particularly from 1893 onwards, when the systematic excavations of the French Archaeological School started. However, artists such as Vera Willoughby, continued to be inspired by the landscape.\nDelphic themes inspired several graphic artists. Besides the landscape, Pythia/Sibylla become an illustration subject even on Tarot cards. A famous example constitutes Michelangelo's Delphic Sibyl (1509), the 19th-century German engraving Oracle of Apollo at Delphi, as well as the recent ink on paper drawing \"The Oracle of Delphi\" (2013) by M. Lind.\nModern artists are inspired also by the Delphic Maxims. Examples of such works are displayed in the \"Sculpture park of the European Cultural Center of Delphi\" and in exhibitions taking place at the Archaeological Museum of Delphi.\nDelphi in later literature.\nDelphi inspired literature as well. In 1814 W. Haygarth, friend of Lord Byron, refers to Delphi in his work \"Greece, a Poem\". In 1888 Charles Marie Ren\u00e9 Leconte de Lisle published his lyric drama L\u2019Apollonide, accompanied by music by Franz Servais. More recent French authors used Delphi as a source of inspiration such as Yves Bonnefoy (Delphes du second jour) or Jean Sullivan (nickname of Joseph Lemarchand) in L'Obsession de Delphes (1967), but also Rob MacGregor's Indiana Jones and the Peril at Delphi (1991).\nThe presence of Delphi in Greek literature is very intense. Poets such as Kostis Palamas (The Delphic Hymn, 1894), Kostas Karyotakis (Delphic festival, 1927), Nikephoros Vrettakos (return from Delphi, 1957), Yannis Ritsos (Delphi, 1961\u201362) and Kiki Dimoula (Gas omphalos and Appropriate terrain 1988), to mention only the most renowned ones. Angelos Sikelianos wrote The Dedication (of the Delphic speech) (1927), the Delphic Hymn (1927) and the tragedy Sibylla (1940), whereas in the context of the Delphic idea and the Delphic festivals he published an essay titled \"The Delphic union\" (1930). The nobelist George Seferis wrote an essay under the title \"Delphi\", in the book \"Dokimes\".\nThe importance of Delphi for the Greeks is significant. The site has been recorded on the collective memory and have been expressed through tradition. Nikolaos Politis, the famous Greek ethnographer, in his Studies on the life and language of the Greek people - part A, offers two examples from Delphi:\nWhen Christ was born a priest of Apollo was sacrificing below the monastery of Panayia, on the road of Livadeia, on a site called Logari. Suddenly he abandoned the sacrifice and says to the people: \"in this moment was born the son of God, who will be very powerful, like Apollo, but then Apollo will beat him\". He didn't have time to finish his speech and a thunder came down and burnt him, opening the rock nearby into two. [p.\u00a099]\nThe Mylords are not Christians, because nobody ever saw them cross themselves. They originate from the old pagan inhabitants of Delphi who kept their property in castle called Adelphi, named after the two brother princes who built it. When Christ and his mother came to the site, and all people around converted to Christianity they thought that they should better leave; thus the Mylords left for the West and took all their belongings with them. The Mylords come here now and worship these stones. [p.\u00a059]"}
{"id": "7952", "revid": "22804074", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7952", "title": "Digital Equipment Corporation", "text": "Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC ), using the trademark Digital, was a major American company in the computer industry from the 1960s to the 1990s. The company was co-founded by Ken Olsen and Harlan Anderson in 1957. Olsen was president until forced to resign in 1992, after the company had gone into precipitous decline.\nAlthough the company produced many different product lines over their history, they are best known for their work in the minicomputer market starting in the mid-1960s. The company produced a series of machines known as the PDP line, with the PDP-8 and PDP-11 being among the most successful minis of all time. Their success was only surpassed by another DEC product, the late-1970s VAX \"supermini\" systems that were designed to replace the PDP-11. Although a number of competitors had successfully competed with Digital through the 1970s, the VAX cemented the company's place as a leading vendor in the computer space.\nAs microcomputers improved in the late 1980s, especially with the introduction of RISC-based workstation machines, the performance niche of the minicomputer was rapidly eroded. By the early 1990s, the company was in turmoil as their mini sales collapsed and their attempts to address this by entering the high-end market with machines like the VAX 9000 were market failures. After several attempts to enter the workstation and file server market, the DEC Alpha product line began to make successful inroads in the mid-1990s, but was too late to save the company.\nDEC was acquired in June 1998 by Compaq in what was at that time the largest merger in the history of the computer industry. During the purchase, some parts of DEC were sold to other companies; the compiler business and the Hudson, Massachusetts facility, were sold to Intel. At the time, Compaq was focused on the enterprise market and had recently purchased several other large vendors. DEC was a major player overseas where Compaq had less presence. However, Compaq had little idea what to do with its acquisitions, and soon found itself in financial difficulty of its own. The company subsequently merged with Hewlett-Packard (HP) in May 2002.\n, decades-old hardware (including PDP-11, VAX, and AlphaServer) is being emulated to allow legacy software to run on modern hardware; funding for this is planned to last at least until 2030.\nHistory.\nFrom 1957 until 1992, DEC's headquarters were located in a former wool mill in Maynard, Massachusetts. The headquarter buildings were vacated in 1993, renamed Clock Tower Place, and subsequently redeveloped as Mill &amp; Main Place, a 1.1 million square foot facility for offices and light industry.\nInitially focusing on the small end of the computer market allowed DEC to grow without its potential competitors making serious efforts to compete with them. Their PDP series of machines became popular in the 1960s, especially the PDP-8, widely considered to be the first successful minicomputer. Looking to simplify and update their line, DEC replaced most of their smaller machines with the PDP-11 in 1970, the year they became the third largest computer manufacturer after IBM and the UNIVAC Division of Sperry Rand. The rising corporation eventually sold over 600,000 PDP-11s.\nOriginally designed as a follow-on to the PDP-11, DEC's VAX-11 series was the first widely used 32-bit minicomputer, sometimes referred to as \"superminis\". These systems were able to compete in many roles with larger mainframe computers, such as the IBM System/370. The VAX was a best-seller, with over 400,000 sold, and its sales through the 1980s propelled DEC to become the second largest computer company in the industry. At its peak, it was the second largest employer in Massachusetts, after the state government.\nThe rapid rise of the business microcomputer in the late 1980s, and especially the introduction of powerful 32-bit systems in the 1990s, quickly eroded the value of DEC's systems. DEC's last major attempt to find a space in the rapidly changing market was the DEC Alpha 64-bit RISC instruction set architecture. DEC initially started work on Alpha as a way to re-implement their VAX series, but also employed it in a range of high-performance workstations. Although the Alpha processor family met both of these goals, and, for most of its lifetime, was the fastest processor family on the market, extremely high asking prices were outsold by lower priced workstation chips from Intel and IBM/Motorola.\nDEC was acquired in June 1998 by Compaq, in what was at that time the largest merger in the history of the computer industry. At the time, Compaq was focused on the enterprise market and had recently purchased several other large vendors. DEC was a major player overseas where Compaq had less presence. However, Compaq had little idea what to do with its acquisitions, and soon found itself in financial difficulty of its own. The company subsequently merged with Hewlett-Packard (HP) in May 2002.\nProducts.\nBeyond DECsystem-10/20, PDP, VAX and Alpha, DEC was known for its work in communication subsystem designs, such as Ethernet, DNA (DIGITAL Network Architecture: predominantly DECnet products), DSA (Digital Storage Architecture: disks/tapes/controllers), and its \"dumb terminal\" subsystems including VT100 and DECserver products.\nResearch.\nDEC's Research Laboratories (or Research Labs, as they were commonly known) conducted DEC's corporate research. Some of them were continued in operation by Compaq and are still operated by Hewlett-Packard. The laboratories were:\nSome of the former employees of DEC's Research Labs or DEC's R&amp;D in general include:\nSome of the former employees of Digital Equipment Corp were responsible for developing DEC Alpha and StrongARM:\nSome of the work of the Research Labs was published in the \"Digital Technical Journal\", which was in published from 1985 until 1998.\nAccomplishments and legacy.\nDEC supported the ANSI standards, especially the ASCII character set, which survives in Unicode and the ISO 8859 character set family. DEC's own Multinational Character Set also had a large influence on ISO 8859-1 (Latin-1) and, by extension, Unicode.\nUser organizations.\nOriginally the users' group was called DECUS (Digital Equipment Computer User Society) during the 1960s to 1990s. When Compaq acquired DEC in 1998, the users group was renamed CUO, the Compaq Users' Organisation. When HP acquired Compaq in 2002, CUO became HP-Interex, although there are still DECUS groups in several countries. In the United States, the organization is represented by the Encompass organization; currently Connect.\nSeveral editions of the Small Computer Handbook were published by DEC, giving information about their PDP line of computers. The editions were:\nWeb sites with photos of their covers include:"}
{"id": "7954", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7954", "title": "Dead Kennedys", "text": " \nDead Kennedys are an American punk rock band that formed in San Francisco, California, in 1978. The band was one of the defining punk bands during its initial eight-year run.\nDead Kennedys' lyrics were usually political in nature, satirizing establishment political figures (liberal and conservative) and authority in general, as well as popular culture and even the punk movement itself. During their initial incarnation between 1978 and 1986, they attracted considerable controversy for their provocative lyrics and artwork. Several stores refused to stock their recordings, provoking debate about censorship in rock music; in the mid-1980s, vocalist and primary lyricist Jello Biafra became an active campaigner against the Parents Music Resource Center. This culminated in an obscenity trial between 1985 and 1986, which resulted in a hung jury.\nThe group released a total of four studio albums and one EP before disbanding in 1986. Following the band's dissolution, Biafra continued to collaborate and record with other artists including D.O.A., NoMeansNo and his own bands Lard and the Guantanamo School of Medicine, as well as releasing several spoken word performances.\nIn 2000 (upheld on appeal in 2003), Biafra lost an acrimonious legal case initiated by his former Dead Kennedys bandmates over songwriting credits and unpaid royalties. In 2001, the band reformed without Biafra; various singers have since been recruited for vocal duties. Although Dead Kennedys have continued to perform live over the years, they have not released any new material since the release of their most recent studio album \"Bedtime for Democracy\" in 1986.\nHistory.\nFormation of the band (1978\u201379).\nDead Kennedys formed in June 1978 in San Francisco, California, when East Bay Ray (Raymond Pepperell) advertised for bandmates in the newspaper \"The Recycler\", after seeing a ska-punk show at Mabuhay Gardens in San Francisco. The original band lineup consisted of Jello Biafra (Eric Reed Boucher) on vocals, East Bay Ray on guitar, Klaus Flouride (Geoffrey Lyall) on bass, 6025 (Carlos Cadona) on rhythm guitar and Ted (Bruce Slesinger) on drums and percussion. This lineup recorded their first demos. Their first live show was on July 19, 1978 at Mabuhay Gardens in San Francisco, California. They were the opening act on a bill that included DV8 and Negative Trend with The Offs headlining.\nDead Kennedys played numerous shows at local venues afterwards. Due to the provocative name of the band, they sometimes played under pseudonyms, including \"The DK's\", \"The Sharks\", \"The Creamsicles\" and \"The Pink Twinkies\". \"San Francisco Chronicle\" columnist Herb Caen wrote in November 1978, \"Just when you think tastelessness has reached its nadir, along comes a punk rock group called 'The Dead Kennedys', which will play at Mabuhay Gardens on Nov. 22, the 15th anniversary of John F. Kennedy's assassination.\" Despite mounting protests, the owner of Mabuhay declared, \"I can't cancel them NOW\u2014there's a contract. Not, apparently, the kind of contract some people have in mind.\" However, despite popular belief, the name was not meant to insult the Kennedy family, but according to Ray, \"the assassinations were in much more poor taste than our band. We actually respect the Kennedy family. . . . When JFK was assassinated, when Martin Luther King was assassinated, when RFK was assassinated, the American Dream was assassinated. . . . Our name is actually homage to the American Dream.\u201d\n6025 left the band in March 1979 under somewhat unclear circumstances, generally considered to be musical differences. In June, the band released their first single, \"California \u00fcber alles\", on Biafra and East Bay Ray's independent label, Alternative Tentacles. The band followed with a poorly attended East Coast tour, being a new and fairly unknown band at the time, without a full album release.\n\"Fresh Fruit for Rotting Vegetables\" (1980\u201381).\nIn early 1980, they recorded and released the single \"Holiday in Cambodia\". In June, the band recorded their debut album, \"Fresh Fruit for Rotting Vegetables\", released in September of that year on the UK label Cherry Red. The album reached number 33 on the UK Albums Chart. Since its initial release, it has been re-released by several other labels, including IRS, Alternative Tentacles, and Cleopatra. The newest reissue-- the special 25th anniversary edition-- features the original artwork and a bonus 55-minute DVD documenting the making of the album as well as the band's early years.\nOn March 25, 1980, Dead Kennedys were invited to perform at the Bay Area Music Awards in an effort to give the event some \"new wave credibility\", in the words of the organizers. The day of the performance was spent practicing the song they were asked to play, the underground hit \"California \u00fcber alles\". The band became the talking point of the ceremony when after about 15 seconds into the song, Biafra stopped the band\u2014in a manner reminiscent of Elvis Costello's \"Saturday Night Live\" appearance\u2014and said, \"Hold it! We've gotta prove that we're adults now. We're not a punk rock band, we're a new wave band.\" The band, all wearing white shirts with a big, black S painted on the front, pulled black ties from around the backs of their necks to form a dollar sign, then started playing a new song titled \"Pull My Strings\", a barbed, satirical attack on the ethics of the mainstream music industry, which contained the lyrics, \"Is my cock big enough, is my brain small enough, for you to make me a star?\". The song also referenced The Knack's song \"My Sharona\". \"Pull My Strings\" was never recorded for a studio release, though the performance at the Bay Area Music Awards, which was the only time the song was ever performed, was released on the band's compilation album \"Give Me Convenience or Give Me Death\".\nIn January 1981, Ted announced that he wanted to leave to pursue a career in architecture and would help look for a replacement. He played his last concert in February 1981. His replacement was D.H. Peligro (Darren Henley). Around the same time, East Bay Ray had tried to pressure the rest of the band to sign to the major record label Polydor Records; Biafra stated that he was prepared to leave the group if the rest of the band wanted to sign to the label, though East Bay Ray asserts that he recommended against signing with Polydor. Polydor decided not to sign the band after they learned that Dead Kennedys' next single was to be entitled \"Too Drunk to Fuck\".\nWhen \"Too Drunk to Fuck\" came out in May 1981, the song caused much controversy in the UK as the BBC feared the single would reach the Top 30; this would require a mention of the song on \"Top of the Pops\". It was never played although it was called \"'Too Drunk' by the Kennedys\" by presenter Tony Blackburn.\n\"In God We Trust, Inc.\", \"Plastic Surgery Disasters\" and Alternative Tentacles Records (1981\u201385).\nAfter Peligro joined the band, the extended play \"In God We Trust, Inc.\" (1981) saw them move toward a more aggressive hardcore/thrash sound. In addition to the EP's controversial artwork depicting a gold Christ figure on a cross of dollar bills, the lyrics contained Biafra's most biting social and political commentary yet, and songs such as \"Moral Majority\", \"Nazi Punks Fuck Off!\" and \"We've Got a Bigger Problem Now\" placed Dead Kennedys as the spokesmen of social protest, while \"Dog Bite\", a cover version of \"Rawhide\" and various joke introductions showed a much more whimsical side. In 1982, they released their second studio album, \"Plastic Surgery Disasters\". The album's cover features a withered starving African child's hand being held and dwarfed by a white man's hand, a picture that had won the World Press Photo award in 1980, taken in Karamoja district in Uganda by Mike Wells.\nThe band's music had evolved considerably in a short time, moving away from hardcore formulae toward a more innovative jazz-informed style, featuring musicianship and dynamics far beyond other bands in the genre (thus effectively removing the music from that genre). By now the group had become a de facto political force, pitting itself against rising elements of American social and political life such as the religious right, Ronald Reagan and the idle rich. The band continued touring all over the United States, as well as Europe and Australia, and gained a large underground following. While they continued to play live shows during 1983 and 1984, they took a break from releasing new records to concentrate on the Alternative Tentacles record label, which would become synonymous with DIY alternative culture. The band continued to write and perform new material during this time, which would appear on their next album (some of these early performances can be seen in the \"DMPO's on Broadway\" video, originally released by Dirk Dirksen and later reissued on Rhino).\n\"Frankenchrist\" and obscenity trial (1985\u201386).\nThe release of the album \"Frankenchrist\" in 1985 showed the band had grown in musical proficiency and lyrical maturity. While there were still a number of loud/fast songs, much of the music featured an eclectic mix of instruments including trumpets and synthesizers. Around this time Klaus Flouride released the similarly experimental solo EP \"Cha Cha Cha With Mr. Flouride\". Lyrically, the band continued their trademark social commentary, with songs such as \"MTV Get Off The Air\" and \"Jock-O-Rama (Invasion of the Beef Patrol)\" poking fun at mainstream America.\nHowever, the controversy that erupted over H.R. Giger's \"Penis Landscape\", included as an insert with the album, dwarfed the notoriety of its music. The artwork caused a furor with the newly formed Parents Music Resource Center (PMRC). In December 1985 a teenage girl purchased the album at the Wherehouse Records store in Los Angeles County. The girl's mother wrote letters of complaint to the California Attorney General and to Los Angeles prosecutors. In 1986, members of the band, along with other parties involved in the distribution of \"Frankenchrist\", were charged criminally with distribution of harmful matter to minors. The store where the teen actually purchased the album was never named in the lawsuit. The criminal charges focused on an illustration by H.R. Giger, titled \"Work 219: Landscape XX\" (also known as \"Penis Landscape\"). Included as a poster with the album, \"Penis Landscape\" depicts nine copulating penises and vaginas.\nMembers of the band and others in the chain of distribution were charged with violating the California Penal Code on a misdemeanor charge carrying a maximum penalty of up to a year in county jail and a base fine of up to $2,000. Biafra says that during this time government agents invaded and searched his home. The prosecution tried to present the poster to the jury in isolation for consideration as obscene material, but Judge Susan Isacoff ruled that the poster must be considered along with the music and lyrics. The charges against three of the original defendants, Ruth Schwartz (owner of Mordam Records), Steve Boudreau (a distributor involved in supplying \"Frankenchrist\" to the Los Angeles Wherehouse store), and Salvatore Alberti (owner of the factory where the record was pressed), were dismissed for lack of evidence.\nIn August 1987, the case went to the jury with two remaining defendants: Jello Biafra and Michael Bonanno (former Alternative Tentacles label manager). However, the criminal trial ended with a hung jury, split 7 to 5 in favor of acquittal. District Attorneys Michael Guarino and Ira Riener made a motion for a retrial which was denied by Judge Isacoff, Superior Court Judge for the County of Los Angeles. The album, however, was banned from many record stores nationwide.\nAfter the break up of the band, Jello Biafra brought up the court case on \"The Oprah Winfrey Show\". Biafra was on the show with Tipper Gore as part of a panel discussion on the issues of \"controversial music lyrics\" and censorship.\n\"Bedtime for Democracy\" and break-up (1986).\nIn addition to the obscenity lawsuit, the band became increasingly disillusioned with the underground scene as well. The hardcore scene, which had been a haven for free-thinking intellectuals and downtrodden nonconformists, was attracting a more violent audience that imposed an increasing level of brutality on other concertgoers and began to alienate many of the bands and individuals who had helped pioneer the movement in the early 1980s. In earlier years the band had criticized neo-Nazi skinheads for trying to ruin the punk scene, but just as big a problem was the popularity of increasingly macho hardcore bands, which brought the group (and their genre) an audience that had little to do with the ideas/ideals they stood for. In January 1986, frustrated and alienated from their own scene, Dead Kennedys decided to break up to pursue other interests and played their last concert on February 21. The band continued to work on songs, with Biafra penning songs such as \"Chickenshit Conformist\" and \"Anarchy for Sale\", which articulated their feelings about the \"dumbing down\" of punk rock.\nDuring the summer they recorded these songs for their final album, \"Bedtime for Democracy\", which was released in November. The artwork, depicting a defaced Statue of Liberty overrun with Nazis, media, opportunists, Klan members, corrupt government officials, and religious zombies, echoed the idea that neither America itself or the punk scene were safe havens any more for \"your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free\". The album contains a number of fast/short songs interspersed with jazz (\"D.M.S.O.\"), spoken word (\"A Commercial\") and psychedelia (\"Cesspools In Eden\"). The lyrical focus is more introspective and earnest (\"Where Do Ya Draw The Line?\"), with an anti-war, anti-violence (\"Rambozo The Clown\") bend, moving away from the violent imagery of their early records, while remaining as subversive as ever (\"I Spy\", \"D.M.S.O.\"). In December, the band announced their split. Biafra went on to speak about his political beliefs on numerous television shows and he released a number of spoken-word albums. Ray, Flouride, and Peligro also went on to solo careers.\nReforming of new band line-up.\nIn 2001, Ray, Peligro, and Flouride reformed the Dead Kennedys, with former Dr. Know singer Brandon Cruz replacing Biafra on vocals. The band played under the name \"DK Kennedys\" for a few concerts, but later reverted to \"Dead Kennedys\" permanently. They played across the continental United States, Europe, Asia, South America, and Russia. Brandon Cruz left the band in May 2003 and was replaced by Jeff Penalty. The band has released two live albums of archival performances on Manifesto Records: \"Mutiny on the Bay\", compiled from various live shows including a recording from their last show with Biafra in 1986, and \"Live at the Deaf Club\", a recording of a 1979 performance at the Deaf Club in San Francisco which was greeted with more enthusiasm.\nOn October 9, 2007, a best of album titled \"Milking the Sacred Cow\" was released. It includes two previously unreleased live versions of \"Soup Is Good Food\" and \"Jock-O-Rama\", originally found on \"Frankenchrist\".\nJeff Penalty left the band in March 2008 in what he describes as a \"not amicable split.\" In a statement released, Jeff said that, following a series of disputes, the band had secretly recruited a new singer and played a gig in his neighbourhood, although he also stated he was \"really proud of what we were able to accomplish with Dead Kennedys\". He was replaced by former Wynona Riders singer Ron \"Skip\" Greer. D.H. also left the band to \"take some personal time off\". He was replaced for a tour by Translator drummer Dave Scheff.\nBreak from touring.\nOn August 21, 2008, the band announced an extended break from touring due to the health-related issues of Flouride and Peligro. They stated their plans to collaborate on new projects. The band performed a gig in Santa Rosa, California in June 2009, with Peligro returning to the drum kit.\nIn August 2010, Dead Kennedys announced plans for a short East Coast tour. The lineup assembled for this tour contained East Bay Ray, Peligro, Greer, and bassist Greg Reeves replacing Flouride, who was taking \"personal time off\" from the band. The tour dates included performances in Philadelphia, New York City, Boston, Washington, D.C., Portland, Maine and Hawaii. The band has played a reworked version of their song \"MTV Get Off the Air\", re-titled \"MP3 Get Off the Web\", with lyrics criticizing music piracy during their October 16, 2010, concert at the Rock and Roll Hotel in Washington, D.C..\nBack on the road.\nDead Kennedys had world tours in 2013 and in 2014, the latter mostly in North American cities. In 2015 and 2016 they toured again, including South America, where they had not played since 2001.\nIn 2017, East Bay Ray revealed that the band and Jello Biafra had been approached by the Punk-oriented music festival Riot Fest about a potential reunion. While Ray and the rest of the band expressed interest in the concept, Biafra refused.\nOn April 26, 2019, the group released \"DK40\", a live compilation album celebrating 40 years since the band formed.\nConflicts between members.\nRoyalties lawsuit.\nIn the late 1990s, former band members discovered problems with the payment of royalties they had received from Alternative Tentacles. East Bay Ray, Klaus Flouride, and D. H. Peligro claimed that Jello Biafra had conspired to pay lower royalty rates. Although both sides agreed that the failure to pay these royalties was an accounting mistake, the other members were upset that Biafra failed to inform them of the mistake after he and his co-workers discovered it and additionally claimed he intended to use the money against them.\nA jury found Biafra and Alternative Tentacles \"guilty of malice, oppression and fraud\". Malice was defined for the jury as \"conduct which is intended to cause injury or despicable conduct which is carried with a willful and conscious disregard for the rights of others\". Biafra's appeal was denied; he had to pay the outstanding royalties and punitive damages, and was forced to hand over the rights to the majority of Dead Kennedys' back catalogue to the Decay Music partnership. The jury and judges also noted, in their words, that Biafra \"lacked credibility\" on the songwriting issue and found from evidence presented by both sides that the songwriting credits were due to the entire band.\nThis dispute was hotly contested by all concerned who felt passionately for their cause, and the case caused minor waves within punk circles. Biafra claims that East Bay Ray had long expressed displeasure with Alternative Tentacles and with the amount of money he received from them, thus the original incentive for the discovery of the back payments. It was found out that Alternative Tentacles was paying Dead Kennedys less per CD than all the other bands, including Biafra himself, and not informing his other bandmates, which was the fraud. Biafra accused the band of wanting to license the famous Dead Kennedys song \"Holiday in Cambodia\" for use in a Levi's jeans commercial, which the band denied. However, an instrumental loop from \"Holiday in Cambodia\" was part of the 1981 movie \"Neighbors,\" but wasn't included on the soundtrack.\nBiafra's former bandmates maintain that they sued because of Jello Biafra's deliberate withholding of money, though when pressed they have acknowledged that the payment was an accounting mistake, but insist that Biafra was wrong in failing to inform the band directly. Details about this issue remain scarce. The band also maintains that the Levi's story was completely fictitious and invented by Biafra to discredit them.\nDisputes over new commercial activities.\nMatters were stirred up even further when the three bandmates invited Jello Biafra to \"bury the hatchet\" in the form of a band reunion. Jello Biafra felt it was unprofessional because no one contacted him directly. In addition, Biafra was disdainful of the reunion, and having long expressed his disdain for nostalgia and rock reunion/oldies tours in particular, argued that the whole affair was motivated by greed.\nSeveral DVDs, re-issues, and live albums have been released since the departure of Biafra most recently on Manifesto Records. According to Biafra, the live albums are \"cash-ins\" on Dead Kennedys' name and his music. Biafra also accused the releases of the new live material of having poor sound quality. Furthermore, he has stated he is not receiving any royalties from the sale of any Manifesto Records releases. Consequently, he has discouraged fans from buying any Dead Kennedy reissues. The other band members denied Biafra's accusations regarding the live releases, and have defended the mixes as an effort of hard work. Biafra dismissed the new group as \"the world's greediest karaoke band.\" Nevertheless, in 2003, Klaus Flouride said of performances without the band's former frontman: \"There hasn't been a show yet that people didn't really like.\"\nBiafra further criticized them for advertising shows using his own image taken from the original 1980s incarnation of the band, which he labeled as false advertising. He attacked the reformed Dead Kennedys in a song called \"Those Dumb Punk Kids (Will Buy Anything)\", which appears on his second collaboration with sludge metal band the Melvins, \"Sieg Howdy!\"\nBiafra told an audience at a speaking gig in Trenton, New Jersey, that the remaining Dead Kennedys have licensed their single \"Too Drunk to Fuck\" to be used in a rape scene in a Robert Rodriguez movie. The reference is to a lounge cover of the song, recorded by the band Nouvelle Vague, played during a scene in the \"Planet Terror\" segment of \"Grindhouse\", although no rape takes place, and in fact the would-be rapist is killed by the would-be victim. The scene in \"Planet Terror\" has would-be rapist, \"Rapist No.\u00a01\" (Quentin Tarantino) order one-legged stripper \"Cherry Darlin\" (Rose McGowan) to get up off the floor and dance. At this point Tarantino hits play on a cassette recorder and Nouvelle Vague's cover of \"Too Drunk To Fuck\" plays. Biafra, disapproving of the situation, later wrote, \"This is their lowest point since Levi's... This goes against everything the Dead Kennedys stands for in spades... The terrified woman later 'wins' by killing Tarantino, but that excuse does not rescue this at all. I wrote every note of that song and this is not what it was meant for... Some people will do anything for money. I can't help but think back to how prudish Klaus Flouride was when he objected to H.R. Giger's painting on the \"Frankenchrist\" (sic) poster, saying he couldn't bear to show it to his parents. I'd sure love to be a fly on the wall when he tries to explain putting a song in a rape scene for money to his teenage daughter... The deal was pushed through by a new business manager the other three hired.\"\nThe reformed Dead Kennedys followed their court victory by releasing reissues of all Dead Kennedys albums (except \"Fresh Fruit for Rotting Vegetables\", to which they did not have the rights until 2005), releasing several new archival concert DVDs, and licensing several songs to \"The Manchurian Candidate\" remake and the Tony Hawk Pro Skater video game. East Bay Ray claims he received a fax from Alternative Tentacles purporting Biafra approved the licensing for the game.\nThe band claims on their website that they still pay close attention to an anti-corporate ideology, despite performing on September 5, 2003 at a festival in Turkey that was sponsored by Coca-Cola, noting that they have since pulled out of a show in Los Angeles when they found that it was being sponsored by Coors. However, Biafra claims the previous licensing deals prove otherwise.\nLogo.\nThe original logo was created by Winston Smith. He later contributed artwork for the covers of \"In God We Trust, Inc.\", \"Plastic Surgery Disasters\", \"Frankenchrist\", \"Bedtime for Democracy\", \"Give Me Convenience or Give Me Death\", the back cover of the \"Kill the Poor\" single and the Alternative Tentacles logo. When asked about the \"DK\" logo in an interview, Jello Biafra explained, \"...I wanted to make sure it was something simple and easy to spray-paint so people would graffiti it all over the place, and then I showed it to Winston Smith. He played around with it, came back with a bunch of designs that had the circle and slightly 3-D looking letters and he had ones with different patterns behind it. I liked the one with bricks, but ultimately I thought simple red behind it was the boldest and the best.\"\nMusic and lyrics.\nDead Kennedys have been described as one of the first hardcore punk bands. They were noted for the harshness of their lyrics, which generally combined biting social satire while expressing a staunchly left-wing view of contemporary America. Unlike other leftist punk bands who use more direct sloganeering, Dead Kennedys' lyrics were often snide. For example, \"Holiday in Cambodia\" is a multi-layered satire targeting both yuppies and Cambodia's recently deposed Khmer Rouge regime.\nDead Kennedys have influenced multiple acts such as System of a Down, Green Day, Faith No More, Rage Against the Machine, Sepultura, Descendents, Bad Religion, Slayer, X, Minutemen, The Hives, Saves the Day and Screeching Weasel among others.\nMembers.\nCurrent members\nFormer members"}
{"id": "7955", "revid": "84591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7955", "title": "DNA", "text": " \nDeoxyribonucleic acid (; DNA) is a molecule composed of two polynucleotide chains that coil around each other to form a double helix carrying genetic instructions for the development, functioning, growth and reproduction of all known organisms and many viruses. DNA and ribonucleic acid (RNA) are nucleic acids. Alongside proteins, lipids and complex carbohydrates (polysaccharides), nucleic acids are one of the four major types of macromolecules that are essential for all known forms of life.\nThe two DNA strands are known as polynucleotides as they are composed of simpler monomeric units called nucleotides. Each nucleotide is composed of one of four nitrogen-containing nucleobases (cytosine [C], guanine [G], adenine [A] or thymine [T]), a sugar called deoxyribose, and a phosphate group. The nucleotides are joined to one another in a chain by covalent bonds (known as the phospho-diester linkage) between the sugar of one nucleotide and the phosphate of the next, resulting in an alternating sugar-phosphate backbone. The nitrogenous bases of the two separate polynucleotide strands are bound together, according to base pairing rules (A with T and C with G), with hydrogen bonds to make double-stranded DNA. The complementary nitrogenous bases are divided into two groups, pyrimidines and purines. In DNA, the pyrimidines are thymine and cytosine; the purines are adenine and guanine.\nBoth strands of double-stranded DNA store the same biological information. This information is replicated as and when the two strands separate. A large part of DNA (more than 98% for humans) is non-coding, meaning that these sections do not serve as patterns for protein sequences. The two strands of DNA run in opposite directions to each other and are thus antiparallel. Attached to each sugar is one of four types of nucleobases (informally, \"bases\"). It is the sequence of these four nucleobases along the backbone that encodes genetic information. RNA strands are created using DNA strands as a template in a process called transcription, where DNA bases are exchanged for their corresponding bases except in the case of thymine (T), for which RNA substitutes uracil (U). Under the genetic code, these RNA strands specify the sequence of amino acids within proteins in a process called translation.\nWithin eukaryotic cells, DNA is organized into long structures called chromosomes. Before typical cell division, these chromosomes are duplicated in the process of DNA replication, providing a complete set of chromosomes for each daughter cell. Eukaryotic organisms (animals, plants, fungi and protists) store most of their DNA inside the cell nucleus as nuclear DNA, and some in the mitochondria as mitochondrial DNA or in chloroplasts as chloroplast DNA. In contrast, prokaryotes (bacteria and archaea) store their DNA only in the cytoplasm, in circular chromosomes. Within eukaryotic chromosomes, chromatin proteins, such as histones, compact and organize DNA. These compacting structures guide the interactions between DNA and other proteins, helping control which parts of the DNA are transcribed.\nProperties.\nDNA is a long polymer made from repeating units called nucleotides, each of which is usually symbolized by a single letter: either , , , or . Chargaff's rules state that DNA from any species of any organism should have a 1:1 protein stoichiometry ratio (base pair rule) of purine and pyrimidine bases (i.e., ) and, more specifically, that the amount of guanine should be equal to cytosine and the amount of adenine should be equal to thymine. The structure of DNA is dynamic along its length, being capable of coiling into tight loops and other shapes. In all species it is composed of two helical chains, bound to each other by hydrogen bonds. Both chains are coiled around the same axis, and have the same pitch of . The pair of chains have a radius of . According to another study, when measured in a different solution, the DNA chain measured wide, and one nucleotide unit measured long. Although each individual nucleotide is very small, a DNA polymer can be very large and may contain hundreds of millions of nucleotides, such as in chromosome 1. Chromosome 1 is the largest human chromosome with approximately 220 million base pairs, and would be long if straightened.\nDNA does not usually exist as a single strand, but instead as a pair of strands that are held tightly together. These two long strands coil around each other, in the shape of a double helix. The nucleotide contains both a segment of the backbone of the molecule (which holds the chain together) and a nucleobase (which interacts with the other DNA strand in the helix). A nucleobase linked to a sugar is called a nucleoside, and a base linked to a sugar and to one or more phosphate groups is called a nucleotide. A biopolymer comprising multiple linked nucleotides (as in DNA) is called a polynucleotide.\nThe backbone of the DNA strand is made from alternating phosphate and sugar groups. The sugar in DNA is 2-deoxyribose, which is a pentose (five-carbon) sugar. The sugars are joined together by phosphate groups that form phosphodiester bonds between the third and fifth carbon atoms of adjacent sugar rings. These are known as the 3\u2032-end (three prime end), and 5\u2032-end (five prime end) carbons, the prime symbol being used to distinguish these carbon atoms from those of the base to which the deoxyribose forms a glycosidic bond. Therefore, any DNA strand normally has one end at which there is a phosphate group attached to the 5\u2032 carbon of a ribose (the 5\u2032 phosphoryl) and another end at which there is a free hydroxyl group attached to the 3\u2032 carbon of a ribose (the 3\u2032 hydroxyl). The orientation of the 3\u2032 and 5\u2032 carbons along the sugar-phosphate backbone confers directionality (sometimes called polarity) to each DNA strand. In a nucleic acid double helix, the direction of the nucleotides in one strand is opposite to their direction in the other strand: the strands are antiparallel. The asymmetric ends of DNA strands are said to have a directionality of five prime end (5\u2032 ), and three prime end (3\u2032), with the 5\u2032 end having a terminal phosphate group and the 3\u2032 end a terminal hydroxyl group. One major difference between DNA and RNA is the sugar, with the 2-deoxyribose in DNA being replaced by the alternative pentose sugar ribose in RNA.\nThe DNA double helix is stabilized primarily by two forces: hydrogen bonds between nucleotides and base-stacking interactions among aromatic nucleobases. The four bases found in DNA are adenine (), cytosine (), guanine () and thymine (). These four bases are attached to the sugar-phosphate to form the complete nucleotide, as shown for adenosine monophosphate. Adenine pairs with thymine and guanine pairs with cytosine, forming and base pairs.\nNucleobase classification.\nThe nucleobases are classified into two types: the purines, and , which are fused five- and six-membered heterocyclic compounds, and the pyrimidines, the six-membered rings and . A fifth pyrimidine nucleobase, uracil (), usually takes the place of thymine in RNA and differs from thymine by lacking a methyl group on its ring. In addition to RNA and DNA, many artificial nucleic acid analogues have been created to study the properties of nucleic acids, or for use in biotechnology.\nNon-canonical bases.\nModified bases occur in DNA. The first of these recognised was 5-methylcytosine, which was found in the genome of \"Mycobacterium tuberculosis\" in 1925. The reason for the presence of these noncanonical bases in bacterial viruses (bacteriophages) is to avoid the restriction enzymes present in bacteria. This enzyme system acts at least in part as a molecular immune system protecting bacteria from infection by viruses. Modifications of the bases cytosine and adenine, the more common and modified DNA bases, plays vital roles in the epigenetic control of gene expression in plants and animals.\nListing of non-canonical bases found in DNA.\nA number of non canonical bases are known to occur in DNA. Most of these are modifications of the canonical bases plus uracil.\nGrooves.\nTwin helical strands form the DNA backbone. Another double helix may be found tracing the spaces, or grooves, between the strands. These voids are adjacent to the base pairs and may provide a binding site. As the strands are not symmetrically located with respect to each other, the grooves are unequally sized. One groove, the major groove, is wide and the other, the minor groove, is wide. The width of the major groove means that the edges of the bases are more accessible in the major groove than in the minor groove. As a result, proteins such as transcription factors that can bind to specific sequences in double-stranded DNA usually make contact with the sides of the bases exposed in the major groove. This situation varies in unusual conformations of DNA within the cell \"(see below)\", but the major and minor grooves are always named to reflect the differences in size that would be seen if the DNA is twisted back into the ordinary B form.\nBase pairing.\nIn a DNA double helix, each type of nucleobase on one strand bonds with just one type of nucleobase on the other strand. This is called complementary base pairing. Purines form hydrogen bonds to pyrimidines, with adenine bonding only to thymine in two hydrogen bonds, and cytosine bonding only to guanine in three hydrogen bonds. This arrangement of two nucleotides binding together across the double helix (from six-carbon ring to six-carbon ring) is called a Watson-Crick base pair. DNA with high GC-content is more stable than DNA with low -content. A Hoogsteen base pair (hydrogen bonding the 6-carbon ring to the 5-carbon ring) is a rare variation of base-pairing. As hydrogen bonds are not covalent, they can be broken and rejoined relatively easily. The two strands of DNA in a double helix can thus be pulled apart like a zipper, either by a mechanical force or high temperature. As a result of this base pair complementarity, all the information in the double-stranded sequence of a DNA helix is duplicated on each strand, which is vital in DNA replication. This reversible and specific interaction between complementary base pairs is critical for all the functions of DNA in organisms.\nTop, a ' base pair with three hydrogen bonds. Bottom, an ' base pair with two hydrogen bonds. Non-covalent hydrogen bonds between the pairs are shown as dashed lines.\nssDNA vs. dsDNA.\nAs noted above, most DNA molecules are actually two polymer strands, bound together in a helical fashion by noncovalent bonds; this double-stranded (dsDNA) structure is maintained largely by the intrastrand base stacking interactions, which are strongest for stacks. The two strands can come apart\u2014a process known as melting\u2014to form two single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) molecules. Melting occurs at high temperature, low salt and high pH (low pH also melts DNA, but since DNA is unstable due to acid depurination, low pH is rarely used).\nThe stability of the dsDNA form depends not only on the -content (% basepairs) but also on sequence (since stacking is sequence specific) and also length (longer molecules are more stable). The stability can be measured in various ways; a common way is the \"melting temperature\", which is the temperature at which 50% of the double-strand molecules are converted to single-strand molecules; melting temperature is dependent on ionic strength and the concentration of DNA. As a result, it is both the percentage of base pairs and the overall length of a DNA double helix that determines the strength of the association between the two strands of DNA. Long DNA helices with a high -content have stronger-interacting strands, while short helices with high content have weaker-interacting strands. In biology, parts of the DNA double helix that need to separate easily, such as the Pribnow box in some promoters, tend to have a high content, making the strands easier to pull apart.\nIn the laboratory, the strength of this interaction can be measured by finding the temperature necessary to break half of the hydrogen bonds, their melting temperature (also called \"Tm\" value). When all the base pairs in a DNA double helix melt, the strands separate and exist in solution as two entirely independent molecules. These single-stranded DNA molecules have no single common shape, but some conformations are more stable than others.\nSense and antisense.\nA DNA sequence is called a \"sense\" sequence if it is the same as that of a messenger RNA copy that is translated into protein. The sequence on the opposite strand is called the \"antisense\" sequence. Both sense and antisense sequences can exist on different parts of the same strand of DNA (i.e. both strands can contain both sense and antisense sequences). In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, antisense RNA sequences are produced, but the functions of these RNAs are not entirely clear. One proposal is that antisense RNAs are involved in regulating gene expression through RNA-RNA base pairing.\nA few DNA sequences in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and more in plasmids and viruses, blur the distinction between sense and antisense strands by having overlapping genes. In these cases, some DNA sequences do double duty, encoding one protein when read along one strand, and a second protein when read in the opposite direction along the other strand. In bacteria, this overlap may be involved in the regulation of gene transcription, while in viruses, overlapping genes increase the amount of information that can be encoded within the small viral genome.\nSupercoiling.\nDNA can be twisted like a rope in a process called DNA supercoiling. With DNA in its \"relaxed\" state, a strand usually circles the axis of the double helix once every 10.4 base pairs, but if the DNA is twisted the strands become more tightly or more loosely wound. If the DNA is twisted in the direction of the helix, this is positive supercoiling, and the bases are held more tightly together. If they are twisted in the opposite direction, this is negative supercoiling, and the bases come apart more easily. In nature, most DNA has slight negative supercoiling that is introduced by enzymes called topoisomerases. These enzymes are also needed to relieve the twisting stresses introduced into DNA strands during processes such as transcription and DNA replication.\nAlternative DNA structures.\nDNA exists in many possible conformations that include A-DNA, B-DNA, and Z-DNA forms, although, only B-DNA and Z-DNA have been directly observed in functional organisms. The conformation that DNA adopts depends on the hydration level, DNA sequence, the amount and direction of supercoiling, chemical modifications of the bases, the type and concentration of metal ions, and the presence of polyamines in solution.\nThe first published reports of A-DNA X-ray diffraction patterns\u2014and also B-DNA\u2014used analyses based on Patterson transforms that provided only a limited amount of structural information for oriented fibers of DNA. An alternative analysis was then proposed by Wilkins \"et al.\", in 1953, for the \"in vivo\" B-DNA X-ray diffraction-scattering patterns of highly hydrated DNA fibers in terms of squares of Bessel functions. In the same journal, James Watson and Francis Crick presented their molecular modeling analysis of the DNA X-ray diffraction patterns to suggest that the structure was a double-helix.\nAlthough the \"B-DNA form\" is most common under the conditions found in cells, it is not a well-defined conformation but a family of related DNA conformations that occur at the high hydration levels present in cells. Their corresponding X-ray diffraction and scattering patterns are characteristic of molecular paracrystals with a significant degree of disorder.\nCompared to B-DNA, the A-DNA form is a wider right-handed spiral, with a shallow, wide minor groove and a narrower, deeper major groove. The A form occurs under non-physiological conditions in partly dehydrated samples of DNA, while in the cell it may be produced in hybrid pairings of DNA and RNA strands, and in enzyme-DNA complexes. Segments of DNA where the bases have been chemically modified by methylation may undergo a larger change in conformation and adopt the Z form. Here, the strands turn about the helical axis in a left-handed spiral, the opposite of the more common B form. These unusual structures can be recognized by specific Z-DNA binding proteins and may be involved in the regulation of transcription.\nAlternative DNA chemistry.\nFor many years, exobiologists have proposed the existence of a shadow biosphere, a postulated microbial biosphere of Earth that uses radically different biochemical and molecular processes than currently known life. One of the proposals was the existence of lifeforms that use arsenic instead of phosphorus in DNA. A report in 2010 of the possibility in the bacterium GFAJ-1, was announced, though the research was disputed, and evidence suggests the bacterium actively prevents the incorporation of arsenic into the DNA backbone and other biomolecules.\nQuadruplex structures.\nAt the ends of the linear chromosomes are specialized regions of DNA called telomeres. The main function of these regions is to allow the cell to replicate chromosome ends using the enzyme telomerase, as the enzymes that normally replicate DNA cannot copy the extreme 3\u2032 ends of chromosomes. These specialized chromosome caps also help protect the DNA ends, and stop the DNA repair systems in the cell from treating them as damage to be corrected. In human cells, telomeres are usually lengths of single-stranded DNA containing several thousand repeats of a simple TTAGGG sequence.\nThese guanine-rich sequences may stabilize chromosome ends by forming structures of stacked sets of four-base units, rather than the usual base pairs found in other DNA molecules. Here, four guanine bases, known as a guanine tetrad, form a flat plate. These flat four-base units then stack on top of each other to form a stable G-quadruplex structure. These structures are stabilized by hydrogen bonding between the edges of the bases and chelation of a metal ion in the centre of each four-base unit. Other structures can also be formed, with the central set of four bases coming from either a single strand folded around the bases, or several different parallel strands, each contributing one base to the central structure.\nIn addition to these stacked structures, telomeres also form large loop structures called telomere loops, or T-loops. Here, the single-stranded DNA curls around in a long circle stabilized by telomere-binding proteins. At the very end of the T-loop, the single-stranded telomere DNA is held onto a region of double-stranded DNA by the telomere strand disrupting the double-helical DNA and base pairing to one of the two strands. This triple-stranded structure is called a displacement loop or D-loop.\nBranched DNA can form networks containing multiple branches.\nBranched DNA.\nIn DNA, fraying occurs when non-complementary regions exist at the end of an otherwise complementary double-strand of DNA. However, branched DNA can occur if a third strand of DNA is introduced and contains adjoining regions able to hybridize with the frayed regions of the pre-existing double-strand. Although the simplest example of branched DNA involves only three strands of DNA, complexes involving additional strands and multiple branches are also possible. Branched DNA can be used in nanotechnology to construct geometric shapes, see the section on uses in technology below.\nArtificial bases.\nSeveral artificial nucleobases have been synthesized, and successfully incorporated in the eight-base DNA analogue named Hachimoji DNA. Dubbed S, B, P, and Z, these artificial bases are capable of bonding with each other in a predictable way (S\u2013B and P\u2013Z), maintain the double helix structure of DNA, and be transcribed to RNA. Their existence could be seen as an indication that there is nothing special about the four natural nucleobases that evolved on Earth. On the other hand, DNA is tightly related to RNA which does not only act as a transcript of DNA but also performs as moleular machines many tasks in cells. For this purpose it has to fold into a structure. It has been shown that to allow to create all possible structures at least four bases are required for the corresponding RNA, while a higher number is also possible but this would be against the natural Principle of least effort.\nChemical modifications and altered DNA packaging.\nStructure of cytosine with and without the 5-methyl group. Deamination converts 5-methylcytosine into thymine.\nBase modifications and DNA packaging.\nThe expression of genes is influenced by how the DNA is packaged in chromosomes, in a structure called chromatin. Base modifications can be involved in packaging, with regions that have low or no gene expression usually containing high levels of methylation of cytosine bases. DNA packaging and its influence on gene expression can also occur by covalent modifications of the histone protein core around which DNA is wrapped in the chromatin structure or else by remodeling carried out by chromatin remodeling complexes (see Chromatin remodeling). There is, further, crosstalk between DNA methylation and histone modification, so they can coordinately affect chromatin and gene expression.\nFor one example, cytosine methylation produces 5-methylcytosine, which is important for X-inactivation of chromosomes. The average level of methylation varies between organisms\u2014the worm \"Caenorhabditis elegans\" lacks cytosine methylation, while vertebrates have higher levels, with up to 1% of their DNA containing 5-methylcytosine. Despite the importance of 5-methylcytosine, it can deaminate to leave a thymine base, so methylated cytosines are particularly prone to mutations. Other base modifications include adenine methylation in bacteria, the presence of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in the brain, and the glycosylation of uracil to produce the \"J-base\" in kinetoplastids.\nDamage.\nDNA can be damaged by many sorts of mutagens, which change the DNA sequence. Mutagens include oxidizing agents, alkylating agents and also high-energy electromagnetic radiation such as ultraviolet light and X-rays. The type of DNA damage produced depends on the type of mutagen. For example, UV light can damage DNA by producing thymine dimers, which are cross-links between pyrimidine bases. On the other hand, oxidants such as free radicals or hydrogen peroxide produce multiple forms of damage, including base modifications, particularly of guanosine, and double-strand breaks. A typical human cell contains about 150,000 bases that have suffered oxidative damage. Of these oxidative lesions, the most dangerous are double-strand breaks, as these are difficult to repair and can produce point mutations, insertions, deletions from the DNA sequence, and chromosomal translocations. These mutations can cause cancer. Because of inherent limits in the DNA repair mechanisms, if humans lived long enough, they would all eventually develop cancer. DNA damages that are naturally occurring, due to normal cellular processes that produce reactive oxygen species, the hydrolytic activities of cellular water, etc., also occur frequently. Although most of these damages are repaired, in any cell some DNA damage may remain despite the action of repair processes. These remaining DNA damages accumulate with age in mammalian postmitotic tissues. This accumulation appears to be an important underlying cause of aging.\nMany mutagens fit into the space between two adjacent base pairs, this is called \"intercalation\". Most intercalators are aromatic and planar molecules; examples include ethidium bromide, acridines, daunomycin, and doxorubicin. For an intercalator to fit between base pairs, the bases must separate, distorting the DNA strands by unwinding of the double helix. This inhibits both transcription and DNA replication, causing toxicity and mutations. As a result, DNA intercalators may be carcinogens, and in the case of thalidomide, a teratogen. Others such as benzo[\"a\"]pyrene diol epoxide and aflatoxin form DNA adducts that induce errors in replication. Nevertheless, due to their ability to inhibit DNA transcription and replication, other similar toxins are also used in chemotherapy to inhibit rapidly growing cancer cells.\nBiological functions.\nDNA usually occurs as linear chromosomes in eukaryotes, and circular chromosomes in prokaryotes. The set of chromosomes in a cell makes up its genome; the human genome has approximately 3 billion base pairs of DNA arranged into 46 chromosomes. The information carried by DNA is held in the sequence of pieces of DNA called genes. Transmission of genetic information in genes is achieved via complementary base pairing. For example, in transcription, when a cell uses the information in a gene, the DNA sequence is copied into a complementary RNA sequence through the attraction between the DNA and the correct RNA nucleotides. Usually, this RNA copy is then used to make a matching protein sequence in a process called translation, which depends on the same interaction between RNA nucleotides. In alternative fashion, a cell may simply copy its genetic information in a process called DNA replication. The details of these functions are covered in other articles; here the focus is on the interactions between DNA and other molecules that mediate the function of the genome.\nGenes and genomes.\nGenomic DNA is tightly and orderly packed in the process called DNA condensation, to fit the small available volumes of the cell. In eukaryotes, DNA is located in the cell nucleus, with small amounts in mitochondria and chloroplasts. In prokaryotes, the DNA is held within an irregularly shaped body in the cytoplasm called the nucleoid. The genetic information in a genome is held within genes, and the complete set of this information in an organism is called its genotype. A gene is a unit of heredity and is a region of DNA that influences a particular characteristic in an organism. Genes contain an open reading frame that can be transcribed, and regulatory sequences such as promoters and enhancers, which control transcription of the open reading frame.\nIn many species, only a small fraction of the total sequence of the genome encodes protein. For example, only about 1.5% of the human genome consists of protein-coding exons, with over 50% of human DNA consisting of non-coding repetitive sequences. The reasons for the presence of so much noncoding DNA in eukaryotic genomes and the extraordinary differences in genome size, or \"C-value\", among species, represent a long-standing puzzle known as the \"C-value enigma\". However, some DNA sequences that do not code protein may still encode functional non-coding RNA molecules, which are involved in the regulation of gene expression.\nSome noncoding DNA sequences play structural roles in chromosomes. Telomeres and centromeres typically contain few genes but are important for the function and stability of chromosomes. An abundant form of noncoding DNA in humans are pseudogenes, which are copies of genes that have been disabled by mutation. These sequences are usually just molecular fossils, although they can occasionally serve as raw genetic material for the creation of new genes through the process of gene duplication and divergence.\nTranscription and translation.\nA gene is a sequence of DNA that contains genetic information and can influence the phenotype of an organism. Within a gene, the sequence of bases along a DNA strand defines a messenger RNA sequence, which then defines one or more protein sequences. The relationship between the nucleotide sequences of genes and the amino-acid sequences of proteins is determined by the rules of translation, known collectively as the genetic code. The genetic code consists of three-letter 'words' called \"codons\" formed from a sequence of three nucleotides (e.g. ACT, CAG, TTT).\nIn transcription, the codons of a gene are copied into messenger RNA by RNA polymerase. This RNA copy is then decoded by a ribosome that reads the RNA sequence by base-pairing the messenger RNA to transfer RNA, which carries amino acids. Since there are 4 bases in 3-letter combinations, there are 64 possible codons (43\u00a0combinations). These encode the twenty standard amino acids, giving most amino acids more than one possible codon. There are also three 'stop' or 'nonsense' codons signifying the end of the coding region; these are the TAA, TGA, and TAG codons.\nReplication.\nCell division is essential for an organism to grow, but, when a cell divides, it must replicate the DNA in its genome so that the two daughter cells have the same genetic information as their parent. The double-stranded structure of DNA provides a simple mechanism for DNA replication. Here, the two strands are separated and then each strand's complementary DNA sequence is recreated by an enzyme called DNA polymerase. This enzyme makes the complementary strand by finding the correct base through complementary base pairing and bonding it onto the original strand. As DNA polymerases can only extend a DNA strand in a 5\u2032 to 3\u2032 direction, different mechanisms are used to copy the antiparallel strands of the double helix. In this way, the base on the old strand dictates which base appears on the new strand, and the cell ends up with a perfect copy of its DNA.\nExtracellular nucleic acids.\nNaked extracellular DNA (eDNA), most of it released by cell death, is nearly ubiquitous in the environment. Its concentration in soil may be as high as 2 \u03bcg/L, and its concentration in natural aquatic environments may be as high at 88 \u03bcg/L. Various possible functions have been proposed for eDNA: it may be involved in horizontal gene transfer; it may provide nutrients; and it may act as a buffer to recruit or titrate ions or antibiotics. Extracellular DNA acts as a functional extracellular matrix component in the biofilms of several bacterial species. It may act as a recognition factor to regulate the attachment and dispersal of specific cell types in the biofilm; it may contribute to biofilm formation; and it may contribute to the biofilm's physical strength and resistance to biological stress.\nCell-free fetal DNA is found in the blood of the mother, and can be sequenced to determine a great deal of information about the developing fetus.\nUnder the name of environmental DNA eDNA has seen increased use in the natural sciences as a survey tool for ecology, monitoring the movements and presence of species in water, air, or on land, and assessing an area's biodiversity.\nInteractions with proteins.\nAll the functions of DNA depend on interactions with proteins. These protein interactions can be non-specific, or the protein can bind specifically to a single DNA sequence. Enzymes can also bind to DNA and of these, the polymerases that copy the DNA base sequence in transcription and DNA replication are particularly important.\nDNA-binding proteins.\nStructural proteins that bind DNA are well-understood examples of non-specific DNA-protein interactions. Within chromosomes, DNA is held in complexes with structural proteins. These proteins organize the DNA into a compact structure called chromatin. In eukaryotes, this structure involves DNA binding to a complex of small basic proteins called histones, while in prokaryotes multiple types of proteins are involved. The histones form a disk-shaped complex called a nucleosome, which contains two complete turns of double-stranded DNA wrapped around its surface. These non-specific interactions are formed through basic residues in the histones, making ionic bonds to the acidic sugar-phosphate backbone of the DNA, and are thus largely independent of the base sequence. Chemical modifications of these basic amino acid residues include methylation, phosphorylation, and acetylation. These chemical changes alter the strength of the interaction between the DNA and the histones, making the DNA more or less accessible to transcription factors and changing the rate of transcription. Other non-specific DNA-binding proteins in chromatin include the high-mobility group proteins, which bind to bent or distorted DNA. These proteins are important in bending arrays of nucleosomes and arranging them into the larger structures that make up chromosomes.\nA distinct group of DNA-binding proteins is the DNA-binding proteins that specifically bind single-stranded DNA. In humans, replication protein A is the best-understood member of this family and is used in processes where the double helix is separated, including DNA replication, recombination, and DNA repair. These binding proteins seem to stabilize single-stranded DNA and protect it from forming stem-loops or being degraded by nucleases.\nIn contrast, other proteins have evolved to bind to particular DNA sequences. The most intensively studied of these are the various transcription factors, which are proteins that regulate transcription. Each transcription factor binds to one particular set of DNA sequences and activates or inhibits the transcription of genes that have these sequences close to their promoters. The transcription factors do this in two ways. Firstly, they can bind the RNA polymerase responsible for transcription, either directly or through other mediator proteins; this locates the polymerase at the promoter and allows it to begin transcription. Alternatively, transcription factors can bind enzymes that modify the histones at the promoter. This changes the accessibility of the DNA template to the polymerase.\nAs these DNA targets can occur throughout an organism's genome, changes in the activity of one type of transcription factor can affect thousands of genes. Consequently, these proteins are often the targets of the signal transduction processes that control responses to environmental changes or cellular differentiation and development. The specificity of these transcription factors' interactions with DNA come from the proteins making multiple contacts to the edges of the DNA bases, allowing them to \"read\" the DNA sequence. Most of these base-interactions are made in the major groove, where the bases are most accessible.\nDNA-modifying enzymes.\nNucleases and ligases.\nNucleases are enzymes that cut DNA strands by catalyzing the hydrolysis of the phosphodiester bonds. Nucleases that hydrolyse nucleotides from the ends of DNA strands are called exonucleases, while endonucleases cut within strands. The most frequently used nucleases in molecular biology are the restriction endonucleases, which cut DNA at specific sequences. For instance, the EcoRV enzyme shown to the left recognizes the 6-base sequence 5\u2032-GATATC-3\u2032 and makes a cut at the horizontal line. In nature, these enzymes protect bacteria against phage infection by digesting the phage DNA when it enters the bacterial cell, acting as part of the restriction modification system. In technology, these sequence-specific nucleases are used in molecular cloning and DNA fingerprinting.\nEnzymes called DNA ligases can rejoin cut or broken DNA strands. Ligases are particularly important in lagging strand DNA replication, as they join together the short segments of DNA produced at the replication fork into a complete copy of the DNA template. They are also used in DNA repair and genetic recombination.\nTopoisomerases and helicases.\nTopoisomerases are enzymes with both nuclease and ligase activity. These proteins change the amount of supercoiling in DNA. Some of these enzymes work by cutting the DNA helix and allowing one section to rotate, thereby reducing its level of supercoiling; the enzyme then seals the DNA break. Other types of these enzymes are capable of cutting one DNA helix and then passing a second strand of DNA through this break, before rejoining the helix. Topoisomerases are required for many processes involving DNA, such as DNA replication and transcription.\nHelicases are proteins that are a type of molecular motor. They use the chemical energy in nucleoside triphosphates, predominantly adenosine triphosphate (ATP), to break hydrogen bonds between bases and unwind the DNA double helix into single strands. These enzymes are essential for most processes where enzymes need to access the DNA bases.\nPolymerases.\nPolymerases are enzymes that synthesize polynucleotide chains from nucleoside triphosphates. The sequence of their products is created based on existing polynucleotide chains\u2014which are called \"templates\". These enzymes function by repeatedly adding a nucleotide to the 3\u2032 hydroxyl group at the end of the growing polynucleotide chain. As a consequence, all polymerases work in a 5\u2032 to 3\u2032 direction. In the active site of these enzymes, the incoming nucleoside triphosphate base-pairs to the template: this allows polymerases to accurately synthesize the complementary strand of their template. Polymerases are classified according to the type of template that they use.\nIn DNA replication, DNA-dependent DNA polymerases make copies of DNA polynucleotide chains. To preserve biological information, it is essential that the sequence of bases in each copy are precisely complementary to the sequence of bases in the template strand. Many DNA polymerases have a proofreading activity. Here, the polymerase recognizes the occasional mistakes in the synthesis reaction by the lack of base pairing between the mismatched nucleotides. If a mismatch is detected, a 3\u2032 to 5\u2032 exonuclease activity is activated and the incorrect base removed. In most organisms, DNA polymerases function in a large complex called the replisome that contains multiple accessory subunits, such as the DNA clamp or helicases.\nRNA-dependent DNA polymerases are a specialized class of polymerases that copy the sequence of an RNA strand into DNA. They include reverse transcriptase, which is a viral enzyme involved in the infection of cells by retroviruses, and telomerase, which is required for the replication of telomeres. For example, HIV reverse transcriptase is an enzyme for AIDS virus replication. Telomerase is an unusual polymerase because it contains its own RNA template as part of its structure. It synthesizes telomeres at the ends of chromosomes. Telomeres prevent fusion of the ends of neighboring chromosomes and protect chromosome ends from damage.\nTranscription is carried out by a DNA-dependent RNA polymerase that copies the sequence of a DNA strand into RNA. To begin transcribing a gene, the RNA polymerase binds to a sequence of DNA called a promoter and separates the DNA strands. It then copies the gene sequence into a messenger RNA transcript until it reaches a region of DNA called the terminator, where it halts and detaches from the DNA. As with human DNA-dependent DNA polymerases, RNA polymerase II, the enzyme that transcribes most of the genes in the human genome, operates as part of a large protein complex with multiple regulatory and accessory subunits.\nGenetic recombination.\nStructure of the Holliday junction intermediate in genetic recombination. The four separate DNA strands are coloured red, blue, green and yellow.\nA DNA helix usually does not interact with other segments of DNA, and in human cells, the different chromosomes even occupy separate areas in the nucleus called \"chromosome territories\". This physical separation of different chromosomes is important for the ability of DNA to function as a stable repository for information, as one of the few times chromosomes interact is in chromosomal crossover which occurs during sexual reproduction, when genetic recombination occurs. Chromosomal crossover is when two DNA helices break, swap a section and then rejoin.\nRecombination allows chromosomes to exchange genetic information and produces new combinations of genes, which increases the efficiency of natural selection and can be important in the rapid evolution of new proteins. Genetic recombination can also be involved in DNA repair, particularly in the cell's response to double-strand breaks.\nThe most common form of chromosomal crossover is homologous recombination, where the two chromosomes involved share very similar sequences. Non-homologous recombination can be damaging to cells, as it can produce chromosomal translocations and genetic abnormalities. The recombination reaction is catalyzed by enzymes known as recombinases, such as RAD51. The first step in recombination is a double-stranded break caused by either an endonuclease or damage to the DNA. A series of steps catalyzed in part by the recombinase then leads to joining of the two helices by at least one Holliday junction, in which a segment of a single strand in each helix is annealed to the complementary strand in the other helix. The Holliday junction is a tetrahedral junction structure that can be moved along the pair of chromosomes, swapping one strand for another. The recombination reaction is then halted by cleavage of the junction and re-ligation of the released DNA. Only strands of like polarity exchange DNA during recombination. There are two types of cleavage: east-west cleavage and north\u2013south cleavage. The north\u2013south cleavage nicks both strands of DNA, while the east\u2013west cleavage has one strand of DNA intact. The formation of a Holliday junction during recombination makes it possible for genetic diversity, genes to exchange on chromosomes, and expression of wild-type viral genomes.\nEvolution.\nDNA contains the genetic information that allows all forms of life to function, grow and reproduce. However, it is unclear how long in the 4-billion-year history of life DNA has performed this function, as it has been proposed that the earliest forms of life may have used RNA as their genetic material. RNA may have acted as the central part of early cell metabolism as it can both transmit genetic information and carry out catalysis as part of ribozymes. This ancient RNA world where nucleic acid would have been used for both catalysis and genetics may have influenced the evolution of the current genetic code based on four nucleotide bases. This would occur, since the number of different bases in such an organism is a trade-off between a small number of bases increasing replication accuracy and a large number of bases increasing the catalytic efficiency of ribozymes. However, there is no direct evidence of ancient genetic systems, as recovery of DNA from most fossils is impossible because DNA survives in the environment for less than one million years, and slowly degrades into short fragments in solution. Claims for older DNA have been made, most notably a report of the isolation of a viable bacterium from a salt crystal 250 million years old, but these claims are controversial.\nBuilding blocks of DNA (adenine, guanine, and related organic molecules) may have been formed extraterrestrially in outer space. Complex DNA and RNA organic compounds of life, including uracil, cytosine, and thymine, have also been formed in the laboratory under conditions mimicking those found in outer space, using starting chemicals, such as pyrimidine, found in meteorites. Pyrimidine, like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), the most carbon-rich chemical found in the universe, may have been formed in red giants or in interstellar cosmic dust and gas clouds.\nIn February 2021, scientists reported, for the first time, the sequencing of DNA from animal remains, a mammoth in this instance over a million years old, the oldest DNA sequenced to date.\nUses in technology.\nGenetic engineering.\nMethods have been developed to purify DNA from organisms, such as phenol-chloroform extraction, and to manipulate it in the laboratory, such as restriction digests and the polymerase chain reaction. Modern biology and biochemistry make intensive use of these techniques in recombinant DNA technology. Recombinant DNA is a man-made DNA sequence that has been assembled from other DNA sequences. They can be transformed into organisms in the form of plasmids or in the appropriate format, by using a viral vector. The genetically modified organisms produced can be used to produce products such as recombinant proteins, used in medical research, or be grown in agriculture.\nDNA profiling.\nForensic scientists can use DNA in blood, semen, skin, saliva or hair found at a crime scene to identify a matching DNA of an individual, such as a perpetrator. This process is formally termed DNA profiling, also called \"DNA fingerprinting\". In DNA profiling, the lengths of variable sections of repetitive DNA, such as short tandem repeats and minisatellites, are compared between people. This method is usually an extremely reliable technique for identifying a matching DNA. However, identification can be complicated if the scene is contaminated with DNA from several people. DNA profiling was developed in 1984 by British geneticist Sir Alec Jeffreys, and first used in forensic science to convict Colin Pitchfork in the 1988 Enderby murders case.\nThe development of forensic science and the ability to now obtain genetic matching on minute samples of blood, skin, saliva, or hair has led to re-examining many cases. Evidence can now be uncovered that was scientifically impossible at the time of the original examination. Combined with the removal of the double jeopardy law in some places, this can allow cases to be reopened where prior trials have failed to produce sufficient evidence to convince a jury. People charged with serious crimes may be required to provide a sample of DNA for matching purposes. The most obvious defense to DNA matches obtained forensically is to claim that cross-contamination of evidence has occurred. This has resulted in meticulous strict handling procedures with new cases of serious crime.\nDNA profiling is also used successfully to positively identify victims of mass casualty incidents, bodies or body parts in serious accidents, and individual victims in mass war graves, via matching to family members.\nDNA profiling is also used in DNA paternity testing to determine if someone is the biological parent or grandparent of a child with the probability of parentage is typically 99.99% when the alleged parent is biologically related to the child. Normal DNA sequencing methods happen after birth, but there are new methods to test paternity while a mother is still pregnant.\nDNA enzymes or catalytic DNA.\nDeoxyribozymes, also called DNAzymes or catalytic DNA, were first discovered in 1994. They are mostly single stranded DNA sequences isolated from a large pool of random DNA sequences through a combinatorial approach called in vitro selection or systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX). DNAzymes catalyze variety of chemical reactions including RNA-DNA cleavage, RNA-DNA ligation, amino acids phosphorylation-dephosphorylation, carbon-carbon bond formation, etc. DNAzymes can enhance catalytic rate of chemical reactions up to 100,000,000,000-fold over the uncatalyzed reaction. The most extensively studied class of DNAzymes is RNA-cleaving types which have been used to detect different metal ions and designing therapeutic agents. Several metal-specific DNAzymes have been reported including the GR-5 DNAzyme (lead-specific), the CA1-3 DNAzymes (copper-specific), the 39E DNAzyme (uranyl-specific) and the NaA43 DNAzyme (sodium-specific). The NaA43 DNAzyme, which is reported to be more than 10,000-fold selective for sodium over other metal ions, was used to make a real-time sodium sensor in cells.\nBioinformatics.\nBioinformatics involves the development of techniques to store, data mine, search and manipulate biological data, including DNA nucleic acid sequence data. These have led to widely applied advances in computer science, especially string searching algorithms, machine learning, and database theory. String searching or matching algorithms, which find an occurrence of a sequence of letters inside a larger sequence of letters, were developed to search for specific sequences of nucleotides. The DNA sequence may be aligned with other DNA sequences to identify homologous sequences and locate the specific mutations that make them distinct. These techniques, especially multiple sequence alignment, are used in studying phylogenetic relationships and protein function. Data sets representing entire genomes' worth of DNA sequences, such as those produced by the Human Genome Project, are difficult to use without the annotations that identify the locations of genes and regulatory elements on each chromosome. Regions of DNA sequence that have the characteristic patterns associated with protein- or RNA-coding genes can be identified by gene finding algorithms, which allow researchers to predict the presence of particular gene products and their possible functions in an organism even before they have been isolated experimentally. Entire genomes may also be compared, which can shed light on the evolutionary history of particular organism and permit the examination of complex evolutionary events.\nDNA nanotechnology.\nDNA nanotechnology uses the unique molecular recognition properties of DNA and other nucleic acids to create self-assembling branched DNA complexes with useful properties. DNA is thus used as a structural material rather than as a carrier of biological information. This has led to the creation of two-dimensional periodic lattices (both tile-based and using the \"DNA origami\" method) and three-dimensional structures in the shapes of polyhedra. Nanomechanical devices and algorithmic self-assembly have also been demonstrated, and these DNA structures have been used to template the arrangement of other molecules such as gold nanoparticles and streptavidin proteins.\nHistory and anthropology.\nBecause DNA collects mutations over time, which are then inherited, it contains historical information, and, by comparing DNA sequences, geneticists can infer the evolutionary history of organisms, their phylogeny. This field of phylogenetics is a powerful tool in evolutionary biology. If DNA sequences within a species are compared, population geneticists can learn the history of particular populations. This can be used in studies ranging from ecological genetics to anthropology.\nInformation storage.\nDNA as a storage device for information has enormous potential since it has much higher storage density compared to electronic devices. However, high costs, slow read and write times (memory latency), and insufficient reliability has prevented its practical use.\nHistory.\nDNA was first isolated by the Swiss physician Friedrich Miescher who, in 1869, discovered a microscopic substance in the pus of discarded surgical bandages. As it resided in the nuclei of cells, he called it \"nuclein\". In 1878, Albrecht Kossel isolated the non-protein component of \"nuclein\", nucleic acid, and later isolated its five primary nucleobases.\nIn 1909, Phoebus Levene identified the base, sugar, and phosphate nucleotide unit of the RNA (then named \"yeast nucleic acid\"). In 1929, Levene identified deoxyribose sugar in \"thymus nucleic acid\" (DNA). Levene suggested that DNA consisted of a string of four nucleotide units linked together through the phosphate groups (\"tetranucleotide hypothesis\"). Levene thought the chain was short and the bases repeated in a fixed order.\nIn 1927, Nikolai Koltsov proposed that inherited traits would be inherited via a \"giant hereditary molecule\" made up of \"two mirror strands that would replicate in a semi-conservative fashion using each strand as a template\". In 1928, Frederick Griffith in his experiment discovered that traits of the \"smooth\" form of \"Pneumococcus\" could be transferred to the \"rough\" form of the same bacteria by mixing killed \"smooth\" bacteria with the live \"rough\" form. This system provided the first clear suggestion that DNA carries genetic information.\nIn 1933, while studying virgin sea urchin eggs, Jean Brachet suggested that DNA is found in the cell nucleus and that RNA is present exclusively in the cytoplasm. At the time, \"yeast nucleic acid\" (RNA) was thought to occur only in plants, while \"thymus nucleic acid\" (DNA) only in animals. The latter was thought to be a tetramer, with the function of buffering cellular pH.\nIn 1937, William Astbury produced the first X-ray diffraction patterns that showed that DNA had a regular structure.\nIn 1943, Oswald Avery, along with co-workers Colin MacLeod and Maclyn McCarty, identified DNA as the transforming principle, supporting Griffith's suggestion (Avery\u2013MacLeod\u2013McCarty experiment). Late in 1951, Francis Crick started working with James Watson at the Cavendish Laboratory within the University of Cambridge. DNA's role in heredity was confirmed in 1952 when Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase in the Hershey\u2013Chase experiment showed that DNA is the genetic material of the enterobacteria phage T2.\n In May 1952, Raymond Gosling, a graduate student working under the supervision of Rosalind Franklin, took an X-ray diffraction image, labeled as \"Photo 51\", at high hydration levels of DNA. This photo was given to Watson and Crick by Maurice Wilkins and was critical to their obtaining the correct structure of DNA. Franklin told Crick and Watson that the backbones had to be on the outside. Before then, Linus Pauling, and Watson and Crick, had erroneous models with the chains inside and the bases pointing outwards. Her identification of the space group for DNA crystals revealed to Crick that the two DNA strands were antiparallel.\nIn February 1953, Linus Pauling and Robert Corey proposed a model for nucleic acids containing three intertwined chains, with the phosphates near the axis, and the bases on the outside. \nWatson and Crick completed their model, which is now accepted as the first correct model of the double-helix of DNA. On 28 February 1953 Crick interrupted patrons' lunchtime at The Eagle pub in Cambridge to announce that he and Watson had \"discovered the secret of life\".\nThe 25 April 1953 issue of the journal \"Nature\" published a series of five articles giving the Watson and Crick double-helix structure DNA and evidence supporting it. The structure was reported in a letter titled \"MOLECULAR STRUCTURE OF NUCLEIC ACIDS A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid\", in which they said, \"It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material.\" This letter was followed by a letter from Franklin and Gosling, which was the first publication of their own X-ray diffraction data and of their original analysis method. Then followed a letter by Wilkins and two of his colleagues, which contained an analysis of \"in vivo\" B-DNA X-ray patterns, and which supported the presence \"in vivo\" of the Watson and Crick structure.\nIn 1962, after Franklin's death, Watson, Crick, and Wilkins jointly received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Nobel Prizes are awarded only to living recipients. A debate continues about who should receive credit for the discovery.\nIn an influential presentation in 1957, Crick laid out the central dogma of molecular biology, which foretold the relationship between DNA, RNA, and proteins, and articulated the \"adaptor hypothesis\". Final confirmation of the replication mechanism that was implied by the double-helical structure followed in 1958 through the Meselson\u2013Stahl experiment. Further work by Crick and co-workers showed that the genetic code was based on non-overlapping triplets of bases, called codons, allowing Har Gobind Khorana, Robert W. Holley, and Marshall Warren Nirenberg to decipher the genetic code. These findings represent the birth of molecular biology."}
{"id": "7956", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7956", "title": "Dna", "text": ""}
{"id": "7957", "revid": "313197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7957", "title": "Kennedy family", "text": "The Kennedy family is an American political family that has long been prominent in American politics, public service, entertainment, and business. The first Kennedy elected to public office was Patrick Joseph \"P. J.\" Kennedy in 1884, 35 years after the family's arrival from Ireland. He served in the Massachusetts state legislature from 1884 to 1895. At least one Kennedy family member served in federal elective office in every year from 1947, when P. J. Kennedy's grandson, John F. Kennedy, became a member of Congress from Massachusetts, to 2011, when P. J. Kennedy's great-grandson, Patrick J. Kennedy, retired as a member of Congress from Rhode Island, a span of 64 years.\nThe descendants of P. J.'s son, Joseph P. Kennedy Sr., and Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy include President John F. Kennedy (who also served in the United States Congress), U.S. Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy (who later served in the U.S. Senate), four other members of the U.S. House of Representatives or Senate, two U.S. ambassadors, a lieutenant governor, three state legislators (one who went on to the U.S. House of Representatives), and one mayor.\nIn addition, Joseph Sr. and Rose's daughter, Eunice, founded the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (a part of the National Institutes of Health), and founded the Special Olympics. Eunice's daughter Maria Shriver served as First Lady of California. Other descendants of Joseph and Rose Kennedy have been active as lawyers, authors, and activists on behalf of those with physical and intellectual challenges.\nHistory.\nAccording to genealogist Brian Kennedy in his work \"JFK's Irish O'Kennedy Ancestors\", the Kennedys who would go on to play a significant role in the United States of America originated from the \u00d3 Cinn\u00e9ide Fionn (one of the three Irish Gaelic \u00d3 Cinn\u00e9ide clans who ruled the kingdom of Ormond, along with the \u00d3 Cinn\u00e9ide Donn and \u00d3 Cinn\u00e9ide Ruadh). Their progenitor, Diarmaid \u00d3 Cinn\u00e9ide Fionn, held Knigh Castle close to what is today Puckane, County Tipperary in 1546. From there, having lost out to the New English order in the Kingdom of Ireland, they ended up in Dunganstown, New Ross, County Wexford by 1740. Patrick Kennedy was born there in 1823.\nThe first Kennedys to reside in the United States were Patrick Kennedy (1823\u20131858) and Bridget Murphy (1824\u20131888), who sailed from Ireland to East Boston in 1849; Patrick worked in East Boston as a barrel maker, or cooper. Patrick and Bridget had five children: their youngest, Patrick Joseph \"P. J.\" Kennedy, went into business and served in the Massachusetts state legislature from 1884 to 1895.\nP. J. and Mary Augusta Hickey were the parents of four children. Their oldest was Joseph Patrick \"Joe\" Kennedy Sr., who amassed a fortune in banking and securities trading, which he further expanded by investing in other growing industries. Joseph Sr. was appointed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt as the first chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, chairman of the Maritime Commission, and U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom in the lead-up to World War II. He served on The Hoover Commission, officially named the Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government, from 1947 to 1949; the commission was appointed by President Harry Truman to recommend administrative changes in the federal government.\nContinued public service.\nJoseph P. Kennedy Sr. and Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald were the parents of nine children: Joseph Jr., John, Rose Marie (called Rosemary), Kathleen, Eunice, Patricia, Robert, Jean, and Edward (called Ted). John served as the 35th President of the United States, while Robert and Ted both became prominent senators. Every Kennedy elected to public office has served as a Democrat, while other members of the family have worked for the Democratic Party or held Cabinet posts in Democratic administrations. Many have attended Harvard University, and the family has contributed greatly to that university's John F. Kennedy School of Government.\nJoseph Sr. expected his eldest son, Joseph Jr., to go into politics and to ultimately be elected president. Joseph Jr. was elected as a delegate to the 1940 Democratic National Convention, and enlisted in the Navy after the U.S. entered World War II. Joseph Jr. was killed in 1944 when the bomber he was piloting exploded in flight. It then fell upon John, who had considered a career as a journalist \u2014 he had authored a book and did some reporting for Hearst Newspapers \u2014 to fulfill his father's desire to see the family involved in politics and government. After returning from Navy service, John served in the U.S. House of Representatives representing Massachusetts's 11th congressional district from 1947 to 1953, and then as U.S. Senator from Massachusetts until his election as President in 1960.\nDuring John's administration, Robert served as attorney general; his brother-in-law Sargent Shriver served as director of the new Peace Corps, and Ted was elected to the U.S. Senate, occupying his brother's former seat in Massachusetts until his death in 2009. Among the Kennedy administration's accomplishments: the Alliance for Progress, the Peace Corps, peaceful resolution to the Cuban Missile Crisis, the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963, the 24th Amendment ending the poll tax, and the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The family was the subject of intense media coverage during and after the Kennedy presidency, often emphasizing their relative youth, allure, education, and future in politics. Ted served in the Senate with his brother Robert (1965\u20131968), and was serving in the Senate when his nephew, Joseph P. II (1987\u20131999), and son, Patrick J. (1995\u20132011), served in the U.S. House of Representatives.\nIn November 2012, Joseph P. Kennedy III, son of former Rep. Joseph P. Kennedy II and grandson of the late Sen. Robert F. Kennedy, was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts's 4th congressional district. In 2020, he lost the 2020 Senate primary election in Massachusetts to Ed Markey, the first Kennedy to ever lose an election in the state.\nKennedy curse.\nFamily incidents led Senator Ted Kennedy to wonder, in a televised statement about the Chappaquiddick incident in 1969, whether there really was a \"Kennedy curse.\" Some of the events endured by the Kennedy clan include: in 1941, Rosemary underwent a non-consensual lobotomy intended to prevent her from embarrassing the family with her violent mood swings, convulsions, and intellectual disability. The operation left her incapacitated for the rest of her life. Joseph Jr. died in 1944 when the Navy bomber he was piloting exploded in mid-flight. Kathleen died in a plane crash in France in 1948. John and Robert were assassinated, in 1963 and 1968 respectively. In 1964, Ted was nearly killed when his plane crashed in an apple orchard near Southampton, Massachusetts. (Legislative aide Edward Moss and the pilot were killed in the crash.) Ted was seriously injured and spent months in a hospital recovering from a severe back injury, a punctured lung, broken ribs and internal bleeding.\nIn later generations, Robert's son David died of a drug overdose in 1984; and son Michael died from injuries sustained in a skiing accident in 1997; John's son John Jr. died in a plane crash (along with his wife Carolyn and sister-in-law Lauren) off the coast of Martha's Vineyard in 1999; Kara Kennedy and Christopher Kennedy Lawford died of heart attacks, in 2011 and 2018 respectively; and Saoirse Kennedy Hill died of a drug overdose in 2019.\nIn April 2020, Robert's granddaughter Maeve Kennedy McKean, a former official in the Obama Administration, and her eight-year-old son, Gideon Joseph Kennedy McKean, disappeared in Chesapeake Bay after embarking in a canoe to retrieve a ball. The rescue operation was suspended after 26 hours. Maeve McKean's body was recovered several days later.\nGovernment offices held.\nThere was a member of the Kennedy family in public office nearly continuously from 1946, when John F. Kennedy was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives, until early 2011, when Patrick J. Kennedy left the House. The only exception in that time was the period between John F. Kennedy's resignation from the Senate on December 22, 1960 and his assumption of the office of President on January 20, 1961. In 2013 Joseph P. Kennedy III was elected U.S. Representative from Massachusetts and served until 2021.\nHeraldry.\nIn 1961, John F. Kennedy was presented with a grant of arms for all the descendants of Patrick Kennedy (1823\u20131858) from the Chief Herald of Ireland. The design of the arms (three gold closed helmets on a black field) strongly alludes to symbols in the coats of arms of the O'Kennedys of Ormonde and the FitzGeralds of Desmond, from whom the family is believed to be descended. The crest is an armored hand holding four arrows between two olive branches, elements taken from the coat of arms of the United States of America and also symbolic of Kennedy and his brothers."}
{"id": "7958", "revid": "37543223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7958", "title": "Deflation (disambiguation)", "text": "Deflation refers to a decrease in the general price level, the opposite of inflation.\nDeflation may also refer to:"}
{"id": "7959", "revid": "40234806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7959", "title": "Democracy", "text": " \nDemocracy (, \"d\u0113mokrati\u0101\", from \"d\u0113mos\" 'people' and \"kratos\" 'rule') refers to two forms of government: The most common form in which the people have the authority to choose their governing legislators and the original form in which the people have the authority to decide on legislation. The decisions on who is considered part of the people and how authority is shared among or delegated by the people have changed over time and at different speeds in different countries, but they have included more and more of the inhabitants of all countries. Cornerstones of Democracy include freedom of assembly and speech, inclusiveness and equality, membership, consent, voting, right to life and minority rights.\nThe \"notion\" of democracy has evolved over time considerably,\nand, generally, the two current types of democracy are direct and representative. In a direct democracy, the people directly deliberate and decide on legislation. In a representative democracy, the people elect representatives to deliberate and decide on legislation, such as in parliamentary or presidential democracy. Liquid democracy combines elements of these two basic types.\nPrevalent day-to-day decision making of democracies is the majority rule, though other decision making approaches like supermajority and consensus have been equally integral to democracies. They serve the crucial purpose of inclusiveness and broader legitimacy on sensitive issues, counterbalancing majoritarianism, and therefore mostly take precedence on a constitutional level.\nIn the common variant of liberal democracy, the powers of the majority are exercised within the framework of a representative democracy, but the constitution limits the majority and protects the minority, usually through the enjoyment by all of certain individual rights, e.g. freedom of speech, or freedom of association. Besides these general types of democracy, there have been a wealth of further types (see below).\nDemocracy makes all forces struggle repeatedly to realize their interests and devolves power from groups of people to sets of rules. Western democracy, as distinct from that which existed in antiquity, is generally considered to have originated in city-states such as Classical Athens and the Roman Republic, where various schemes and degrees of enfranchisement of the free male population were observed before the form disappeared in the West at the beginning of late antiquity. The English word dates back to the 16th century, from the older Middle French and Middle Latin equivalents.\nAccording to American political scientist Larry Diamond, democracy consists of four key elements: a political system for choosing and replacing the government through free and fair elections; the active participation of the people, as citizens, in politics and civic life; protection of the human rights of all citizens; and a rule of law, in which the laws and procedures apply equally to all citizens. Todd Landman, nevertheless, draws our attention to the fact that democracy and human rights are two different concepts and that \"there must be greater specificity in the conceptualisation and operationalisation of democracy and human rights\".\nThe term appeared in the 5th century BC to denote the political systems then existing in Greek city-states, notably Athens, to mean \"rule of the people\", in contrast to aristocracy (, \"\"), meaning \"rule of an elite\". While theoretically, these definitions are in opposition, in practice the distinction has been blurred historically. The political system of Classical Athens, for example, granted democratic citizenship to free men and excluded slaves and women from political participation. In virtually all democratic governments throughout ancient and modern history, democratic citizenship consisted of an elite class, until full enfranchisement was won for all adult citizens in most modern democracies through the suffrage movements of the 19th and 20th centuries.\nDemocracy contrasts with forms of government where power is either held by an individual, as in an absolute monarchy, or where power is held by a small number of individuals, as in an oligarchy. Nevertheless, these oppositions, inherited from Greek philosophy, are now ambiguous because contemporary governments have mixed democratic, oligarchic and monarchic elements. Karl Popper defined democracy in contrast to dictatorship or tyranny, thus focusing on opportunities for the people to control their leaders and to oust them without the need for a revolution.\nCharacteristics.\nNo consensus exists on how to define democracy \u2013 indeed, one study found that at least 2,234 descriptions of democracy exist in the English language - but legal equality, political freedom and rule of law have been identified as important characteristics. These principles are reflected in all eligible citizens being equal before the law and having equal access to legislative processes. For example, in a representative democracy, every vote has equal weight, no unreasonable restrictions can apply to anyone seeking to become a representative, and the freedom of its eligible citizens is secured by legitimised rights and liberties which are typically protected by a constitution. Other uses of \"democracy\" include that of direct democracy.\nOne theory holds that democracy requires three fundamental principles: upward control (sovereignty residing at the lowest levels of authority), political equality, and social norms by which individuals and institutions only consider acceptable acts that reflect the first two principles of upward control and political equality.\nThe term \"democracy\" is sometimes used as shorthand for liberal democracy, which is a variant of representative democracy that may include elements such as political pluralism; equality before the law; the right to petition elected officials for redress of grievances; due process; civil liberties; human rights; and elements of civil society outside the government. Roger Scruton argues that democracy alone cannot provide personal and political freedom unless the institutions of civil society are also present.\nIn some countries, notably in the United Kingdom which originated the Westminster system, the dominant principle is that of parliamentary sovereignty, while maintaining judicial independence. In India, parliamentary sovereignty is subject to the Constitution of India which includes judicial review. Though the term \"democracy\" is typically used in the context of a political state, the principles also are applicable to private organisations.\nThere are many decision-making methods used in democracies, but majority rule is the dominant form. Without compensation, like legal protections of individual or group rights, political minorities can be oppressed by the \"tyranny of the majority\". Majority rule is a competitive approach, opposed to consensus democracy, creating the need that elections, and generally deliberation, are substantively and procedurally \"fair,\" i.e. just and equitable. In some countries, freedom of political expression, freedom of speech, freedom of the press, and internet democracy are considered important to ensure that voters are well informed, enabling them to vote according to their own interests.\nIt has also been suggested that a basic feature of democracy is the capacity of all voters to participate freely and fully in the life of their society. With its emphasis on notions of social contract and the collective will of all the voters, democracy can also be characterised as a form of political collectivism because it is defined as a form of government in which all eligible citizens have an equal say in lawmaking.\nRepublics, though often associated with democracy because of the shared principle of rule by consent of the governed, are not necessarily democracies, as republicanism does not specify \"how\" the people are to rule.\nClassically the term \"republic\" encompassed both democracies and aristocracies. In a modern sense the republican form of government is a form of government without monarch. Because of this democracies can be republics or constitutional monarchies, such as the United Kingdom.\nHistory.\nHistorically, democracies and republics have been rare. Republican theorists linked democracy to small size: as political units grew in size, the likelihood increased that the government would turn despotic. At the same time, small political units were vulnerable to conquest. Montesquieu wrote, \"If a republic be small, it is destroyed by a foreign force; if it be large, it is ruined by an internal imperfection.\" According to Johns Hopkins University political scientist Daniel Deudney, the creation of the United States, with its large size and its system of checks and balances, was a solution to the dual problems of size.\nIt is commonly claimed that democracy and democratization were important drivers of the expansion of primary education around the world. However, new evidence from historical education trends challenges this assertion. An analysis of historical student enrollment rates for 109 countries from 1820 to 2010 finds no support for the claim that democratization increased access to primary education around the world. It is true that transitions to democracy often coincided with an acceleration in the expansion of primary education, but the same acceleration was observed in countries that remained non-democratic.\nHistoric origins and proto-democratic societies.\nRetrospectively different polities, outside of declared democracies, have been described as proto-democratic (see History of democracy).\nOrigins.\nThe term \"democracy\" first appeared in ancient Greek political and philosophical thought in the city-state of Athens during classical antiquity. The word comes from \"d\u00eamos\" '(common) people' and \"kr\u00e1tos\" 'force/might'. Under Cleisthenes, what is generally held as the first example of a type of democracy in 508\u2013507 BC was established in Athens. Cleisthenes is referred to as \"the father of Athenian democracy\".\nAthenian democracy took the form of a direct democracy, and it had two distinguishing features: the random selection of ordinary citizens to fill the few existing government administrative and judicial offices, and a legislative assembly consisting of all Athenian citizens. All eligible citizens were allowed to speak and vote in the assembly, which set the laws of the city state. However, Athenian citizenship excluded women, slaves, foreigners (\u03bc\u03ad\u03c4\u03bf\u03b9\u03ba\u03bf\u03b9 / \"m\u00e9toikoi\"), and youths below the age of military service. Effectively, only 1 in 4 residents in Athens qualified as citizens. Owning land was not a requirement for citizenship. The exclusion of large parts of the population from the citizen body is closely related to the ancient understanding of citizenship. In most of antiquity the benefit of citizenship was tied to the obligation to fight war campaigns.\nAthenian democracy was not only \"direct\" in the sense that decisions were made by the assembled people, but also the \"most direct\" in the sense that the people through the assembly, boule and courts of law controlled the entire political process and a large proportion of citizens were involved constantly in the public business. Even though the rights of the individual were not secured by the Athenian constitution in the modern sense (the ancient Greeks had no word for \"rights\"), those who were citizens of Athens enjoyed their liberties not in opposition to the government but by living in a city that was not subject to another power and by not being subjects themselves to the rule of another person.\nRange voting appeared in Sparta as early as 700 BC. The Apella was an assembly of the people, held once a month, in which every male citizen of at least 30 years of age could participate. In the Apella, Spartans elected leaders and cast votes by range voting and shouting (the vote is then decided on how loudly the crowd shouts). Aristotle called this \"childish\", as compared with the stone voting ballots used by the Athenian citizenry. Sparta adopted it because of its simplicity, and to prevent any biased voting, buying, or cheating that was predominant in the early democratic elections.\nEven though the Roman Republic contributed significantly to many aspects of democracy, only a minority of Romans were citizens with votes in elections for representatives. The votes of the powerful were given more weight through a system of gerrymandering, so most high officials, including members of the Senate, came from a few wealthy and noble families. In addition, the overthrow of the Roman Kingdom was the first case in the Western world of a polity being formed with the explicit purpose of being a republic, although it didn't have much of a democracy. The Roman model of governance inspired many political thinkers over the centuries, and today's modern representative democracies imitate more the Roman than the Greek models because it was a state in which supreme power was held by the people and their elected representatives, and which had an elected or nominated leader.\nVaishali, capital city of the Vajjian Confederacy of (Vrijji mahajanapada), India was also considered one of the first examples of a republic around the 6th century BCE.\nOther cultures, such as the Iroquois Nation in the Americas between around 1450 and 1600 AD also developed a form of democratic society before they came in contact with the Europeans. This indicates that forms of democracy may have been invented in other societies around the world.\nMiddle Ages.\nWhile most regions in Europe during the Middle Ages were ruled by clergy or feudal lords, there existed various systems involving elections or assemblies, although often only involving a small part of the population. In Scandinavia, bodies known as things consisted of freemen presided by a lawspeaker. These deliberative bodies were responsible for settling political questions, and variants included the Althing in Iceland and the L\u00f8gting in the Faeroe Islands. The veche, found in Eastern Europe, was a similar body to the Scandinavian thing. In the Roman Catholic Church, the pope has been elected by a papal conclave composed of cardinals since 1059. The first documented parliamentary body in Europe was the Cortes of Le\u00f3n. Established by Alfonso IX in 1188, the Cortes had authority over setting taxation, foreign affairs and legislating, though the exact nature of its role remains disputed. The Republic of Ragusa, established in 1358 and centered around the city of Dubrovnik, provided representation and voting rights to its male aristocracy only. Various Italian city-states and polities had republic forms of government. For instance, the Republic of Florence, established in 1115, was led by the Signoria whose members were chosen by sortition. In 10th\u201315th century Frisia, a distinctly non-feudal society, the right to vote on local matters and on county officials was based on land size. The Kouroukan Fouga divided the Mali Empire into ruling clans (lineages) that were represented at a great assembly called the \"Gbara\". However, the charter made Mali more similar to a constitutional monarchy than a democratic republic.\nThe Parliament of England had its roots in the restrictions on the power of kings written into Magna Carta (1215), which explicitly protected certain rights of the King's subjects and implicitly supported what became the English writ of habeas corpus, safeguarding individual freedom against unlawful imprisonment with right to appeal. The first representative national assembly in England was Simon de Montfort's Parliament in 1265. The emergence of petitioning is some of the earliest evidence of parliament being used as a forum to address the general grievances of ordinary people. However, the power to call parliament remained at the pleasure of the monarch.\nStudies have linked the emergence of parliamentary institutions in Europe during the medieval period to urban agglomeration and the creation of new classes, such as artisans, as well as the presence of nobility and religious elites. Scholars have also linked the emergence of representative government to Europe's relative political fragmentation. New York University political scientist David Stasavage links the fragmentation of Europe, and its subsequent democratization, to the manner in which the Roman Empire collapsed: Roman territory was conquered by small fragmented groups of Germanic tribes, thus leading to the creation of small political units where rulers were relatively weak and needed the consent of the governed to ward off foreign threats.\nIn Poland, noble democracy was characterized by an increase in the activity of the middle nobility, which wanted to increase their share in exercising power at the expense of the magnates. Magnates dominated the most important offices in the state (secular and ecclesiastical) and sat on the royal council, later the senate. The growing importance of the middle nobility had an impact on the establishment of the institution of the land \"sejmik\" (local assembly), which subsequently obtained more rights. During the fifteenth and first half of the sixteenth century, sejmiks received more and more powers and became the most important institutions of local power. In 1454, Casimir IV Jagiellon granted the sejmiks the right to decide on taxes and to convene a mass mobilization in the Nieszawa Statutes. He also pledged not to create new laws without their consent.\nModern era.\nEarly modern period.\nIn 17th century England, there was renewed interest in Magna Carta. The Parliament of England passed the Petition of Right in 1628 which established certain liberties for subjects. The English Civil War (1642\u20131651) was fought between the King and an oligarchic but elected Parliament, during which the idea of a political party took form with groups debating rights to political representation during the Putney Debates of 1647. Subsequently, the Protectorate (1653\u201359) and the English Restoration (1660) restored more autocratic rule, although Parliament passed the Habeas Corpus Act in 1679 which strengthened the convention that forbade detention lacking sufficient cause or evidence. After the Glorious Revolution of 1688, the Bill of Rights was enacted in 1689 which codified certain rights and liberties and is still in effect. The Bill set out the requirement for regular elections, rules for freedom of speech in Parliament and limited the power of the monarch, ensuring that, unlike much of Europe at the time, royal absolutism would not prevail. Economic historians Douglass North and Barry Weingast have characterized the institutions implemented in the Glorious Revolution as a resounding success in terms of restraining the government and ensuring protection for property rights.\nRenewed interest in the Magna Carta, the English Civil War, and the Glorious Revolution in the 17th century prompted the growth of political philosophy on the British Isles. Thomas Hobbes was the first philosopher to articulate a detailed social contract theory. Writing in \"Leviathan\" (1651), Hobbes theorized that individuals living in the state of nature led lives that were \"solitary, poor, nasty, brutish and short\" and constantly waged a war of all against all. In order to prevent the occurrence of an anarchic state of nature, Hobbes reasoned that individuals ceded their rights to a strong, authoritarian government. Later, philosopher and physician John Locke would posit a different interpretation of social contract theory. Writing in his \"Two Treatises of Government\" (1689), Locke posited that all individuals possessed the inalienable rights to life, liberty and estate (property). According to Locke, individuals would voluntarily come together to form a state for the purposes of defending their rights. Particularly important for Locke were property rights, whose protection Locke deemed to be a government's primary purpose. Furthermore, Locke asserted that governments were legitimate only if they held the consent of the governed. For Locke, citizens had the right to revolt against a government that acted against their interest or became tyrannical. Although they were not widely read during his lifetime, Locke's works are considered the founding documents of liberal thought and profoundly influenced the leaders of the American Revolution and later the French Revolution. His liberal democratic framework of governance remains the preeminent form of democracy in the world.\nIn the Cossack republics of Ukraine in the 16th and 17th centuries, the Cossack Hetmanate and Zaporizhian Sich, the holder of the highest post of Hetman was elected by the representatives from the country's districts.\nIn North America, representative government began in Jamestown, Virginia, with the election of the House of Burgesses (forerunner of the Virginia General Assembly) in 1619. English Puritans who migrated from 1620 established colonies in New England whose local governance was democratic; although these local assemblies had some small amounts of devolved power, the ultimate authority was held by the Crown and the English Parliament. The Puritans (Pilgrim Fathers), Baptists, and Quakers who founded these colonies applied the democratic organisation of their congregations also to the administration of their communities in worldly matters.\n18th and 19th centuries.\nThe first Parliament of Great Britain was established in 1707, after the merger of the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Scotland under the Acts of Union. Although the monarch increasingly became a figurehead, Parliament was only elected by male property owners, which amounted to 3% of the population in 1780. The first known British person of African heritage to vote in a general election, Ignatius Sancho, voted in 1774 and 1780. During the Age of Liberty in Sweden (1718\u20131772), civil rights were expanded and power shifted from the monarch to parliament. The taxed peasantry was represented in parliament, although with little influence, but commoners without taxed property had no suffrage.\nThe creation of the short-lived Corsican Republic in 1755 marked the first nation in modern history to adopt a democratic constitution (all men and women above age of 25 could vote). This Corsican Constitution was the first based on Enlightenment principles and included female suffrage, something that was not granted in most other democracies until the 20th century.\nIn the American colonial period before 1776, and for some time after, often only adult white male property owners could vote; enslaved Africans, most free black people and most women were not extended the franchise. This changed state by state, beginning with the republican State of New Connecticut, soon after called Vermont, which, on declaring independence of Great Britain in 1777, adopted a constitution modelled on Pennsylvania's with citizenship and democratic suffrage for males with or without property, and went on to abolish slavery. The American Revolution led to the adoption of the United States Constitution in 1787, the oldest surviving, still active, governmental codified constitution. The Constitution provided for an elected government and protected civil rights and liberties for some, but did not end slavery nor extend voting rights in the United States, instead leaving the issue of suffrage to the individual states. Generally, states limited suffrage to white male property owners and taxpayers. At the time of the first Presidential election in 1789, about 6% of the population was eligible to vote. The Naturalization Act of 1790 limited U.S. citizenship to whites only. The Bill of Rights in 1791 set limits on government power to protect personal freedoms but had little impact on judgements by the courts for the first 130 years after ratification.\nIn 1789, Revolutionary France adopted the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen and, although short-lived, the National Convention was elected by all men in 1792. The Polish-Lithuanian Constitution of 3 May 1791 sought to implement a more effective constitutional monarchy, introduced political equality between townspeople and nobility, and placed the peasants under the protection of the government, mitigating the worst abuses of serfdom. In force for less than 19 months, it was declared null and void by the Grodno Sejm that met in 1793. Nonetheless, the 1791 Constitution helped keep alive Polish aspirations for the eventual restoration of the country's sovereignty over a century later.\nHowever, in the early 19th century, little of democracy\u2014as theory, practice, or even as word\u2014remained in the North Atlantic world. During this period, slavery remained a social and economic institution in places around the world. This was particularly the case in the United States, where eight serving presidents had owned slaves, and the last fifteen slave states kept slavery legal in the American South until the Civil War. Advocating the movement of black people from the US to locations where they would enjoy greater freedom and equality, in the 1820s the abolitionist members of the ACS established the settlement of Liberia. The United Kingdom's Slave Trade Act 1807 banned the trade across the British Empire, which was enforced internationally by the Royal Navy under treaties Britain negotiated with other nations. In 1833, the UK passed the Slavery Abolition Act which took effect across the British Empire, although slavery was legally allowed to continue in areas controlled by the East India Company, in Ceylon, and in Saint Helena for an additional ten years.\nIn the United States, the 1828 presidential election was the first in which non-property-holding white males could vote in the vast majority of states. Voter turnout soared during the 1830s, reaching about 80% of the adult white male population in the 1840 presidential election. North Carolina was the last state to abolish property qualification in 1856 resulting in a close approximation to universal white male suffrage (however tax-paying requirements remained in five states in 1860 and survived in two states until the 20th century). In the 1860 United States Census, the slave population had grown to four million, and in Reconstruction after the Civil War, three constitutional amendments were passed: the 13th Amendment (1865) that ended slavery; the 14th Amendment (1869) that gave black people citizenship, and the 15th Amendment (1870) that gave black males a nominal right to vote. Full enfranchisement of citizens was not secured until after the civil rights movement gained passage by the US Congress of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.\nThe voting franchise in the United Kingdom was expanded and made more uniform in a series of reforms that began with the Reform Act 1832 and continued into the 20th century, notably with the Representation of the People Act 1918 and the Equal Franchise Act 1928. Universal male suffrage was established in France in March 1848 in the wake of the French Revolution of 1848. In 1848, several revolutions broke out in Europe as rulers were confronted with popular demands for liberal constitutions and more democratic government.\nIn 1876 the Ottoman Empire transitioned from an absolute monarchy to a constitutional one, and held two elections the next year to elect members to her newly formed parliament. Provisional Electoral Regulations were issued, stating that the elected members of the Provincial Administrative Councils would elect members to the first Parliament. Later that year, a new constitution was promulgated, which provided for a bicameral Parliament with a Senate appointed by the Sultan and a popularly elected Chamber of Deputies. Only men above the age of 30 who were competent in Turkish and had full civil rights were allowed to stand for election. Reasons for disqualification included holding dual citizenship, being employed by a foreign government, being bankrupt, employed as a servant, or having \"notoriety for ill deeds\". Full universal suffrage was achieved in 1934.\nIn 1893 the self-governing colony New Zealand became the first country in the world (except for the short-lived 18th-century Corsican Republic) to grant active universal suffrage by giving women the right to vote.\n20th and 21st centuries.\n20th-century transitions to liberal democracy have come in successive \"waves of democracy\", variously resulting from wars, revolutions, decolonisation, and religious and economic circumstances. Global waves of \"democratic regression\" reversing democratization, have also occurred in the 1920s and 30s, in the 1960s and 1970s, and in the 2010s.\nWorld War I and the dissolution of the Ottoman and Austro-Hungarian empires resulted in the creation of new nation-states from Europe, most of them at least nominally democratic. In the 1920s democracy flourished and women's suffrage advanced, but the Great Depression brought disenchantment and most of the countries of Europe, Latin America, and Asia turned to strong-man rule or dictatorships. Fascism and dictatorships flourished in Nazi Germany, Italy, Spain and Portugal, as well as non-democratic governments in the Baltics, the Balkans, Brazil, Cuba, China, and Japan, among others.\nWorld War II brought a definitive reversal of this trend in western Europe. The democratisation of the American, British, and French sectors of occupied Germany (disputed), Austria, Italy, and the occupied Japan served as a model for the later theory of government change. However, most of Eastern Europe, including the Soviet sector of Germany fell into the non-democratic Soviet bloc.\nThe war was followed by decolonisation, and again most of the new independent states had nominally democratic constitutions. India emerged as the world's largest democracy and continues to be so. Countries that were once part of the British Empire often adopted the British Westminster system. By 1960, the vast majority of country-states were nominally democracies, although most of the world's populations lived in nations that experienced sham elections, and other forms of subterfuge (particularly in \"Communist\" nations and the former colonies.)\nA subsequent wave of democratisation brought substantial gains toward true liberal democracy for many nations, dubbed \"third wave of democracy.\" Portugal, Spain, and several of the military dictatorships in South America returned to civilian rule in the 1970s and 1980s. This was followed by nations in East and South Asia by the mid-to-late 1980s. Economic malaise in the 1980s, along with resentment of Soviet oppression, contributed to the collapse of the Soviet Union, the associated end of the Cold War, and the democratisation and liberalisation of the former Eastern bloc countries. The most successful of the new democracies were those geographically and culturally closest to western Europe, and they are now members or candidate members of the European Union. In 1986, after the toppling of the most prominent Asian dictatorship, the only democratic state of its kind at the time emerged in the Philippines with the rise of Corazon Aquino, who would later be known as the Mother of Asian Democracy.\nThe liberal trend spread to some nations in Africa in the 1990s, most prominently in South Africa. Some recent examples of attempts of liberalisation include the Indonesian Revolution of 1998, the Bulldozer Revolution in Yugoslavia, the Rose Revolution in Georgia, the Orange Revolution in Ukraine, the Cedar Revolution in Lebanon, the Tulip Revolution in Kyrgyzstan, and the Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia.\nAccording to Freedom House, in 2007 there were 123 electoral democracies (up from 40 in 1972). According to \"World Forum on Democracy\", electoral democracies now represent 120 of the 192 existing countries and constitute 58.2 percent of the world's population. At the same time liberal democracies i.e. countries Freedom House regards as free and respectful of basic human rights and the rule of law are 85 in number and represent 38 percent of the global population. Also in 2007 the United Nations declared 15 September the International Day of Democracy.\nMost electoral democracies continue to exclude those younger than 18 from voting. The voting age has been lowered to 16 for national elections in a number of countries, including Brazil, Austria, Cuba, and Nicaragua. In California, a 2004 proposal to permit a quarter vote at 14 and a half vote at 16 was ultimately defeated. In 2008, the German parliament proposed but shelved a bill that would grant the vote to each citizen at birth, to be used by a parent until the child claims it for themselves.\nAccording to Freedom House, starting in 2005, there have been eleven consecutive years in which declines in political rights and civil liberties throughout the world have outnumbered improvements, as populist and nationalist political forces have gained ground everywhere from Poland (under the Law and Justice Party) to the Philippines (under Rodrigo Duterte). In a Freedom House report released in 2018, Democracy Scores for most countries declined for the 12th consecutive year. \"The Christian Science Monitor\" reported that nationalist and populist political ideologies were gaining ground, at the expense of rule of law, in countries like Poland, Turkey and Hungary. For example, in Poland, the President appointed 27 new Supreme Court judges over objections from the European Union. In Turkey, thousands of judges were removed from their positions following a failed coup attempt during a government crackdown .\n\"Democratic backsliding\" in the 2010s were attributed to economic inequality and social discontent, personalism, poor management of COVID-19 pandemic, as well as other factors such as government manipulation of civil society, \"toxic polarization,\" foreign disinformation campaigns, racism and nativism, excessive executive power, and decreased power of the opposition. Within English-speaking Western democracies, \"protection-based\" attitudes combining cultural conservatism and leftist economic attitudes were the strongest predictor of support for authoritarian modes of governance.\nTheory.\nEarly theory.\nAristotle contrasted rule by the many (democracy/timocracy), with rule by the few (oligarchy/aristocracy), and with rule by a single person (tyranny or today autocracy/absolute monarchy). He also thought that there was a good and a bad variant of each system (he considered democracy to be the degenerate counterpart to timocracy).\nA common view among early and renaissance Republican theorists was that democracy could only survive in small political communities. Heeding the lessons of the Roman Republic's shift to monarchism as it grew larger or smaller, these Republican theorists held that the expansion of territory and population inevitably led to tyranny. Democracy was therefore highly fragile and rare historically, as it could only survive in small political units, which due to their size were vulnerable to conquest by larger political units. Montesquieu famously said, \"if a republic is small, it is destroyed by an outside force; if it is large, it is destroyed by an internal vice.\" Rousseau asserted, \"It is, therefore the natural property of small states to be governed as a republic, of middling ones to be subject to a monarch, and of large empires to be swayed by a despotic prince.\"\nContemporary theory.\nAmong modern political theorists, there are three contending conceptions of democracy: \"aggregative democracy\", \"deliberative democracy\", and \"radical democracy\".\nAggregative.\nThe theory of \"aggregative democracy\" claims that the aim of the democratic processes is to solicit citizens' preferences and aggregate them together to determine what social policies society should adopt. Therefore, proponents of this view hold that democratic participation should primarily focus on voting, where the policy with the most votes gets implemented.\nDifferent variants of aggregative democracy exist. Under \"minimalism\", democracy is a system of government in which citizens have given teams of political leaders the right to rule in periodic elections. According to this minimalist conception, citizens cannot and should not \"rule\" because, for example, on most issues, most of the time, they have no clear views or their views are not well-founded. Joseph Schumpeter articulated this view most famously in his book \"Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy\". Contemporary proponents of minimalism include William H. Riker, Adam Przeworski, Richard Posner.\nAccording to the theory of direct democracy, on the other hand, citizens should vote directly, not through their representatives, on legislative proposals. Proponents of direct democracy offer varied reasons to support this view. Political activity can be valuable in itself, it socialises and educates citizens, and popular participation can check powerful elites. Most importantly, citizens do not rule themselves unless they directly decide laws and policies.\nGovernments will tend to produce laws and policies that are close to the views of the median voter\u2014with half to their left and the other half to their right. This is not a desirable outcome as it represents the action of self-interested and somewhat unaccountable political elites competing for votes. Anthony Downs suggests that ideological political parties are necessary to act as a mediating broker between individual and governments. Downs laid out this view in his 1957 book \"An Economic Theory of Democracy\".\nRobert A. Dahl argues that the fundamental democratic principle is that, when it comes to binding collective decisions, each person in a political community is entitled to have his/her interests be given equal consideration (not necessarily that all people are equally satisfied by the collective decision). He uses the term polyarchy to refer to societies in which there exists a certain set of institutions and procedures which are perceived as leading to such democracy. First and foremost among these institutions is the regular occurrence of free and open elections which are used to select representatives who then manage all or most of the public policy of the society. However, these polyarchic procedures may not create a full democracy if, for example, poverty prevents political participation. Similarly, Ronald Dworkin argues that \"democracy is a substantive, not a merely procedural, ideal.\"\nDeliberative.\n\"Deliberative democracy\" is based on the notion that democracy is government by deliberation. Unlike aggregative democracy, deliberative democracy holds that, for a democratic decision to be legitimate, it must be preceded by authentic deliberation, not merely the aggregation of preferences that occurs in voting. \"Authentic deliberation\" is deliberation among decision-makers that is free from distortions of unequal political power, such as power a decision-maker obtained through economic wealth or the support of interest groups. If the decision-makers cannot reach consensus after authentically deliberating on a proposal, then they vote on the proposal using a form of majority rule. Citizens assemblies are considered by many scholars as practical examples of deliberative democracy, with a recent OECD report identifying citizens assemblies as an increasingly popular mechanism to involve citizens in governmental decision-making.\nRadical.\n\"Radical democracy\" is based on the idea that there are hierarchical and oppressive power relations that exist in society. Democracy's role is to make visible and challenge those relations by allowing for difference, dissent and antagonisms in decision-making processes.\nMeasurement of democracy.\nSeveral freedom indices are published by several organisations according to their own various definitions of the term and relying on different types of data:\nDieter Fuchs and Edeltraud Roller suggest that, in order to truly measure the quality of democracy, objective measurements need to be complemented by \"subjective measurements based on the perspective of citizens\". Similarly, Quinton Mayne and Brigitte Gei\u00dfel also defend that the quality of democracy does not depend exclusively on the performance of institutions, but also on the citizens' own dispositions and commitment.\nDifficulties in measuring democracy.\nBecause democracy is an overarching concept that includes the functioning of diverse institutions which are not easy to measure, strong limitations exist in quantifying and econometrically measuring the potential effects of democracy or its relationship with other phenomena\u2014whether inequality, poverty, education etc. Given the constraints in acquiring reliable data with within-country variation on aspects of democracy, academics have largely studied cross-country variations. Yet variations between democratic institutions are very large across countries which constrains meaningful comparisons using statistical approaches. Since democracy is typically measured aggregately as a macro variable using a single observation for each country and each year, studying democracy faces a range of econometric constraints and is limited to basic correlations. Cross-country comparison of a composite, comprehensive and qualitative concept like democracy may thus not always be, for many purposes, methodologically rigorous or useful.\nTypes of governmental democracies.\nDemocracy has taken a number of forms, both in theory and practice. Some varieties of democracy provide better representation and more freedom for their citizens than others. However, if any democracy is not structured to prohibit the government from excluding the people from the legislative process, or any branch of government from altering the separation of powers in its favour, then a branch of the system can accumulate too much power and destroy the democracy.\nThe following kinds of democracy are not exclusive of one another: many specify details of aspects that are independent of one another and can co-exist in a single system.\nBasic forms.\nSeveral variants of democracy exist, but there are two basic forms, both of which concern how the whole body of all eligible citizens executes its will. One form of democracy is direct democracy, in which all eligible citizens have active participation in the political decision making, for example voting on policy initiatives directly. In most modern democracies, the whole body of eligible citizens remain the sovereign power but political power is exercised indirectly through elected representatives; this is called a representative democracy.\nDirect.\nDirect democracy is a political system where the citizens participate in the decision-making personally, contrary to relying on intermediaries or representatives. The use of a lot system, a characteristic of Athenian democracy, is unique to direct democracies. In this system, important governmental and administrative tasks are performed by citizens picked from a lottery. A direct democracy gives the voting population the power to:\nWithin modern-day representative governments, certain electoral tools like referendums, citizens' initiatives and recall elections are referred to as forms of direct democracy. However, some advocates of direct democracy argue for local assemblies of face-to-face discussion. Direct democracy as a government system currently exists in the Swiss cantons of Appenzell Innerrhoden and Glarus, the Rebel Zapatista Autonomous Municipalities, communities affiliated with the CIPO-RFM, the Bolivian city councils of FEJUVE, and Kurdish cantons of Rojava.\nRepresentative.\nRepresentative democracy involves the election of government officials by the people being represented. If the head of state is also democratically elected then it is called a democratic republic. The most common mechanisms involve election of the candidate with a majority or a plurality of the votes. Most western countries have representative systems.\nRepresentatives may be elected or become diplomatic representatives by a particular district (or constituency), or represent the entire electorate through proportional systems, with some using a combination of the two. Some representative democracies also incorporate elements of direct democracy, such as referendums. A characteristic of representative democracy is that while the representatives are elected by the people to act in the people's interest, they retain the freedom to exercise their own judgement as how best to do so. Such reasons have driven criticism upon representative democracy, pointing out the contradictions of representation mechanisms with democracy\nParliamentary.\nParliamentary democracy is a representative democracy where government is appointed by or can be dismissed by, representatives as opposed to a \"presidential rule\" wherein the president is both head of state and the head of government and is elected by the voters. Under a parliamentary democracy, government is exercised by delegation to an executive ministry and subject to ongoing review, checks and balances by the legislative parliament elected by the people.\nParliamentary systems have the right to dismiss a Prime Minister at any point in time that they feel he or she is not doing their job to the expectations of the legislature. This is done through a Vote of No Confidence where the legislature decides whether or not to remove the Prime Minister from office by a majority support for his or her dismissal. In some countries, the Prime Minister can also call an election whenever he or she so chooses, and typically the Prime Minister will hold an election when he or she knows that they are in good favour with the public as to get re-elected. In other parliamentary democracies, extra elections are virtually never held, a minority government being preferred until the next ordinary elections. An important feature of the parliamentary democracy is the concept of the \"loyal opposition\". The essence of the concept is that the second largest political party (or coalition) opposes the governing party (or coalition), while still remaining loyal to the state and its democratic principles.\nPresidential.\nPresidential Democracy is a system where the public elects the president through free and fair elections. The president serves as both the head of state and head of government controlling most of the executive powers. The president serves for a specific term and cannot exceed that amount of time. Elections typically have a fixed date and aren't easily changed. The president has direct control over the cabinet, specifically appointing the cabinet members.\nThe president cannot be easily removed from office by the legislature, but he or she cannot remove members of the legislative branch any more easily. This provides some measure of separation of powers. In consequence, however, the president and the legislature may end up in the control of separate parties, allowing one to block the other and thereby interfere with the orderly operation of the state. This may be the reason why presidential democracy is not very common outside the Americas, Africa, and Central and Southeast Asia.\nA semi-presidential system is a system of democracy in which the government includes both a prime minister and a president. The particular powers held by the prime minister and president vary by country.\nHybrid or semi-direct.\nSome modern democracies that are predominantly representative in nature also heavily rely upon forms of political action that are directly democratic. These democracies, which combine elements of representative democracy and direct democracy, are termed \"hybrid democracies\", \"semi-direct democracies\" or \"participatory democracies\". Examples include Switzerland and some U.S. states, where frequent use is made of referendums and initiatives.\nThe Swiss confederation is a semi-direct democracy. At the federal level, citizens can propose changes to the constitution (federal popular initiative) or ask for a referendum to be held on any law voted by the parliament. Between January 1995 and June 2005, Swiss citizens voted 31 times, to answer 103 questions (during the same period, French citizens participated in only two referendums). Although in the past 120 years less than 250 initiatives have been put to referendum. The populace has been conservative, approving only about 10% of the initiatives put before them; in addition, they have often opted for a version of the initiative rewritten by government.\nExamples include the extensive use of referendums in the US state of California, which is a state that has more than 20 million voters.\nIn New England, Town meetings are often used, especially in rural areas, to manage local government. This creates a hybrid form of government, with a local direct democracy and a representative state government. For example, most Vermont towns hold annual town meetings in March in which town officers are elected, budgets for the town and schools are voted on, and citizens have the opportunity to speak and be heard on political matters.\nVariants.\nConstitutional monarchy.\nMany countries such as the United Kingdom, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Scandinavian countries, Thailand, Japan and Bhutan turned powerful monarchs into constitutional monarchs with limited or, often gradually, merely symbolic roles. For example, in the predecessor states to the United Kingdom, constitutional monarchy began to emerge and has continued uninterrupted since the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and passage of the Bill of Rights 1689.\nIn other countries, the monarchy was abolished along with the aristocratic system (as in France, China, Russia, Germany, Austria, Hungary, Italy, Greece and Egypt). An elected president, with or without significant powers, became the head of state in these countries.\nElite upper houses of legislatures, which often had lifetime or hereditary tenure, were common in many nations. Over time, these either had their powers limited (as with the British House of Lords) or else became elective and remained powerful (as with the Australian Senate).\nRepublic.\nThe term \"republic\" has many different meanings, but today often refers to a representative democracy with an elected head of state, such as a president, serving for a limited term, in contrast to states with a hereditary monarch as a head of state, even if these states also are representative democracies with an elected or appointed head of government such as a prime minister.\nThe Founding Fathers of the United States rarely praised and often criticised democracy, which in their time tended to specifically mean direct democracy, often without the protection of a constitution enshrining basic rights; James Madison argued, especially in \"The Federalist\" No. 10, that what distinguished a direct \"democracy\" from a \"republic\" was that the former became weaker as it got larger and suffered more violently from the effects of faction, whereas a republic could get stronger as it got larger and combats faction by its very structure.\nWhat was critical to American values, John Adams insisted, was that the government be \"bound by fixed laws, which the people have a voice in making, and a right to defend.\" As Benjamin Franklin was exiting after writing the U.S. constitution, Elizabeth Willing Powel asked him \"Well, Doctor, what have we got\u2014a republic or a monarchy?\". He replied \"A republic\u2014if you can keep it.\"\nLiberal democracy.\nA liberal democracy is a representative democracy in which the ability of the elected representatives to exercise decision-making power is subject to the rule of law, and moderated by a constitution or laws that emphasise the protection of the rights and freedoms of individuals, and which places constraints on the leaders and on the extent to which the will of the majority can be exercised against the rights of minorities (see civil liberties).\nIn a liberal democracy, it is possible for some large-scale decisions to emerge from the many individual decisions that citizens are free to make. In other words, citizens can \"vote with their feet\" or \"vote with their dollars\", resulting in significant informal government-by-the-masses that exercises many \"powers\" associated with formal government elsewhere.\nSocialist.\nSocialist thought has several different views on democracy. Social democracy, democratic socialism, and the dictatorship of the proletariat (usually exercised through Soviet democracy) are some examples. Many democratic socialists and social democrats believe in a form of participatory, industrial, economic and/or workplace democracy combined with a representative democracy.\nWithin Marxist orthodoxy there is a hostility to what is commonly called \"liberal democracy\", which is simply referred to as parliamentary democracy because of its often centralised nature. Because of orthodox Marxists' desire to eliminate the political elitism they see in capitalism, Marxists, Leninists and Trotskyists believe in direct democracy implemented through a system of communes (which are sometimes called soviets). This system ultimately manifests itself as council democracy and begins with workplace democracy.\nAnarchist.\nAnarchists are split in this domain, depending on whether they believe that a majority-rule is tyrannic or not. To many anarchists, the only form of democracy considered acceptable is direct democracy. Pierre-Joseph Proudhon argued that the only acceptable form of direct democracy is one in which it is recognised that majority decisions are not binding on the minority, even when unanimous. However, anarcho-communist Murray Bookchin criticised individualist anarchists for opposing democracy, and says \"majority rule\" is consistent with anarchism.\nSome anarcho-communists oppose the majoritarian nature of direct democracy, feeling that it can impede individual liberty and opt-in favour of a non-majoritarian form of consensus democracy, similar to Proudhon's position on direct democracy. Henry David Thoreau, who did not self-identify as an anarchist but argued for \"a better government\" and is cited as an inspiration by some anarchists, argued that people should not be in the position of ruling others or being ruled when there is no consent.\nSortition.\nSometimes called \"democracy without elections\", sortition chooses decision makers via a random process. The intention is that those chosen will be representative of the opinions and interests of the people at large, and be more fair and impartial than an elected official. The technique was in widespread use in Athenian Democracy and Renaissance Florence and is still used in modern jury selection.\nConsociational.\nA consociational democracy allows for simultaneous majority votes in two or more ethno-religious constituencies, and policies are enacted only if they gain majority support from both or all of them.\nConsensus democracy.\nA consensus democracy, in contrast, would not be dichotomous. Instead, decisions would be based on a multi-option approach, and policies would be enacted if they gained sufficient support, either in a purely verbal agreement or via a consensus vote\u2014a multi-option preference vote. If the threshold of support were at a sufficiently high level, minorities would be as it were protected automatically. Furthermore, any voting would be ethno-colour blind.\nSupranational.\nQualified majority voting is designed by the Treaty of Rome to be the principal method of reaching decisions in the European Council of Ministers. This system allocates votes to member states in part according to their population, but heavily weighted in favour of the smaller states. This might be seen as a form of representative democracy, but representatives to the Council might be appointed rather than directly elected.\nInclusive.\nInclusive democracy is a political theory and political project that aims for direct democracy in all fields of social life: political democracy in the form of face-to-face assemblies which are confederated, economic democracy in a stateless, moneyless and marketless economy, democracy in the social realm, i.e. self-management in places of work and education, and ecological democracy which aims to reintegrate society and nature. The theoretical project of inclusive democracy emerged from the work of political philosopher Takis Fotopoulos in \"Towards An Inclusive Democracy\" and was further developed in the journal \"Democracy &amp; Nature\" and its successor \"The International Journal of Inclusive Democracy\".\nThe basic unit of decision making in an inclusive democracy is the demotic assembly, i.e. the assembly of demos, the citizen body in a given geographical area which may encompass a town and the surrounding villages, or even neighbourhoods of large cities. An inclusive democracy today can only take the form of a confederal democracy that is based on a network of administrative councils whose members or delegates are elected from popular face-to-face democratic assemblies in the various demoi. Thus, their role is purely administrative and practical, not one of policy-making like that of representatives in representative democracy.\nThe citizen body is advised by experts but it is the citizen body which functions as the ultimate decision-taker. Authority can be delegated to a segment of the citizen body to carry out specific duties, for example, to serve as members of popular courts, or of regional and confederal councils. Such delegation is made, in principle, by lot, on a rotation basis, and is always recallable by the citizen body. Delegates to regional and confederal bodies should have specific mandates.\nParticipatory politics.\nA Parpolity or Participatory Polity is a theoretical form of democracy that is ruled by a Nested Council structure. The guiding philosophy is that people should have decision making power in proportion to how much they are affected by the decision. Local councils of 25\u201350 people are completely autonomous on issues that affect only them, and these councils send delegates to higher level councils who are again autonomous regarding issues that affect only the population affected by that council.\nA council court of randomly chosen citizens serves as a check on the tyranny of the majority, and rules on which body gets to vote on which issue. Delegates may vote differently from how their sending council might wish but are mandated to communicate the wishes of their sending council. Delegates are recallable at any time. Referendums are possible at any time via votes of most lower-level councils, however, not everything is a referendum as this is most likely a waste of time. A parpolity is meant to work in tandem with a participatory economy.\nCosmopolitan.\nCosmopolitan democracy, also known as \"Global democracy\" or \"World Federalism\", is a political system in which democracy is implemented on a global scale, either directly or through representatives. An important justification for this kind of system is that the decisions made in national or regional democracies often affect people outside the constituency who, by definition, cannot vote. By contrast, in a cosmopolitan democracy, the people who are affected by decisions also have a say in them.\nAccording to its supporters, any attempt to solve global problems is undemocratic without some form of cosmopolitan democracy. The general principle of cosmopolitan democracy is to expand some or all of the values and norms of democracy, including the rule of law; the non-violent resolution of conflicts; and equality among citizens, beyond the limits of the state. To be fully implemented, this would require reforming existing international organisations, e.g. the United Nations, as well as the creation of new institutions such as a World Parliament, which ideally would enhance public control over, and accountability in, international politics.\nCosmopolitan Democracy has been promoted, among others, by physicist Albert Einstein, writer Kurt Vonnegut, columnist George Monbiot, and professors David Held and Daniele Archibugi. The creation of the International Criminal Court in 2003 was seen as a major step forward by many supporters of this type of cosmopolitan democracy.\nCreative democracy.\nCreative Democracy is advocated by American philosopher John Dewey. The main idea about Creative Democracy is that democracy encourages individual capacity building and the interaction among the society. Dewey argues that democracy is a way of life in his work of \"Creative Democracy: The Task Before Us\" and an experience built on faith in human nature, faith in human beings, and faith in working with others. Democracy, in Dewey's view, is a moral ideal requiring actual effort and work by people; it is not an institutional concept that exists outside of ourselves. \"The task of democracy\", Dewey concludes, \"is forever that of creation of a freer and more humane experience in which all share and to which all contribute\".\nGuided democracy.\nGuided democracy is a form of democracy that incorporates regular popular elections, but which often carefully \"guides\" the choices offered to the electorate in a manner that may reduce the ability of the electorate to truly determine the type of government exercised over them. Such democracies typically have only one central authority which is often not subject to meaningful public review by any other governmental authority. Russian-style democracy has often been referred to as a \"Guided democracy.\" Russian politicians have referred to their government as having only one center of power/ authority, as opposed to most other forms of democracy which usually attempt to incorporate two or more naturally competing sources of authority within the same government.\nNon-governmental democracy.\nAside from the public sphere, similar democratic principles and mechanisms of voting and representation have been used to govern other kinds of groups. Many non-governmental organisations decide policy and leadership by voting. Most trade unions and cooperatives are governed by democratic elections. Corporations are controlled by shareholders on the principle of one share, one vote\u2014sometimes supplemented by workplace democracy. Amitai Etzioni has postulated a system that fuses elements of democracy with sharia law, termed \"islamocracy\".\nJustification.\nSeveral justifications for democracy have been postulated.\nLegitimacy.\nSocial contract theory argues that the legitimacy of government is based on consent of the governed, i.e. an election, and that political decisions must reflect the general will.\nBetter decision-making.\nCondorcet's jury theorem is logical proof that if each decision-maker has a better than chance probability of making the right decision, then having the largest number of decision-makers, i.e. a democracy, will result in the best decisions. This has also been argued by theories of the wisdom of the crowd.\nDemocratic peace.\nDemocratic peace theory claims that liberal democracies do not go to war against each other.\nEconomic success.\nIn \"Why Nations Fail\", Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson argue that democracies are more economically successful because undemocratic political systems tend to limit markets and favor monopolies at the expense of the creative destruction which is necessary for sustained economic growth.\nCriticism.\nArrow's theorem.\nArrow's impossibility theorem suggests that democracy is logically incoherent. This is based on a certain set of criteria for democratic decision-making being inherently conflicting, i.e. these three \"fairness\" criteria:\n \nIt is often expressed in a non-mathematical way with a statement such as \"no voting method is fair\", \"every ranked voting method is flawed\", or \"the only voting method that isn't flawed is a dictatorship\".\nHowever, Arrow's formal premises can be considered overly strict, and with their reasonable weakening, the logical incoherence of democracy looks much less critical.\nInefficiencies.\nSome economists have criticized the efficiency of democracy, citing the premise of the irrational voter, or a voter who makes decisions without all of the facts or necessary information in order to make a truly informed decision. Another argument is that democracy slows down processes because of the amount of input and participation needed in order to go forward with a decision. A common example often quoted to substantiate this point is the high economic development achieved by China (a non-democratic country) as compared to India (a democratic country). According to economists, the lack of democratic participation in countries like China allows for unfettered economic growth.\nOn the other hand, Socrates believed that democracy without educated masses (educated in the broader sense of being knowledgeable and responsible) would only lead to populism being the criteria to become an elected leader and not competence. This would ultimately lead to a demise of the nation. This was quoted by Plato in book 10 of The Republic, in Socrates' conversation with Adimantus. Socrates was of the opinion that the right to vote must not be an indiscriminate right (for example by birth or citizenship), but must be given only to people who thought sufficiently of their choice.\nPopular rule as a fa\u00e7ade.\nThe 20th-century Italian thinkers Vilfredo Pareto and Gaetano Mosca (independently) argued that democracy was illusory, and served only to mask the reality of elite rule. Indeed, they argued that elite oligarchy is the unbendable law of human nature, due largely to the apathy and division of the masses (as opposed to the drive, initiative and unity of the elites), and that democratic institutions would do no more than shift the exercise of power from oppression to manipulation. As Louis Brandeis once professed, \"We may have democracy, or we may have wealth concentrated in the hands of a few, but we can't have both.\". British writer Ivo Mosley, grandson of blackshirt Oswald Mosley describes in \"In the Name of the People: Pseudo-Democracy and the Spoiling of Our World\", how and why current forms of electoral governance are destined to fall short of their promise.\nA study led by Princeton professor Martin Gilens of 1,779 U.S. government decisions concluded that\n\"elites and organized groups representing business interests have substantial independent impacts on U.S. government policy, while average citizens and mass-based interest groups have little or no independent influence.\"\nMob rule.\nPlato's \"The Republic\" presents a critical view of democracy through the narration of Socrates: \"Democracy, which is a charming form of government, full of variety and disorder, and dispensing a sort of equality to equals and unequaled alike.\" In his work, Plato lists 5 forms of government from best to worst. Assuming that \"the Republic\" was intended to be a serious critique of the political thought in Athens, Plato argues that only Kallipolis, an aristocracy led by the unwilling philosopher-kings (the wisest men), is a just form of government.\nJames Madison critiqued direct democracy (which he referred to simply as \"democracy\") in Federalist No. 10, arguing that representative democracy\u2014which he described using the term \"republic\"\u2014is a preferable form of government, saying: \"...\u00a0democracies have ever been spectacles of turbulence and contention; have ever been found incompatible with personal security or the rights of property; and have in general been as short in their lives as they have been violent in their deaths.\" Madison offered that republics were superior to democracies because republics safeguarded against tyranny of the majority, stating in Federalist No. 10: \"the same advantage which a republic has over a democracy, in controlling the effects of faction, is enjoyed by a large over a small republic\".\nPolitical instability.\nMore recently, democracy is criticised for not offering enough political stability. As governments are frequently elected on and off there tends to be frequent changes in the policies of democratic countries both domestically and internationally. Even if a political party maintains power, vociferous, headline-grabbing protests and harsh criticism from the popular media are often enough to force sudden, unexpected political change. Frequent policy changes with regard to business and immigration are likely to deter investment and so hinder economic growth. For this reason, many people have put forward the idea that democracy is undesirable for a developing country in which economic growth and the reduction of poverty are top priorities.\nThis opportunist alliance not only has the handicap of having to cater to too many ideologically opposing factions, but it is usually short-lived since any perceived or actual imbalance in the treatment of coalition partners, or changes to leadership in the coalition partners themselves, can very easily result in the coalition partner withdrawing its support from the government.\nBiased media has been accused of causing political instability, resulting in the obstruction of democracy, rather than its promotion.\nFraudulent elections.\nIn representative democracies, it may not benefit incumbents to conduct fair elections. A study showed that incumbents who rig elections stay in office 2.5 times as long as those who permit fair elections. Democracies in countries with high per capita income have been found to be less prone to violence, but in countries with low incomes the tendency is the reverse. Election misconduct is more likely in countries with low per capita incomes, small populations, rich in natural resources, and a lack of institutional checks and balances. Sub-Saharan countries, as well as Afghanistan, all tend to fall into that category.\nGovernments that have frequent elections tend to have significantly more stable economic policies than those governments who have infrequent elections. However, this trend does not apply to governments where fraudulent elections are common.\nOpposition.\nDemocracy in modern times has almost always faced opposition from the previously existing government, and many times it has faced opposition from social elites. The implementation of a democratic government within a non-democratic state is typically brought about by democratic revolution.\nDevelopment.\nSeveral philosophers and researchers have outlined historical and social factors seen as supporting the evolution of democracy.\nOther commentators have mentioned the influence of economic development. In a related theory, Ronald Inglehart suggests that improved living-standards in modern developed countries can convince people that they can take their basic survival for granted, leading to increased emphasis on self-expression values, which correlates closely with democracy.\nDouglas M. Gibler and Andrew Owsiak in their study argued about the importance of peace and stable borders for the development of democracy. It has often been assumed that democracy causes peace, but this study shows that, historically, peace has almost always predated the establishment of democracy.\nCarroll Quigley concludes that the characteristics of weapons are the main predictor of democracy: Democracy\u2014this scenario\u2014tends to emerge only when the best weapons available are easy for individuals to obtain and use. By the 1800s, guns were the best personal weapons available, and in the United States of America (already nominally democratic), almost everyone could afford to buy a gun, and could learn how to use it fairly easily. Governments couldn't do any better: it became the age of mass armies of citizen soldiers with guns. Similarly, Periclean Greece was an age of the citizen soldier and democracy.\nOther theories stressed the relevance of education and of human capital\u2014and within them of cognitive ability to increasing tolerance, rationality, political literacy and participation. Two effects of education and cognitive ability are distinguished:\nEvidence consistent with conventional theories of why democracy emerges and is sustained has been hard to come by. Statistical analyses have challenged modernisation theory by demonstrating that there is no reliable evidence for the claim that democracy is more likely to emerge when countries become wealthier, more educated, or less unequal. In fact, empirical evidence shows that economic growth and education may not lead to increased demand for democratization as modernization theory suggests: historically, most countries attained high levels of access to primary education well before transitioning to democracy. Rather than acting as a catalyst for democratization, in some situations education provision may instead be used by non-democratic regimes to indoctrinate their subjects and strengthen their power.\nThe assumed link between education and economic growth is called into question when analyzing empirical evidence. Across different countries, the correlation between education attainment and math test scores is very weak (.07). A similarly weak relationship exists between per-pupil expenditures and math competency (.26). Additionally, historical evidence suggests that average human capital (measured using literacy rates) of the masses does not explain the onset of industrialization in France from 1750\u20131850 despite arguments to the contrary. Together, these findings show that education does not always promote human capital and economic growth as is generally argued to be the case. Instead, the evidence implies that education provision often falls short of its expressed goals, or, alternatively, that political actors use education to promote goals other than economic growth and development.\nNeither is there convincing evidence that increased reliance on oil revenues prevents democratisation, despite a vast theoretical literature on \"the Resource Curse\" that asserts that oil revenues sever the link between citizen taxation and government accountability, seen as the key to representative democracy. The lack of evidence for these conventional theories of democratisation have led researchers to search for the \"deep\" determinants of contemporary political institutions, be they geographical or demographic. More inclusive institutions lead to democracy because as people gain more power, they are able to demand more from the elites, who in turn have to concede more things to keep their position. This virtuous circle may end up in democracy.\nAn example of this is the disease environment. Places with different mortality rates had different populations and productivity levels around the world. For example, in Africa, the tsetse fly\u2014which afflicts humans and livestock\u2014reduced the ability of Africans to plow the land. This made Africa less settled. As a consequence, political power was less concentrated. This also affected the colonial institutions European countries established in Africa. Whether colonial settlers could live or not in a place made them develop different institutions which led to different economic and social paths. This also affected the distribution of power and the collective actions people could take. As a result, some African countries ended up having democracies and others autocracies.\nAn example of geographical determinants for democracy is having access to coastal areas and rivers. This natural endowment has a positive relation with economic development thanks to the benefits of trade. Trade brought economic development, which in turn, broadened power. Rulers wanting to increase revenues had to protect property-rights to create incentives for people to invest. As more people had more power, more concessions had to be made by the ruler and in many places this process lead to democracy. These determinants defined the structure of the society moving the balance of political power.\nIn the 21st century, democracy has become such a popular method of reaching decisions that its application beyond politics to other areas such as entertainment, food and fashion, consumerism, urban planning, education, art, literature, science and theology has been criticised as \"the reigning dogma of our time\". The argument suggests that applying a populist or market-driven approach to art and literature (for example), means that innovative creative work goes unpublished or unproduced. In education, the argument is that essential but more difficult studies are not undertaken. Science, as a truth-based discipline, is particularly corrupted by the idea that the correct conclusion can be arrived at by popular vote. However, more recently, theorists have also advanced the concept epistemic democracy to assert that democracy actually does a good job tracking the truth.\nRobert Michels asserts that although democracy can never be fully realised, democracy may be developed automatically in the act of striving for democracy:\nThe peasant in the fable, when on his deathbed, tells his sons that a treasure is buried in the field. After the old man's death the sons dig everywhere in order to discover the treasure. They do not find it. But their indefatigable labor improves the soil and secures for them a comparative well-being. The treasure in the fable may well symbolise democracy.\nDr. Harald Wydra, in his book \"Communism and The Emergence of Democracy\" (2007), maintains that the development of democracy should not be viewed as a purely procedural or as a static concept but rather as an ongoing \"process of meaning formation\". Drawing on Claude Lefort's idea of the empty place of power, that \"power emanates from the people [...] but is the power of nobody\", he remarks that democracy is reverence to a symbolic mythical authority\u2014as in reality, there is no such thing as the people or \"demos\". Democratic political figures are not supreme rulers but rather temporary guardians of an empty place. Any claim to substance such as the collective good, the public interest or the will of the nation is subject to the competitive struggle and times of for gaining the authority of office and government. The essence of the democratic system is an empty place, void of real people, which can only be temporarily filled and never be appropriated. The seat of power is there but remains open to constant change. As such, people's definitions of \"democracy\" or of \"democratic\" progress throughout history as a continual and potentially never-ending process of social construction."}
{"id": "7960", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7960", "title": "Deduction and induction", "text": "Deduction and induction may refer to:"}
{"id": "7961", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7961", "title": "Documentary Film", "text": ""}
{"id": "7962", "revid": "41469175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7962", "title": "Logical disjunction", "text": "In logic, disjunction is a logical connective typically notated formula_1 whose meaning either refines or corresponds to that of natural language expressions such as \"or\". In classical logic, it is given a truth functional semantics on which formula_2 is true unless both formula_3 and formula_4 are false. Because this semantics allows a disjunctive formula to be true when both of its disjuncts are true, it is an \"inclusive\" interpretation of disjunction, in contrast with exclusive disjunction. Classical proof theoretical treatments are often given in terms of rules such as disjunction introduction and disjunction elimination. Disjunction has also been given numerous non-classical treatments, motivated by problems including Aristotle's sea battle argument, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, as well the numerous mismatches between classical disjunction and its nearest equivalents in natural language.\nNotation.\nIn logic and related fields, disjunction is customarily notated with an infix operator formula_5. Alternative notations include formula_6, used mainly in electronics, as well as formula_7 and formula_8 in many programming languages. The English word \"or\" is sometimes used as well, often in capital letters. In Jan \u0141ukasiewicz's prefix notation for logic, the operator is A, short for Polish \"alternatywa\" (English: alternative).\nClassical disjunction.\nSemantics.\nClassical disjunction is a truth functional operation which returns the truth value \"true\" unless both of its arguments are \"false\". Its semantic entry is standardly given as follows:\nThis semantics is corresponds to the following truth table:\nDefined by other operators.\nIn systems where logical disjunction is not a primitive, it may be defined as\nThis can be checked by the following truth table:\nProperties.\nThe following properties apply to disjunction:\nApplications in computer science.\nOperators corresponding to logical disjunction exist in most programming languages.\nBitwise operation.\nDisjunction is often used for bitwise operations. Examples:\nThe codice_1 operator can be used to set bits in a bit field to 1, by codice_1-ing the field with a constant field with the relevant bits set to 1. For example, codice_3 will force the final bit to 1, while leaving other bits unchanged.\nLogical operation.\nMany languages distinguish between bitwise and logical disjunction by providing two distinct operators; in languages following C, bitwise disjunction is performed with the single pipe operator (codice_4), and logical disjunction with the double pipe (codice_5) operator.\nLogical disjunction is usually short-circuited; that is, if the first (left) operand evaluates to codice_6, then the second (right) operand is not evaluated. The logical disjunction operator thus usually constitutes a sequence point.\nIn a parallel (concurrent) language, it is possible to short-circuit both sides: they are evaluated in parallel, and if one terminates with value true, the other is interrupted. This operator is thus called the parallel or.\nAlthough the type of a logical disjunction expression is boolean in most languages (and thus can only have the value codice_6 or codice_8), in some languages (such as Python and JavaScript), the logical disjunction operator returns one of its operands: the first operand if it evaluates to a true value, and the second operand otherwise.\nConstructive disjunction.\nThe Curry\u2013Howard correspondence relates a constructivist form of disjunction to tagged union types.\nSet theory.\nThe membership of an element of a union set in set theory is defined in terms of a logical disjunction: formula_21 if and only if formula_22. Because of this, logical disjunction satisfies many of the same identities as set-theoretic union, such as associativity, commutativity, distributivity, and de Morgan's laws, identifying logical conjunction with set intersection, logical negation with set complement.\nNatural language.\nThe classical denotation for formula_5 does not precisely match the denotation of disjunctive statements in natural languages such as English. Notably, classical disjunction is inclusive while natural language disjunction is often understood exclusively.\nThis inference has sometimes been understood as an entailment, for instance by Alfred Tarski, who suggested that natural language disjunction is ambiguous between a classical and a nonclassical interpretation. More recent work in pragmatics has shown that this inference can be derived as a conversational implicature on the basis of a semantic denotation which behaves classically. However, disjunctive constructions including Hungarian \"vagy... vagy\" and French \"soit... soit\" have been argued to be inherently exclusive, rendering ungrammaticality in contexts where an inclusive reading would otherwise be forced.\nSimilar deviations from classical logic have been noted in cases such as free choice disjunction and simplification of disjunctive antecedents, where certain modal operators trigger a conjunction-like interpretation of disjunction. As with exclusivity, these inferences have been analyzed both as implicatures and as entailments arising from a nonclassical interpretation of disjunction.\nIn many languages, disjunctive expressions play a role in question formation. For instance, while the following English example can be interpreted as a polar question asking whether it's true that Mary is either a philosopher or a linguist, it can also be interpreted as an alternative question asking which of the two professions is hers. The role of disjunction in these cases has be analyzed using nonclassical logics such as alternative semantics and inquisitive semantics, which have also been adopted to explain the free choice and simplification inferences.\nIn English, as in many other languages, disjunction is expressed by a coordinating conjunction. Other languages express disjunctive meanings in a variety of ways, though it is unknown whether disjunction itself is a linguistic universal. In many languages such as Dyirbal and Maricopa, disjunction is marked using a verb suffix. For instance, in the Maricopa example below, disjunction is marked by the suffix \"\u0161aa\"."}
{"id": "7963", "revid": "998484945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7963", "title": "Disjunctive syllogism", "text": "In classical logic, disjunctive syllogism (historically known as modus tollendo ponens (MTP), Latin for \"mode that affirms by denying\") is a valid argument form which is a syllogism having a disjunctive statement for one of its premises.\nAn example in English:\nPropositional logic.\nIn propositional logic, disjunctive syllogism (also known as disjunction elimination and or elimination, or abbreviated \u2228E), is a valid rule of inference. If we are told that at least one of two statements is true; and also told that it is not the former that is true; we can infer that it has to be the latter that is true. If \"P\" is true or \"Q\" is true and \"P\" is false, then \"Q\" is true. The reason this is called \"disjunctive syllogism\" is that, first, it is a syllogism, a three-step argument, and second, it contains a logical disjunction, which simply means an \"or\" statement. \"P or Q\" is a disjunction; P and Q are called the statement's \"disjuncts\". The rule makes it possible to eliminate a disjunction from a logical proof. It is the rule that:\nwhere the rule is that whenever instances of \"formula_2\", and \"formula_3\" appear on lines of a proof, \"formula_4\" can be placed on a subsequent line.\nDisjunctive syllogism is closely related and similar to hypothetical syllogism, in that it is also a type of syllogism, and also the name of a rule of inference. It is also related to the law of noncontradiction, one of the .\nFormal notation.\nThe \"disjunctive syllogism\" rule may be written in sequent notation:\nwhere formula_6 is a metalogical symbol meaning that formula_4 is a syntactic consequence of formula_2, and formula_9 in some logical system;\nand expressed as a truth-functional tautology or theorem of propositional logic:\nwhere formula_11, and formula_4 are propositions expressed in some formal system.\nNatural language examples.\nHere is an example:\nHere is another example:\nInclusive and exclusive disjunction.\nPlease observe that the disjunctive syllogism works whether 'or' is considered 'exclusive' or 'inclusive' disjunction. See below for the definitions of these terms.\nThere are two kinds of logical disjunction:\nThe widely used English language concept of \"or\" is often ambiguous between these two meanings, but the difference is pivotal in evaluating disjunctive arguments.\nThis argument:\nis valid and indifferent between both meanings. However, only in the \"exclusive\" meaning is the following form valid:\nWith the \"inclusive\" meaning you could draw no conclusion from the first two premises of that argument. See affirming a disjunct.\nRelated argument forms.\nUnlike \"modus ponens\" and \"modus ponendo tollens\", with which it should not be confused, disjunctive syllogism is often not made an explicit rule or axiom of logical systems, as the above arguments can be proven with a (slightly devious) combination of reductio ad absurdum and disjunction elimination.\nOther forms of syllogism include:\nDisjunctive syllogism holds in classical propositional logic and intuitionistic logic, but not in some paraconsistent logics."}
{"id": "7964", "revid": "189033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7964", "title": "Definition", "text": "A definition is a statement of the meaning of a term (a word, phrase, or other set of symbols). Definitions can be classified into two large categories, intensional definitions (which try to give the sense of a term) and extensional definitions (which try to list the objects that a term describes). Another important category of definitions is the class of ostensive definitions, which convey the meaning of a term by pointing out examples. A term may have many different senses and multiple meanings, and thus require multiple definitions.\nIn mathematics, a definition is used to give a precise meaning to a new term, by describing a condition which unambiguously qualifies what a mathematical term is and is not. Definitions and axioms form the basis on which all of modern mathematics is to be constructed.\nBasic terminology.\nIn modern usage, a \"definition\" is something, typically expressed in words, that attaches a meaning to a word or group of words. The word or group of words that is to be defined is called the \"definiendum\", and the word, group of words, or action that defines it is called the \"definiens\". For example, in the definition \"An elephant is a large gray animal native to Asia and Africa\", the word \"elephant\" is the \"definiendum\", and everything after the word \"is\" is the \"definiens\".\nThe \"definiens\" is not \"the meaning\" of the word defined, but is instead something that \"conveys the same meaning\" as that word.\nThere are many sub-types of definitions, often specific to a given field of knowledge or study. These include, among many others, lexical definitions, or the common dictionary definitions of words already in a language; demonstrative definitions, which define something by pointing to an example of it (\"\"This,\" [said while pointing to a large grey animal], \"is an Asian elephant.\"\"); and precising definitions, which reduce the vagueness of a word, typically in some special sense (\"'Large', among female Asian elephants, is any individual weighing over 5,500 pounds.\").\nIntensional definitions vs extensional definitions.\nAn \"intensional definition\", also called a \"connotative\" definition, specifies the necessary and sufficient conditions for a thing to be a member of a specific set. Any definition that attempts to set out the essence of something, such as that by genus and differentia, is an intensional definition.\nAn \"extensional definition\", also called a \"denotative\" definition, of a concept or term specifies its \"extension\". It is a list naming every object that is a member of a specific set.\nThus, the \"seven deadly sins\" can be defined \"intensionally\" as those singled out by Pope Gregory I as particularly destructive of the life of grace and charity within a person, thus creating the threat of eternal damnation. An \"extensional\" definition, on the other hand, would be the list of wrath, greed, sloth, pride, lust, envy, and gluttony. In contrast, while an intensional definition of \"Prime Minister\" might be \"the most senior minister of a cabinet in the executive branch of parliamentary government\", an extensional definition is not possible since it is not known who the future prime ministers will be (even though all prime ministers from the past and present can be listed).\nClasses of intensional definitions.\nA genus\u2013differentia definition is a type of intensional definition that takes a large category (the genus) and narrows it down to a smaller category by a distinguishing characteristic (i.e. the differentia).\nMore formally, a genus\u2013differentia definition consists of:\nFor example, consider the following genus\u2013differentia definitions:\nThose definitions can be expressed as a genus (\"a plane figure\") and two differentiae (\"that has three straight bounding sides\" and \"that has four straight bounding sides\", respectively).\nIt is also possible to have two different genus\u2013differentia definitions that describe the same term, especially when the term describes the overlap of two large categories. For instance, both of these genus\u2013differentia definitions of \"square\" are equally acceptable:\nThus, a \"square\" is a member of both genera (the plural of \"genus\"): the genus \"rectangle\" and the genus \"rhombus\".\nClasses of extensional definitions.\nOne important form of the extensional definition is \"ostensive definition\". This gives the meaning of a term by pointing, in the case of an individual, to the thing itself, or in the case of a class, to examples of the right kind. For example, one can explain who \"Alice\" (an individual) is, by pointing her out to another; or what a \"rabbit\" (a class) is, by pointing at several and expecting another to understand. The process of ostensive definition itself was critically appraised by Ludwig Wittgenstein.\nAn \"enumerative definition\" of a concept or a term is an \"extensional definition\" that gives an explicit and exhaustive listing of all the objects that fall under the concept or term in question. Enumerative definitions are only possible for finite sets (and in fact only practical for relatively small sets).\n\"Divisio\" and \"partitio\".\n\"Divisio\" and \"partitio\" are classical terms for definitions. A \"partitio\" is simply an intensional definition. A \"divisio\" is not an extensional definition, but an exhaustive list of subsets of a set, in the sense that every member of the \"divided\" set is a member of one of the subsets. An extreme form of \"divisio\" lists all sets whose only member is a member of the \"divided\" set. The difference between this and an extensional definition is that extensional definitions list \"members\", and not \"subsets\".\nNominal definitions vs real definitions.\nIn classical thought, a definition was taken to be a statement of the essence of a thing. Aristotle had it that an object's essential attributes form its \"essential nature\", and that a definition of the object must include these essential attributes.\nThe idea that a definition should state the essence of a thing led to the distinction between \"nominal\" and \"real\" essence\u2014a distinction originating with Aristotle. In the Posterior Analytics, he says that the meaning of a made-up name can be known (he gives the example \"goat stag\") without knowing what he calls the \"essential nature\" of the thing that the name would denote (if there were such a thing). This led medieval logicians to distinguish between what they called the \"quid nominis\", or the \"whatness of the name\", and the underlying nature common to all the things it names, which they called the \"quid rei\", or the \"whatness of the thing\". The name \"hobbit\", for example, is perfectly meaningful. It has a \"quid nominis\", but one could not know the real nature of hobbits, and so the \"quid rei\" of hobbits cannot be known. By contrast, the name \"man\" denotes real things (men) that have a certain \"quid rei\". The meaning of a name is distinct from the nature that a thing must have in order that the name apply to it.\nThis leads to a corresponding distinction between \"nominal\" and \"real\" definitions. A nominal definition is the definition explaining what a word means (i.e., which says what the \"nominal essence\" is), and is definition in the classical sense as given above. A real definition, by contrast, is one expressing the real nature or \"quid rei\" of the thing.\nThis preoccupation with essence dissipated in much of modern philosophy. Analytic philosophy, in particular, is critical of attempts to elucidate the essence of a thing. Russell described essence as \"a hopelessly muddle-headed notion\".\nMore recently Kripke's formalisation of possible world semantics in modal logic led to a new approach to essentialism. Insofar as the essential properties of a thing are \"necessary\" to it, they are those things that it possesses in all possible worlds. Kripke refers to names used in this way as rigid designators.\nOperational vs. theoretical definitions.\nA definition may also be classified as an operational definition or theoretical definition.\nTerms with multiple definitions.\nHomonyms.\nA homonym is, in the strict sense, one of a group of words that share the same spelling and pronunciation but have different meanings. Thus homonyms are simultaneously homographs (words that share the same spelling, regardless of their pronunciation) \"and\" homophones (words that share the same pronunciation, regardless of their spelling). The state of being a homonym is called homonymy. Examples of homonyms are the pair \"stalk\" (part of a plant) and \"stalk\" (follow/harass a person) and the pair \"left\" (past tense of leave) and \"left\" (opposite of right). A distinction is sometimes made between \"true\" homonyms, which are unrelated in origin, such as \"skate\" (glide on ice) and \"skate\" (the fish), and polysemous homonyms, or polysemes, which have a shared origin, such as \"mouth\" (of a river) and \"mouth\" (of an animal).\nPolysemes.\nPolysemy is the capacity for a sign (such as a word, phrase, or symbol) to have multiple meanings (that is, multiple semes or sememes and thus multiple senses), usually related by contiguity of meaning within a semantic field. It is thus usually regarded as distinct from homonymy, in which the multiple meanings of a word may be unconnected or unrelated.\nIn logic and mathematics.\nIn mathematics, definitions are generally not used to describe existing terms, but to describe or characterize a concept. For naming the object of a definition mathematicians can use either a neologism (this was mainly the case in the past) or words or phrases of the common language (this is generally the case in modern mathematics). The precise meaning of a term given by a mathematical definition is often different than the English definition of the word used, which can lead to confusion, particularly when the meanings are close. For example a set is not exactly the same thing in mathematics and in common language. In some case, the word used can be misleading; for example, a real number has nothing more (or less) real than an imaginary number. Frequently, a definition uses a phrase built with common English words, which has no meaning outside mathematics, such as primitive group or irreducible variety.\nClassification.\nAuthors have used different terms to classify definitions used in formal languages like mathematics. Norman Swartz classifies a definition as \"stipulative\" if it is intended to guide a specific discussion. A stipulative definition might be considered a temporary, working definition, and can only be disproved by showing a logical contradiction. In contrast, a \"descriptive\" definition can be shown to be \"right\" or \"wrong\" with reference to general usage.\nSwartz defines a \"precising definition\" as one that extends the descriptive dictionary definition (lexical definition) for a specific purpose by including additional criteria. A precising definition narrows the set of things that meet the definition.\nC.L. Stevenson has identified \"persuasive definition\" as a form of stipulative definition which purports to state the \"true\" or \"commonly accepted\" meaning of a term, while in reality stipulating an altered use (perhaps as an argument for some specific belief). Stevenson has also noted that some definitions are \"legal\" or \"coercive\"\u00a0\u2013 their object is to create or alter rights, duties, or crimes.\nRecursive definitions.\nA recursive definition, sometimes also called an \"inductive\" definition, is one that defines a word in terms of itself, so to speak, albeit in a useful way. Normally this consists of three steps:\nFor instance, we could define a natural number as follows (after Peano): \nSo \"0\" will have exactly one successor, which for convenience can be called \"1\". In turn, \"1\" will have exactly one successor, which could be called \"2\", and so on. Notice that the second condition in the definition itself refers to natural numbers, and hence involves self-reference. Although this sort of definition involves a form of circularity, it is not vicious, and the definition has been quite successful.\nIn the same way, we can define ancestor as follows:\nOr simply: an ancestor is a parent or a parent of an ancestor.\nIn medicine.\nIn medical dictionaries, guidelines and other consensus statements and classifications, definitions should as far as possible be:\nProblems.\nCertain rules have traditionally been given for definitions (in particular, genus-differentia definitions).\nLimitations of definition.\nGiven that a natural language such as English contains, at any given time, a finite number of words, any comprehensive list of definitions must either be circular or rely upon primitive notions. If every term of every \"definiens\" must itself be defined, \"where at last should we stop?\" A dictionary, for instance, insofar as it is a comprehensive list of lexical definitions, must resort to circularity.\nMany philosophers have chosen instead to leave some terms undefined. The scholastic philosophers claimed that the highest genera (called the ten \"generalissima\") cannot be defined, since a higher genus cannot be assigned under which they may fall. Thus being, unity and similar concepts cannot be defined. Locke supposes in \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" that the names of simple concepts do not admit of any definition. More recently Bertrand Russell sought to develop a formal language based on logical atoms. Other philosophers, notably Wittgenstein, rejected the need for any undefined simples. Wittgenstein pointed out in his \"Philosophical Investigations\" that what counts as a \"simple\" in one circumstance might not do so in another. He rejected the very idea that every explanation of the meaning of a term needed itself to be explained: \"As though an explanation hung in the air unless supported by another one\", claiming instead that explanation of a term is only needed to avoid misunderstanding.\nLocke and Mill also argued that individuals cannot be defined. Names are learned by connecting an idea with a sound, so that speaker and hearer have the same idea when the same word is used. This is not possible when no one else is acquainted with the particular thing that has \"fallen under our notice\". Russell offered his theory of descriptions in part as a way of defining a proper name, the definition being given by a definite description that \"picks out\" exactly one individual. Saul Kripke pointed to difficulties with this approach, especially in relation to modality, in his book \"Naming and Necessity\".\nThere is a presumption in the classic example of a definition that the \"definiens\" can be stated. Wittgenstein argued that for some terms this is not the case. The examples he used include \"game\", \"number\" and \"family\". In such cases, he argued, there is no fixed boundary that can be used to provide a definition. Rather, the items are grouped together because of a family resemblance. For terms such as these it is not possible and indeed not necessary to state a definition; rather, one simply comes to understand the \"use\" of the term."}
{"id": "7965", "revid": "937705", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7965", "title": "Disruption", "text": "Disruption, disruptive, or disrupted may refer to:"}
{"id": "7966", "revid": "1024110246", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7966", "title": "Disco", "text": "Disco is a genre of dance music and a subculture that emerged in the 1970s from the United States' urban nightlife scene. Its sound is typified by four-on-the-floor beats, syncopated basslines, string sections, horns, electric piano, synthesizers, and electric rhythm guitars.\nWell-known disco artists include Donna Summer, Gloria Gaynor, Giorgio Moroder, Boney M., Earth Wind &amp; Fire, the Bee Gees, Chaka Khan, Chic, KC and the Sunshine Band, ABBA, Thelma Houston, Sister Sledge, The Trammps, the Village People, and Michael Jackson. While performers garnered public attention, record producers working behind the scenes played an important role in developing the genre. Films such as \"Saturday Night Fever\" (1977) and \"Thank God It's Friday\" (1978) contributed to disco's mainstream popularity.\nDisco started as a mixture of music from venues popular with African Americans, Hispanic and Latino Americans, Italian Americans, and gay men in Philadelphia and New York City during the late 1960s and early 1970s. Disco can be seen as a reaction by the 1960s counterculture to both the dominance of rock music and the stigmatization of dance music at the time. Several dance styles were developed during the period of disco's popularity in the United States, including \"the Bump\" and \"the Hustle\".\nBy the late 1970s, most major U.S. cities had thriving disco club scenes, and DJs would mix dance records at clubs such as Studio 54 in Manhattan, a venue popular among celebrities. Nightclub-goers often wore expensive, extravagant, and sexy fashions. There was also a thriving drug subculture in the disco scene, particularly for drugs that would enhance the experience of dancing to the loud music and the flashing lights, such as cocaine and Quaaludes, the latter being so common in disco subculture that they were nicknamed \"disco biscuits\". Disco clubs were also associated with promiscuity as a reflection of the sexual revolution of this era in popular history.\nDisco declined as a major trend in popular music in the United States following the infamous Disco Demolition Night, and it continued to decline in popularity in the U.S. during the early 1980s; however, it remained popular in Italy and certain European countries throughout the 1980s, and it was a key influence in the development of electronic dance music, house music, hip-hop, new wave, dance-punk, and post-disco. The style has had several newer scenes since the 1990s, and the influence of disco remains strong across American and European pop music. A current revival has been underway since the early 2010s, coming to great popularity in the early 2020s during the COVID-19 pandemic, due to disco's fun and escapist nature (alleviating the mental toll the pandemic has taken on people). Albums that have contributed to this revival include \"Confessions On A Dance Floor\", \"Random Access Memories\", \"The Slow Rush\", \"Cuz I Love You\", \"Future Nostalgia\", \"Hey U X\", \"What's Your Pleasure?\", \"It Is What It Is\", and Kylie Minogue's album itself titled \"Disco\".\nEtymology.\nThe term \"disco\" is shorthand for the word \"discoth\u00e8que\", a French word for \"library of phonograph records\" derived from \"biblioth\u00e8que\". The word \"discoth\u00e8que\" had the same meaning in English in the 1950s.\n\"Discoth\u00e8que\" became used in French for a type of nightclub in Paris, France, after these had resorted to playing records during the Nazi occupation in the early 1940s. Some clubs used it as their proper name. In 1960, it was also used to describe a Parisian nightclub in an English magazine.\nIn the summer of 1964, a short sleeveless dress called \"discotheque dress\" was briefly very popular in the United States. The earliest known use for the abbreviated form \"disco\" described this dress and has been found in \"The Salt Lake Tribune\" on July 12, 1964, but \"Playboy\" magazine used it in September of the same year to describe Los Angeles nightclubs.\nVince Aletti was one of the first to describe disco as a sound or a music genre. He wrote the feature article \"Discotheque Rock Paaaaarty\" that appeared in \"Rolling Stone\" magazine in September 1973.\nMusical characteristics.\nThe music typically layered soaring, often-reverberated vocals, often doubled by horns, over a background \"pad\" of electric pianos and \"chicken-scratch\" rhythm guitars played on an electric guitar. Lead guitar features less frequently in disco than in rock. \"The \"chicken scratch\" sound is achieved by lightly pressing the guitar strings against the fretboard and then quickly releasing them just enough to get a slightly muted poker [sound] while constantly strumming very close to the bridge.\" Other backing keyboard instruments include the piano, electric organ (during early years), string synthesizers, and electromechanical keyboards such as the Fender Rhodes electric piano, Wurlitzer electric piano, and Hohner Clavinet. Synthesizers are also fairly common in disco, especially in the late 1970s.\nThe rhythm is laid down by prominent, syncopated basslines (with heavy use of broken octaves, that is, octaves with the notes sounded one after the other) played on the bass guitar and by drummers using a drum kit, African/Latin percussion, and electronic drums such as Simmons and Roland drum modules. The sound was enriched with solo lines and harmony parts played by a variety of orchestral instruments, such as harp, violin, viola, cello, trumpet, saxophone, trombone, clarinet, flugelhorn, French horn, tuba, English horn, oboe, flute (sometimes especially the alto flute and occasionally bass flute), piccolo, timpani and synth strings, string section or a full string orchestra.\nMost disco songs have a steady four-on-the-floor beat, a quaver or semi-quaver hi-hat pattern with an open hi-hat on the off-beat, and a heavy, syncopated bass line. Other Latin rhythms such as the rhumba, the samba, and the cha-cha-cha are also found in disco recordings, and Latin polyrhythms, such as a rhumba beat layered over a merengue, are commonplace. The quaver pattern is often supported by other instruments such as the rhythm guitar and may be implied rather than explicitly present.\nSongs often use syncopation, which is the accenting of unexpected beats. In general, the difference between disco, or any dance song, and a rock or popular song is that in dance music the bass drum hits \"four to the floor\", at least once a beat (which in 4/4 time is 4 beats per measure). Disco is further characterized by a 16th note division of the quarter notes as shown in the second drum pattern below, after a typical rock drum pattern.\nThe orchestral sound is usually known as \"disco sound\" relies heavily on string sections and horns playing linear phrases, in unison with the soaring, often reverberated vocals or playing instrumental fills, while electric pianos and chicken-scratch guitars create the background \"pad\" sound defining the harmony progression. Typically, all of the doubling of parts and use of additional instruments creates a rich \"wall of sound\". There are, however, more minimalist flavors of disco with reduced, transparent instrumentation, pioneered by Chic.\nHarmonically, disco music typically contains major and minor seven chords, which are found more often in jazz than pop music.\nProduction.\nThe \"disco sound\" was much more costly to produce than many of the other popular music genres from the 1970s. Unlike the simpler, four-piece-band sound of funk, soul music of the late 1960s, or the small jazz organ trios, disco music often included a large band, with several chordal instruments (guitar, keyboards, synthesizer), several drum or percussion instruments (drumkit, Latin percussion, electronic drums), a horn section, a string orchestra, and a variety of \"classical\" solo instruments (for example, flute, piccolo, and so on).\nDisco songs were arranged and composed by experienced arrangers and orchestrators, and record producers added their creative touches to the overall sound using multitrack recording techniques and effects units. Recording complex arrangements with such a large number of instruments and sections required a team that included a conductor, copyists, record producers, and mixing engineers. Mixing engineers had an important role in the disco production process, because disco songs used as many as 64 tracks of vocals and instruments. Mixing engineers and record producers, under the direction of arrangers, compiled these tracks into a fluid composition of verses, bridges, and refrains, complete with builds and breaks. Mixing engineers and record producers helped to develop the \"disco sound\" by creating a distinctive-sounding, sophisticated disco mix.\nEarly records were the \"standard\" three-minute version until Tom Moulton came up with a way to make songs longer so that he could take a crowd of dancers at a club to another level and keep them dancing longer. He found that it was impossible to make the 45-RPM vinyl singles of the time longer, as they could usually hold no more than five\u00a0minutes of good-quality music. With the help of Jos\u00e9 Rodriguez, his remaster/mastering engineer, he pressed a single on a 10\" disc instead of 7\". They cut the next single on a 12\" disc, the same format as a standard album. Moulton and Rodriguez discovered that these larger records could have much longer songs and remixes. 12\" single records, also known as \"Maxi singles\", quickly became the standard format for all DJs of the disco genre.\nClub culture.\nNightclubs.\nBy the late 1970s most major US cities had thriving disco club scenes. The largest scenes were most notably in New York City but also in Philadelphia, San Francisco, Miami, and Washington, D.C. The scene was centered on discotheques, nightclubs, and private loft parties.\nIn the 1970s, notable discos included \"Crisco Disco\", \"The Sanctuary\", \"Leviticus\", \"Studio 54\" and \"Paradise Garage\" in New York, \"Artemis\" in Philadelphia, \"Studio One\" in Los Angeles, \"Dugan's Bistro\" in Chicago, and \"The Library\" in Atlanta.\nIn the late '70s, Studio 54 in Midtown Manhattan was arguably the best known nightclub in the world. This club played a major formative role in the growth of disco music and nightclub culture in general. It was operated by Steve Rubell and Ian Schrager and was notorious for the hedonism that went on within; the balconies were known for sexual encounters, and drug use was rampant. Its dance floor was decorated with an image of the \"Man in the Moon\" that included an animated cocaine spoon.\nThe \"Copacabana\", another New York nightclub dating to the 1940s, had a revival in the late 1970s when it embraced disco; it would become the setting of a Barry Manilow song of the same name.\nIn Washington, D.C., large disco clubs such as \"The Pier\" (\"Pier 9\") and \"The Other Side,\" originally regarded exclusively as \"gay bars,\" became particularly popular among the capital area's gay and straight college students in the late '70s.\nSound and light equipment.\nPowerful, bass-heavy, hi-fi sound systems were viewed as a key part of the disco club experience. \"[Loft-party host David] Mancuso introduced the technologies of tweeter arrays (clusters of small loudspeakers, which emit high-end frequencies, positioned above the floor) and bass reinforcements (additional sets of subwoofers positioned at ground level) at the start of the 1970s to boost the treble and bass at opportune moments, and by the end of the decade sound engineers such as Richard Long had multiplied the effects of these innovations in venues such as the Garage.\"\nTypical lighting designs for disco dance floors could include multi-coloured lights that swirl around or flash to the beat, strobe light, an illuminated dance floor and a mirror ball.\nDJs.\nDisco-era disc jockeys (DJs) would often remix existing songs using reel-to-reel tape machines, and add in percussion breaks, new sections, and new sounds. DJs would select songs and grooves according to what the dancers wanted, transitioning from one song to another with a DJ mixer and using a microphone to introduce songs and speak to the audiences. Other equipment was added to the basic DJ setup, providing unique sound manipulations, such as reverb, equalization, and echo effects unit. Using this equipment, a DJ could do effects such as cutting out all but the bassline of a song and then slowly mixing in the beginning of another song using the DJ mixer's crossfader. Notable U.S. disco DJs include Francis Grasso of The Sanctuary, David Mancuso of The Loft, Frankie Knuckles of the Chicago Warehouse, Larry Levan of the Paradise Garage, Nicky Siano, Walter Gibbons, Karen Mixon Cook, Jim Burgess, John \"Jellybean\" Benitez, Richie Kulala of Studio 54 and Rick Salsalini.\nSome DJs were also record producers who created and produced disco songs in the recording studio. Larry Levan, for example, was a prolific record producer as well as a DJ. Because record sales were often dependent on dance floor play by DJs in leading nightclubs, DJs were also influential for the development and popularization of certain types of disco music being produced for record labels.\nDance.\nIn the early years, dancers in discos danced in a \"hang loose\" or \"freestyle\" approach. At first, many dancers improvised their own dance styles and dance steps. Later in the disco era, popular dance styles were developed, including the \"Bump\", \"Penguin\", \"Boogaloo\", \"Watergate\" and \"Robot\". By October 1975 the Hustle reigned. It was highly stylized, sophisticated and overtly sexual. Variations included the Brooklyn Hustle, New York Hustle and Latin Hustle.\nDuring the disco era, many nightclubs would commonly host disco dance competitions or offer free dance lessons. Some cities had disco dance instructors or dance schools, which taught people how to do popular disco dances such as \"touch dancing\", \"the hustle\", and \"the cha cha\". The pioneer of disco dance instruction was Karen Lustgarten in San Francisco in 1973. Her book \"The Complete Guide to Disco Dancing\" (Warner Books 1978) was the first to name, break down and codify popular disco dances as dance forms and distinguish between disco freestyle, partner and line dances. The book topped the \"New York Times\" bestseller list for 13 weeks and was translated into Chinese, German and French.\nIn Chicago, the \"Step By Step\" disco dance TV show was launched with the sponsorship support of the Coca-Cola company. Produced in the same studio that Don Cornelius used for the nationally syndicated dance/music television show, \"Soul Train\", \"Step by Step\"'s audience grew and the show became a success. The dynamic dance duo of Robin and Reggie led the show. The pair spent the week teaching disco dancing to dancers in the disco clubs. The instructional show aired on Saturday mornings and had a strong following. The viewers of this would stay up all night on Fridays so they could be on the set the next morning, ready to return to the disco on Saturday night knowing with the latest personalized dance steps. The producers of the show, John Reid and Greg Roselli, routinely made appearances at disco functions with Robin and Reggie to scout out new dancing talent and promote upcoming events such as \"Disco Night at White Sox Park\".\nIn Sacramento, California, Disco King Paul Dale Roberts danced for the Guinness Book of World Records. Roberts danced for 205 hours which is the equivalent of 8 \u00bd days. Other dance marathons took place after Roberts held the world's record for disco dancing for a short period of time.\nSome notable professional dance troupes of the 1970s included Pan's People and Hot Gossip. For many dancers, a key source of inspiration for 1970s disco dancing was the film \"Saturday Night Fever\" (1977). This developed into the music and dance style of such films as \"Fame\" (1980), \"Disco Dancer\" (1982), \"Flashdance\" (1983), and \"The Last Days of Disco\" (1998). Interest in disco dancing also helped spawn dance competition TV shows such as \"Dance Fever\" (1979).\nFashion.\nDisco fashions were very trendy in the late 1970s. Discoth\u00e8que-goers often wore glamorous, expensive, and extravagant fashions for nights out at their local disco club. Some women would wear sheer, flowing dresses, such as Halston dresses or loose, flared pants. Other women wore tight, revealing, sexy clothes, such as backless halter tops, disco pants, \"hot pants\", or body-hugging spandex bodywear or \"catsuits\". Men would wear shiny polyester Qiana shirts with colorful patterns and pointy, extra wide collars, preferably open at the chest. Men often wore Pierre Cardin suits, three piece suits with a vest and double-knit polyester shirt jackets with matching trousers known as the leisure suit. Men's leisure suits were typically form-fitted in some parts of the body, such as the waist and bottom, but the lower part of the pants were flared in a bell bottom style, to permit freedom of movement.\nDuring the disco era, men engaged in elaborate grooming rituals and spent time choosing fashion clothing, both activities that would have been considered \"feminine\" according to the gender stereotypes of the era. Women dancers wore glitter makeup, sequins, or gold lam\u00e9 clothing that would shimmer under the lights. Bold colors were popular for both genders. Platform shoes and boots for both genders and high heels for women were popular footwear. Necklaces and medallions were a common fashion accessory. Less commonly, some disco dancers wore outlandish costumes, dressed in drag, covered their bodies with gold or silver paint, or wore very skimpy outfits leaving them nearly nude; these uncommon get-ups were more likely to be seen at invitation-only New York City loft parties and disco clubs.\nDrug subculture.\nIn addition to the dance and fashion aspects of the disco club scene, there was also a thriving club drug subculture, particularly for drugs that would enhance the experience of dancing to the loud, bass-heavy music and the flashing colored lights, such as cocaine (nicknamed \"blow\"), amyl nitrite (\"poppers\"), and the \"...\u00a0other quintessential 1970s club drug Quaalude, which suspended motor coordination and gave the sensation that one's arms and legs had turned to 'Jell-O.'\" Quaaludes were so popular at disco clubs that the drug was nicknamed \"disco biscuits\".\nPaul Gootenberg states that \"[t]he relationship of cocaine to 1970s disco culture cannot be stressed enough...\" During the 1970s, the use of cocaine by well-to-do celebrities led to its \"glamorization\" and to the widely held view that it was a \"soft drug\". LSD, marijuana, and \"speed\" (amphetamines) were also popular in disco clubs, and the use of these drugs \"...contributed to the hedonistic quality of the dance floor experience.\" Since disco dances were typically held in liquor licensed-nightclubs and dance clubs, alcoholic drinks were also consumed by dancers; some users intentionally combined alcohol with the consumption of other drugs, such as Quaaludes, for a stronger effect.\nEroticism and sexual liberation.\nAccording to Peter Braunstein, the \"massive quantities of drugs ingested in discoth\u00e8ques produced the next cultural phenomenon of the disco era: rampant promiscuity and public sex. While the dance floor was the central arena of seduction, actual sex usually took place in the nether regions of the disco: bathroom stalls, exit stairwells, and so on. In other cases the disco became a kind of 'main course' in a hedonist's menu for a night out.\" At The Saint nightclub, a high percentage of the gay male dancers and patrons would have sex in the club; they typically had unprotected sex, because in 1980, HIV-AIDS had not yet been identified. At The Saint, \"dancers would elope to an un[monitored] upstairs balcony to engage in sex.\" The promiscuity and public sex at discos was part of a broader trend towards exploring a freer sexual expression in the 1970s, an era that is also associated with \"swingers clubs, hot tubs, [and] key parties.\"\nIn his paper, \"In Defense of Disco\" (1979), Richard Dyer claims eroticism as one of the three main characteristics of disco. As opposed to rock music which has a very phallic centered eroticism focusing on the sexual pleasure of men over other persons, Dyer describes disco as featuring a non-phallic full body eroticism. Through a range of percussion instruments, a willingness to play with rhythm, and the endless repeating of phrases without cutting the listener off, disco achieved this full body eroticism by restoring eroticism to the whole body for both sexes. This allowed for the potential expression of sexualities not defined by the cock/penis, and the erotic pleasure of bodies that are not defined by a relationship to a penis. The sexual liberation expressed through the rhythm of disco is further represented in the club spaces that disco grew within.\nIn Peter Shapiro's \": Throbbing Words on Sound\", he discusses eroticism through the technology disco utilizes to create its audacious sound. The music, Shapiro states, is adjunct to \"the pleasure-is-politics ethos of post-Stonewall culture.\" He explains how \"mechano-eroticism,\" which links the technology used to create the unique mechanical sound of disco to eroticism, sets the genre in a new dimension of reality living outside of naturalism and heterosexuality.\nHe uses Donna Summer's singles \"Love to Love You Baby\" (1975) and \"I Feel Love\" (1977) as examples of the ever present relationship between the synthesized bass lines and backgrounds to the simulated sounds of orgasms Summers echoes in the tracks, and likens them to the drug-fervent, sexually liberated fans of disco who sought to free themselves through disco's \"aesthetic of machine sex.\" Shapiro sees this as an influence that creates sub-genres like hi-NRG and dub-disco, which allowed for eroticism and technology to be further explored through intense synth bass lines and alternative rhythmic techniques that tap into the entire body rather than the obvious erotic parts of the body.\nThe New York nightclub The Sanctuary under resident DJ Francis Grasso is a prime example of this sexual liberty. In their history of the disc jockey and club culture, Bill Brewster and Frank Broughton describe the Sanctuary as \"poured full of newly liberated gay men, then shaken (and stirred) by a weighty concoction of dance music and pharmacoia of pills and potions, the result is a festivaly of carnality.\" The Sanctuary was the \"first totally uninhibited gay discotheque in America\" and while sex was not allowed on the dancefloor, the dark corners, the bathrooms and the hallways of the adjacent buildings were all utilized for orgy like sexual engagements.\nBy describing the music, drugs and liberated mentality as a trifecta coming together to create the festival of carnality, Brewster and Broughton are inciting all three as stimuli for the dancing, sex and other embodied movements that contributed to the corporeal vibrations within the Sanctuary. This supports the argument that the disco music took a role in facilitating this sexual liberation that was experienced in the discotheques. Further, this coupled with the recent legalization of abortions, the introduction of antibiotics and the pill all facilitated a culture shift around sex from one of procreation to pleasure and enjoyment fostering a very sex positive framework around discotheques. Given that at this time all instances of oral and anal gay sex were considered deviant and illegal acts in New York state, this sexual freedom can be considered quite liberatory and resistant to dominant oppressive structures.\nFurther, in addition to gay sex being illegal in New York state, until 1973 the American Psychiatric Association classified homosexuality as an illness. This law and classification coupled together can be understood to have heavily dissuaded the expression of queerness in public, as such the liberatory dynamics of discotheques can be seen as having provided space for self-realization for queer persons. David Mancuso's club/house party, The Loft, was described as having a \"pansexual attitude [that] was revolutionary in a country where up until recently it had been illegal for two men to dance together unless there was a woman present; where women were legally obliged to wear at least one recognizable item of female clothing in public; and where men visiting gay bars usually carried bail money with them.\"\nHistory.\n1940s\u20131960s: First discotheques.\nDisco was mostly developed from music that was popular on the dance floor in clubs that started playing records instead of having a live band. The first discotheques mostly played swing music. Later on uptempo rhythm and blues became popular in American clubs and northern soul and glam rock records in the UK. In the early 1940s, nightclubs in Paris resorted to playing jazz records during the Nazi occupation.\nR\u00e9gine Zylberberg claimed to have started the first discotheque and to have been the first club DJ in 1953 in the \"Whisky \u00e0 Go-Go\" in Paris. She installed a dance floor with coloured lights and two turntables so she could play records without having a gap in the music. In October 1959, the owner of the Scotch Club in Aachen, West Germany chose to install a record player for the opening night instead of hiring a live band. The patrons were unimpressed until a young reporter, who happened to be covering the opening of the club, impulsively took control of the record player and introduced the records that he chose to play. Klaus Quirini later claimed to thus have been the world's first nightclub DJ.\n1960s\u20131974: Precursors and early disco music.\nDuring the 1960s, discotheque dancing became a European trend that was enthusiastically picked up by the American press. At this time, when the discotheque culture from Europe became popular in the United States, several music genres with danceable rhythms rose to popularity and evolved into different sub-genres: rhythm and blues (originated in the 1940s), soul (late 1950s and 1960s), funk (mid-1960s) and go-go (mid-1960s and 1970s; more than \"disco\", the word \"go-go\" originally indicated a music club). Those genres, mainly African-American ones, would influence much of early disco music.\nAlso during the 1960s, the Motown record label developed a popular and influential own sound, described as having \"1) simply structured songs with sophisticated melodies and chord changes, 2) a relentless four-beat drum pattern, 3) a gospel use of background voices, vaguely derived from the style of the Impressions, 4) a regular and sophisticated use of both horns and strings, 5) lead singers who were half way between pop and gospel music, 6) a group of accompanying musicians who were among the most dextrous, knowledgeable, and brilliant in all of popular music (Motown bassists have long been the envy of white rock bassists) and 7) a trebly style of mixing that relied heavily on electronic limiting and equalizing (boosting the high range frequencies) to give the overall product a distinctive sound, particularly effective for broadcast over AM radio.\" Motown had many hits with early disco elements by acts like the Supremes (for instance \"You Keep Me Hangin' On\" in 1966), Stevie Wonder (for instance \"Superstition\" in 1972), The Jackson 5 and Eddie Kendricks (\"Keep on Truckin'\" in 1973).\nAt the end of the 1960s, musicians and audiences from the Black, Italian and Latino communities adopted several traits from the hippie and psychedelia subcultures. They included using music venues with a loud, overwhelming sound, free-form dancing, trippy lighting, colorful costumes, and the use of hallucinogenic drugs. In addition, the perceived positivity, lack of irony, and earnestness of the hippies informed proto-disco music like MFSB's album \"Love Is the Message\".\nPartly through the success of Jimi Hendrix, psychedelic elements that were popular in rock music of the late 1960s found their way into soul and early funk music and formed the subgenre psychedelic soul. Examples can be found in the music of the Chambers Brothers, George Clinton with his Parliament-Funkadelic collective, Sly and the Family Stone and the productions of Norman Whitfield with The Temptations.\nThe long instrumental introductions and detailed orchestration found in psychedelic soul tracks by the Temptations are also considered as cinematic soul. In the early 1970s, Curtis Mayfield and Isaac Hayes scored hits with cinematic soul songs that were actually composed for movie soundtracks: \"Superfly\" (1972) and \"Theme from Shaft\" (1971). The latter is sometimes regarded as an early disco song. Psychedelic soul-influenced proto-disco acts such as Willie Hutch and Philadelphia soul. From the mid-1960s to early 1970s, Philly soul and New York soul developed as sub-genres that also had lavish percussion, lush string orchestra arrangements, and expensive record production processes. In the early 1970s, the Philly soul productions by Gamble and Huff evolved from the simpler arrangements of the late-1960s into a style featuring lush strings, thumping basslines, and sliding hi-hat rhythms. These elements would become typical for disco music and are found in several of the hits they produced in the early 1970s:\nOther early disco tracks that helped shape disco and became popular on the dance floors of (underground) discotheque clubs and parties include: \nEarly disco was dominated by record producers and labels such as Salsoul Records (Ken, Stanley, and Joseph Cayre), West End Records (Mel Cheren), Casablanca (Neil Bogart), and Prelude (Marvin Schlachter), to name a few. The genre was also shaped by Tom Moulton, who wanted to extend the enjoyment of dance songs \u2014 thus creating the extended mix or \"remix\", going from a three-minute 45 rpm single to the much longer 12\" record. Other influential DJs and remixers who helped to establish what became known as the \"disco sound\" included David Mancuso, Nicky Siano, Shep Pettibone, Larry Levan, Walter Gibbons, and Chicago-based Frankie Knuckles. Frankie Knuckles was not only an important disco DJ; he also helped to develop house music in the 1980s.\nDisco hit the television airwaves as part of the music/dance variety show \"Soul Train\" in 1971 hosted by Don Cornelius, then Marty Angelo's \"Disco Step-by-Step Television Show\" in 1975, Steve Marcus' \"Disco Magic/Disco 77\", Eddie Rivera's \"Soap Factory\", and Merv Griffin's \"Dance Fever\", hosted by Deney Terrio, who is credited with teaching actor John Travolta to dance for his role in the film \"Saturday Night Fever\", as well as DANCE, based out of Columbia, South Carolina.\nIn 1974, New York City's WPIX-FM premiered the first disco radio show.\nEarly disco culture in the United States.\nIn the 1970s, the key counterculture of the 1960s, the hippie movement, was fading away. The economic prosperity of the previous decade had declined, and unemployment, inflation and crime rates had soared. Political issues like the backlash from the Civil Rights Movement culminating in the form of race riots, the Vietnam War, the assassinations of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr and John F. Kennedy, and the Watergate scandal, left many feeling disillusioned and hopeless. The start of the '70s was marked by a shift in the consciousness of the American people: the rise of the feminist movement, identity politics, gangs, etc. very much shaped this era. Disco music and disco dancing provided an escape from negative social and economic issues. The non-partnered dance style of disco music allowed people of all races and sexual orientations to enjoy the dancefloor atmosphere.\nIn \"Beautiful Things in Popular Culture\", Simon Frith highlights the sociability of disco and its roots in 1960s counterculture. \"The driving force of the New York underground dance scene in which disco was forged was not simply that city's complex ethnic and sexual culture but also a 1960s notion of community, pleasure and generosity that can only be described as hippie\", he says. \"The best disco music contained within it a remarkably powerful sense of collective euphoria.\"\nThe birth of disco is often claimed to be found in the private dance parties held by New York City DJ David Mancuso's home that became known as The Loft, an invitation-only non-commercial underground club that inspired many others. He organized the first major party in his Manhattan home on Valentine's Day 1970 with the name \"Love Saves The Day\". After some months the parties became weekly events and Mancuso continued to give regular parties into the 1990s. Mancuso required that the music played had to be soulful, rhythmic, and impart words of hope, redemption, or pride.\nWhen Mancuso threw his first informal house parties, the gay community (which made up much of The Loft's attendee roster) was often harassed in the gay bars and dance clubs, with many gay men carrying bail money with them to gay bars. But at The Loft and many other early, private discotheques, they could dance together without fear of police action thanks to Mancuso's underground, yet legal, policies. Vince Aletti described it \"like going to party, completely mixed, racially and sexually, where there wasn't any sense of someone being more important than anyone else,\" and Alex Rosner reiterated this saying \"It was probably about sixty percent black and seventy percent gay...There was a mix of sexual orientation, there was a mix of races, mix of economic groups. A real mix, where the common denominator was music.\"\nFilm critic Roger Ebert called the popular embrace of disco's exuberant dance moves an escape from \"the general depression and drabness of the political and musical atmosphere of the late seventies.\" Pauline Kael, writing about the disco-themed film \"Saturday Night Fever\", said the film and disco itself touched on \"something deeply romantic, the need to move, to dance, and the need to be who you'd like to be. Nirvana is the dance; when the music stops, you return to being ordinary.\"\nEarly disco culture in the United Kingdom.\nIn the late 1960s, uptempo soul with heavy beats and some associated dance styles and fashion were picked up in the British mod scene and formed the northern soul movement. Originating at venues such as the Twisted Wheel in Manchester, it quickly spread to other UK dancehalls and nightclubs like the Chateau Impney (Droitwich), Catacombs (Wolverhampton), the Highland Rooms at Blackpool Mecca, Golden Torch (Stoke-on-Trent) and Wigan Casino. As the favoured beat became more uptempo and frantic in the early 1970s, northern soul dancing became more athletic, somewhat resembling the later dance styles of disco and break dancing. Featuring spins, flips, karate kicks and backdrops, club dancing styles were often inspired by the stage performances of touring American soul acts such as Little Anthony &amp; the Imperials and Jackie Wilson.\nIn 1974, there were an estimated 25,000 mobile discos and 40,000 professional disc jockeys in the United Kingdom. Mobile discos were hired deejays that brought their own equipment to provide music for special events. Glam rock tracks were popular, with for example Gary Glitter's 1972 single \"Rock and Roll Part 2\" becoming popular on UK dance floors while it did not get any radio airplay.\n1974\u20131977: Rise to mainstream.\nFrom 1974 to 1977, disco music increased in popularity as many disco songs topped the charts. The Hues Corporation's \"Rock the Boat\" (1974), a US number-one single and million-seller, was one of the early disco songs to reach number one. The same year saw the release of \"Kung Fu Fighting\", performed by Carl Douglas and produced by Biddu, which reached number one in both the UK and US, and became the best-selling single of the year and one of the best-selling singles of all time with 11\u00a0million records sold worldwide, helping to popularize disco to a great extent. Another notable disco success that year was George McCrae's \"Rock Your Baby\": it became the United Kingdom's first number one chart disco single.\nIn the northwestern sections of the United Kingdom, the northern soul explosion, which started in the late 1960s and peaked in 1974, made the region receptive to disco, which the region's disc jockeys were bringing back from New York City. The shift by some DJs to the newer sounds coming from the U.S.A. resulted in a split in the scene, whereby some abandoned the 1960s soul and pushed a modern soul sound which tended to be more closely aligned with disco than soul.\nIn 1975, Gloria Gaynor released her first side-long vinyl album, which included a remake of the Jackson 5's \"Never Can Say Goodbye\" (which, in fact, is also the album title) and two other songs, \"Honey Bee\" and her disco version of \"Reach Out (I'll Be There)\", first topped the Billboard disco/dance charts in November 1974. Later in 1978, Gaynor's number-one disco song was \"I Will Survive\", which was seen as a symbol of female strength and a gay anthem, like her further disco hit, a 1983 remake of \"I Am What I Am\"; in 1979 she released \"Let Me Know (I Have a Right)\", a single which gained popularity in the civil rights movements. Also in 1975, Vincent Montana Jr.'s Salsoul Orchestra contributed with their Latin-flavored orchestral dance song \"Salsoul Hustle\", reaching number four on the Billboard Dance Chart and their 1976 hits \"Tangerine\" and \"Nice 'n' Naasty\", the first being a cover of a 1941 song.\nSongs such as Van McCoy's 1975 \"The Hustle\" and the humorous Joe Tex 1977 \"Ain't Gonna Bump No More (With No Big Fat Woman)\" gave names to the popular disco dances \"the Bump\" and \"the Hustle\". Other notable early successful disco songs include Barry White's \"You're the First, the Last, My Everything\" (1974), Labelle's \"Lady Marmalade\" (1974), Disco-Tex and the Sex-O-Lettes' \"Get Dancin'\" (1974), Silver Convention's \"Fly, Robin, Fly\" (1975) and \"Get Up and Boogie\" (1976) and Johnny Taylor's \"Disco Lady\" (1976).\nFormed by Harry Wayne Casey (a.k.a. \"KC\") and Richard Finch, Miami's KC and the Sunshine Band had a string of disco-definitive top-five singles between 1975 and 1977, including \"Get Down Tonight\", \"That's the Way (I Like It)\", \"(Shake, Shake, Shake) Shake Your Booty\", \"I'm Your Boogie Man\" and \"Keep It Comin' Love\". In this period, rock bands like the English Electric Light Orchestra featured in their songs a violin sound that became a staple of disco music, as in the 1975 hit \"Evil Woman\", although the genre was correctly described as orchestral rock.\nOther disco producers such as Tom Moulton took ideas and techniques from dub music (which came with the increased Jamaican migration to New York City in the 1970s) to provide alternatives to the \"four on the floor\" style that dominated. DJ Larry Levan utilized styles from dub and jazz and remixing techniques to create early versions of house music that sparked the genre.\nMotown turning disco.\nNorman Whitfield was an influential producer and songwriter at Motown records, renowned for creating innovative \"psychedelic soul\" songs with many hits for Marvin Gaye, the Velvelettes, the Temptations and Gladys Knight &amp; The Pips. From around the production of the Temptations' album \"Cloud Nine\" in 1968, he incorporated some psychedelic influences and started to produce longer, dance-friendly tracks, with more room for elaborate rhythmic instrumental parts. An example of such a long psychedelic soul track is \"Papa Was a Rollin' Stone\", which appeared as a single edit of almost seven minutes and an approximately 12-minute-long 12\" version in 1972. By the early 70s, many of Whitfield's productions evolved more and more towards funk and disco, as heard on albums by the Undisputed Truth and the 1973 album \"\" by The Jackson 5. The Undisputed Truth, a Motown recording act assembled by Whitfield to experiment with his psychedelic soul production techniques, found success with their 1971 song \"Smiling Faces Sometimes\". Their disco single \"You + Me = Love\" (number 43) was produced by Whitfield and made number 2 on the US Dance Charts in 1976. \nIn 1975, Whitfield left Motown and founded his own label Whitfield records, on which also \"You + Me = Love\" was released. Whitfield produced some more disco hits, including \"Car Wash\" (1976) by Rose Royce from the to the 1976 film \"Car Wash\". In 1977, singer, songwriter and producer Willie Hutch, who had been signed to Motown since 1970, now signed with Whitfield's new label, and scored a successful disco single with his song \"In and Out\" in 1982.\nOther Motown artists turned to disco as well. Diana Ross embraced the disco sound with her successful 1976 outing \"Love Hangover\" from her self-titled album. Her 1980 dance classics \"Upside Down\" and \"I'm Coming Out\" were written and produced by Nile Rodgers and Bernard Edwards of the group Chic. The Supremes, the group that made Ross famous, scored a handful of hits in the disco clubs without her, most notably 1976's \"I'm Gonna Let My Heart Do the Walking\" and, their last charted single before disbanding, 1977's \"You're My Driving Wheel\".\nAt the request of Motown that he produce songs in the disco genre, Marvin Gaye released \"Got to Give It Up\" in 1978, despite his dislike of disco. He vowed not to record any songs in the genre, and actually wrote the song as a parody. However, several of Gaye's songs have disco elements, including \"I Want You\" (1975). Stevie Wonder released the disco single \"Sir Duke\" in 1977 as a tribute to Duke Ellington, the influential jazz legend who had died in 1974. Smokey Robinson left the Motown group the Miracles for a solo career in 1972 and released his third solo album \"A Quiet Storm\" in 1975, which spawned and lent its name to the \"Quiet Storm\" musical programming format and subgenre of R&amp;B. It contained the disco single \"Baby That's Backatcha\". Other Motown artists who scored disco hits include: Robinson's former group, the Miracles, with \"Love Machine\" (1975), Eddie Kendricks with \"Keep On Truckin'\" (1973), the Originals with \"Down to Love Town\" (1976) and Thelma Houston with her cover of the Harold Melvin and the Blue Notes song \"Don't Leave Me This Way\" (1976). The label continued to release successful disco songs into the 1980s with Rick James' \"Super Freak\" (1981), and the Commodores' \"Lady (You Bring Me Up)\" (1981).\nSeveral of Motown's solo artists who left the label went on to have successful disco songs. Mary Wells, Motown's first female superstar with her signature song \"My Guy\" (written by Smokey Robinson), abruptly left the label in 1964. She briefly reappeared on the charts with the disco song \"Gigolo\" in 1980. Jimmy Ruffin, the elder brother of the Temptations lead singer David Ruffin, was also signed to Motown, and released his most successful and well-known song \"What Becomes of the Brokenhearted\" as a single in 1966. Ruffin eventually left the record label in the mid-1970s, but saw success with the 1980 disco song \"Hold On (To My Love)\", which was written and produced by Robin Gibb of the Bee Gees, for his album \"Sunrise\". Edwin Starr, known for his Motown protest song \"War\" (1970), reentered the charts in 1979 with a pair of disco songs, \"Contact\" and \"H.A.P.P.Y. Radio\". Kiki Dee became the first white British singer to sign with Motown in the US, and released one album, \"Great Expectations\" (1970), and two singles \"The Day Will Come Between Sunday and Monday\" (1970) and \"Love Makes the World Go Round\" (1971), the latter giving her first-ever chart entry (number 87 on the US Chart). She soon left the company and signed with Elton John's The Rocket Record Company, and in 1976 had her biggest and best-known single, \"Don't Go Breaking My Heart\", a disco duet with John. The song was intended as an affectionate disco-style pastiche of the Motown sound, in particular the various duets recorded by Marvin Gaye with Tammi Terrell and Kim Weston. \nMany Motown groups who had left the record label charted with disco songs. The Jackson 5, one of Motown's premier acts in the early 1970s, left the record company in 1975 (Jermaine Jackson, however, remained with the label) after successful songs like \"I Want You Back\" (1969) and \"ABC\" (1970), and even the disco song \"Dancing Machine\" (1974). Renamed as 'the Jacksons' (as Motown owned the name 'the Jackson 5'), they went on to find success with disco songs like \"Blame It on the Boogie\" (1978), \"Shake Your Body (Down to the Ground)\" (1979) and \"Can You Feel It?\" (1981) on the Epic label. The Jacksons' former lead singer, Michael Jackson, who had also released many successful solo singles under the Motown label, like \"Got To Be There\" (1971), \"Ben\" (1972) and a cover of Bobby Day's \"Rockin' Robin\" (1972), went on to score hits in the disco genre with \"Rock with You\" (1979), \"Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough\" (1979) and \"Billie Jean\" (1983) for Epic Records.\nThe Isley Brothers, whose short tenure at the company had produced the song \"This Old Heart of Mine (Is Weak for You)\" in 1966, went on release successful disco songs like \"That Lady\" (1973) and \"It's a Disco Night (Rock Don't Stop)\" (1979). Gladys Knight and the Pips, who recorded the most successful version of \"I Heard It Through the Grapevine\" (1967) before Marvin Gaye, scored commercially successful singles such as \"Baby, Don't Change Your Mind\" (1977) and \"Bourgie, Bourgie\" (1980) in the disco era. The Detroit Spinners were also signed to the Motown label and saw success with the Stevie Wonder-produced song \"It's a Shame\" in 1970. They left soon after, on the advice of fellow Detroit native Aretha Franklin, to Atlantic Records, and there had disco songs like \"The Rubberband Man\" (1976). In 1979, they released a successful cover of Elton John's \"Are You Ready for Love\", as well as a medley of the Four Seasons' song \"Working My Way Back to You\" and Michael Zager's \"Forgive Me, Girl\". The Four Seasons themselves were briefly signed to Motown's MoWest label, a short-lived subsidiary for R&amp;B and soul artists based on the West Coast, and there the group produced one album, \"Chameleon\" (1972) \u2013 to little commercial success in the US. However, one single, \"The Night\", was released in Britain in 1975, and thanks to popularity from the Northern Soul circuit, reached number seven on the UK Singles Chart. The Four Seasons left Motown in 1974 and went on to have a disco hit with their song \"December, 1963 (Oh, What a Night)\" (1975) for Warner Curb Records.\nEurodisco.\nBy far the most successful Euro disco act was ABBA (1972\u20131982). This Swedish quartet, which sang primarily in English, found success with singles such as \"Waterloo\" (1974), \"Fernando\" (1976), \"Take a Chance on Me\" (1978), \"Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)\" (1979), and their signature smash hit \"Dancing Queen\" (1976)\u2014ranks as the Fourth best-selling act of all time.\nIn 1970s Munich, West Germany, music producers Giorgio Moroder and Pete Bellotte made a decisive contribution to disco music with a string of hits for Donna Summer, which became known as the \"Munich Sound\". In 1975, Summer suggested the lyric \"Love to Love You Baby\" to Moroder and Bellotte, who turned the lyric into a full disco song. The final product, which contained a series of simulated orgasms, initially was not intended for release, but when Moroder played it in the clubs it caused a sensation and he released it. The song became an international hit, reaching the charts in many European countries and the US (No. 2). It has been described as the arrival of the expression of raw female sexual desire in pop music. A 17-minute 12-inch single was released. The 12\" single became and remains a standard in discos today. In 1976 Donna Summer's version of \"Could It Be Magic\" brought disco further into the mainstream. In 1977 Summer, Moroder and Bellotte further released \"I Feel Love\", as the B-side of \"Can't We Just Sit Down (And Talk It Over)\", which revolutionized dance music with its mostly electronic production and was a massive worldwide success, spawning the Hi-NRG subgenre. Giorgio Moroder was described by AllMusic as \"one of the principal architects of the disco sound\". Another successful disco music project by Moroder at that time was Munich Machine (1976\u20131980).\nBoney M. (1974\u20131986) was a West German disco group of four West Indian singers and dancers masterminded by record producer Frank Farian. Boney M. charted worldwide with such songs as \"Daddy Cool\" (1976) \"Ma Baker\" (1977) and \"Rivers Of Babylon\" (1978). Another successful West German disco recording act was Silver Convention (1974\u20131979). The German group Kraftwerk also had an influence on Euro disco. \nIn France, Dalida released \"J'attendrai\" (\"I Will Wait\") in 1975, which also became successful in Canada, Europe and Japan. Dalida successfully adjusted herself to disco era and released at least a dozen of songs that charted among top number 10 in whole Europe and wider. Claude Fran\u00e7ois, who re-invented himself as the king of French disco, released \"La plus belle chose du monde\", a French version of the Bee Gees song \"Massachusetts\", which became successful in Canada and Europe and \"Alexandrie Alexandra\" was posthumously released on the day of his burial and became a worldwide success. Cerrone's early songs, \"Love in C Minor\" (1976), \"Supernature\" (1977) and \"Give Me Love\" (1978) were successful in the US and Europe. Another Euro disco act was the French diva Amanda Lear, where Euro disco sound is most heard in \"Enigma (Give a Bit of Mmh to Me)\" (1978). French producer Alec Costandinos assembled the disco group Love and Kisses (1977\u20131982). \nIn Italy Raffaella Carr\u00e0 is the most successful disco act, alongside La Bionda, Hermanas Goggi and Oliver Onions. Her greatest international single was \"Tanti Auguri\" (\"Best Wishes\"), which has become a popular song with gay audiences. The song is also known under its Spanish title \"Para hacer bien el amor hay que venir al sur\" (which refers to Southern Europe, since the song was recorded and taped in Spain). The Estonian version of the song \"J\u00e4tke v\u00f5tmed v\u00e4ljapoole\" was performed by Anne Veski. \"A far l'amore comincia tu\" (\"To make love, your move first\") was another success for her internationally, known in Spanish as \"En el amor todo es empezar\", in German as \"Liebelei\", in French as \"Puisque tu l'aimes dis le lui\", and in English as \"Do It, Do It Again\". It was her only entry to the UK Singles Chart, reaching number 9, where she remains a one-hit wonder. In 1977, she recorded another successful single, \"Fiesta\" (\"The Party\" in English) originally in Spanish, but then recorded it in French and Italian after the song hit the charts. \"A far l'amore comincia tu\" has also been covered in Turkish by a Turkish popstar Ajda Pekkan as \"Sak\u0131n Ha\" in 1977.\nRecently, Carr\u00e0 has gained new attention for her appearance as the female dancing soloist in a 1974 TV performance of the experimental gibberish song \"Prisencolinensinainciusol\" (1973) by Adriano Celentano. A remixed video featuring her dancing went viral on the internet in 2008. In 2008 a video of a performance of her only successful UK single, \"Do It, Do It Again\", was featured in the \"Doctor Who\" episode \"Midnight\". Rafaella Carr\u00e0 worked with Bob Sinclar on the new single \"Far l'Amore\" which was released on YouTube on March 17, 2011. The song charted in different European countries.Another prominent European disco act was the pop group Luv' from the Netherlands. \nEuro disco continued evolving within the broad mainstream pop music scene, even when disco's popularity sharply declined in the United States, abandoned by major U.S. record labels and producers. Through the influence of Italo disco, it also played a role in the evolution of early house music in the early 1980s and later forms of electronic dance music, including early 1990s' Eurodance.\n1977\u20131979: Pop preeminence.\nIn December 1977, the film \"Saturday Night Fever\" was released. It was a huge success and its soundtrack became one of the best-selling albums of all time. The idea for the film was sparked by a 1976 \"New York\" magazine article titled \"Tribal Rites of the New Saturday Night\" which supposedly chronicled the disco culture in mid-1970s New York City, but was later revealed to have been fabricated. Some critics said the film \"mainstreamed\" disco, making it more acceptable to heterosexual white males.\nThe Bee Gees used Barry Gibb's falsetto to garner hits such as \"You Should Be Dancing\", \"Stayin' Alive\", \"Night Fever\", \"More Than A Woman\" and \"Love You Inside Out\". Andy Gibb, a younger brother to the Bee Gees, followed with similarly styled solo singles such as \"I Just Want to Be Your Everything\", \"(Love Is) Thicker Than Water\" and \"Shadow Dancing\".\nIn 1978, Donna Summer's multi-million selling vinyl single disco version of \"MacArthur Park\" was number one on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart for three weeks and was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance. The recording, which was included as part of the \"MacArthur Park Suite\" on her double live album \"Live and More\", was eight minutes and 40 seconds long on the album. The shorter seven-inch vinyl single version of MacArthur Park was Summer's first single to reach number one on the Hot 100; it does not include the balladic second movement of the song, however. A 2013 remix of \"MacArthur Park\" by Summer topped the Billboard Dance Charts marking five consecutive decades with a number-one song on the charts. From mid-1978 to late 1979, Summer continued to release singles such as \"Last Dance\", \"Heaven Knows\" (with Brooklyn Dreams), \"Hot Stuff\", \"Bad Girls\", \"Dim All the Lights\" and \"On the Radio\", all very successful songs, landing in the top five or better, on the Billboard pop charts.\nThe band Chic was formed mainly by guitarist Nile Rodgers\u2014a self-described \"street hippie\" from late 1960s New York\u2014and bassist Bernard Edwards. Their popular 1978 single, \"Le Freak\", is regarded as an iconic song of the genre. Other successful songs by Chic include the often-sampled \"Good Times\" (1979) and \"Everybody Dance\" (1979). The group regarded themselves as the disco movement's rock band that made good on the hippie movement's ideals of peace, love, and freedom. Every song they wrote was written with an eye toward giving it \"deep hidden meaning\" or D.H.M.\nSylvester, a flamboyant and openly gay singer famous for his soaring falsetto voice, scored his biggest disco hit in late 1978 with \"You Make Me Feel (Mighty Real)\". His singing style was said to have influenced the singer Prince. At that time, disco was one of the forms of music most open to gay performers.\nThe Village People were a singing/dancing group created by Jacques Morali and Henri Belolo to target disco's gay audience. They were known for their onstage costumes of typically male-associated jobs and ethnic minorities and achieved mainstream success with their 1978 hit song \"Macho Man\". Other songs include \"Y.M.C.A.\" (1979) and \"In the Navy\" (1979).\nThe Jacksons (formerly the Jackson 5) released many disco songs from 1977 to 1981, including \"Blame It on the Boogie\" (1978), \"Shake Your Body (Down to the Ground)\" (1979), \"Lovely One\" (1980) and \"Can You Feel It\" (1981): all of them were sung by Michael Jackson, whose 1979 solo album, \"Off the Wall\", also included several disco hits, such as the album's title song, \"Rock with You\", \"Workin' Day and Night\" and his second chart-topping solo disco hit, \"Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough\".\nAlso noteworthy are The Trammps' \"Disco Inferno\" (1978, reissue due to the popularity gained from the \"Saturday Night Fever\" soundtrack), Cheryl Lynn's \"Got to Be Real\" (1978), Evelyn \"Champagne\" King's \"Shame\" (1978), Alicia Bridges' \"I Love the Nightlife\" (1978), Patrick Hernandez' \"Born to Be Alive\" (1978), Sister Sledge's \"We Are Family\" (1979), Anita Ward's \"Ring My Bell\" (1979), Lipps Inc.'s \"Funkytown\" (1979), George Benson's \"Give Me the Night\" (1980) and Walter Murphy's various attempts to bring classical music to the mainstream, most notably his disco song \"A Fifth of Beethoven\" (1976), which was inspired by Beethoven's fifth symphony.\nAt the height of its popularity, many non-disco artists recorded songs with disco elements, such as Rod Stewart with his \"Da Ya Think I'm Sexy?\" in 1979. Even mainstream rock artists adopted elements of disco. Progressive rock group Pink Floyd used disco-like drums and guitar in their song \"Another Brick in the Wall, Part 2\" (1979), which became their only number-one single in both the US and UK. The Eagles referenced disco with \"One of These Nights\" (1975) and \"Disco Strangler\" (1979), Paul McCartney &amp; Wings with \"Silly Love Songs\" (1976) and \"Goodnight Tonight\" (1979), Queen with \"Another One Bites the Dust\" (1980), the Rolling Stones with \"Miss You\" (1978) and \"Emotional Rescue\" (1980), Stephen Stills with his album \"Thoroughfare Gap\" (1978), Electric Light Orchestra with \"Shine a Little Love\" and \"Last Train to London\" (both 1979), Chicago with \"Street Player\" (1979), the Kinks with \"(Wish I Could Fly Like) Superman\" (1979), the Grateful Dead with \"Shakedown Street\", The Who with \"Eminence Front\" (1982), and the J. Geils Band with \"Come Back\" (1980). Even hard rock group KISS jumped in with \"I Was Made For Lovin' You\" (1979), and Ringo Starr's album \"Ringo the 4th\" (1978) features a strong disco influence.\nThe disco sound was also adopted by artists from other genres, including the 1979 U.S. number one hit \"No More Tears (Enough Is Enough)\" by easy listening singer Barbra Streisand in a duet with Donna Summer. In country music, artists like Connie Smith covered Andy Gibb's \"I Just Want to Be Your Everything\" in 1977, Bill Anderson recorded \"Double S\" in 1978, and Ronnie Milsap released \"Get It Up\" and covered blues singer Tommy Tucker's song \"Hi-Heel Sneakers\" in 1979.\nPre-existing non-disco songs, standards, and TV themes were frequently \"disco-ized\" in the 1970s, such as the \"I Love Lucy\" theme (recorded as \"Disco Lucy\" by the Wilton Place Street Band), \"Aquarela do Brasil\" (recorded as \"Brazil\" by The Ritchie Family), and \"Baby Face\" (recorded by the Wing and a Prayer Fife and Drum Corps). The rich orchestral accompaniment that became identified with the disco era conjured up the memories of the big band era\u2014which brought out several artists that recorded and disco-ized some big band arrangements, including Perry Como, who re-recorded his 1945 song \"Temptation\", in 1975, as well as Ethel Merman, who released an album of disco songs entitled \"The Ethel Merman Disco Album\" in 1979.\nMyron Floren, second-in-command on \"The Lawrence Welk Show\", released a recording of the \"Clarinet Polka\" entitled \"Disco Accordion.\" Similarly, Bobby Vinton adapted \"The Pennsylvania Polka\" into a song named \"Disco Polka\". Easy listening icon Percy Faith, in one of his last recordings, released an album entitled \"Disco Party\" (1975) and recorded a disco version of his \"Theme from \"A Summer Place\"\" in 1976. Classical music was even adapted for disco, notably Walter Murphy's \"A Fifth of Beethoven\" (1976, based on the first movement of Beethoven's 5th Symphony) and \"Flight 76\" (1976, based on Rimsky-Korsakov's \"Flight of the Bumblebee\"), and Louis Clark's \"Hooked On Classics\" series of albums and singles.\nMany original television theme songs of the era also showed a strong disco influence, such as \"S.W.A.T.\" (1975), \"Wonder Woman\" (1975), \"Charlie's Angels\" (1976), \"NBC Saturday Night At The Movies\" (1976), \"The Love Boat\" (1977), \"The Donahue Show\" (1977), \"CHiPs\" (1977), \"The Professionals\" (1977), \"Dallas\" (1978), NBC Sports broadcasts (1978), \"Kojak\" (1977), and \"The Hollywood Squares\" (1979).\nDisco jingles also made their way into many TV commercials, including Purina's 1979 \"Good Mews\" cat food commercial and an \"IC Light\" commercial by Pittsburgh's Iron City Brewing Company.\nParodies.\nSeveral parodies of the disco style were created. Rick Dees, at the time a radio DJ in Memphis, Tennessee, recorded \"Disco Duck\" (1976) and \"Dis-Gorilla\" (1977); Frank Zappa parodied the lifestyles of disco dancers in \"Disco Boy\" on his 1976 \"Zoot Allures\" album and in \"Dancin' Fool\" on his 1979 \"Sheik Yerbouti\" album; \"Weird Al\" Yankovic's eponymous 1983 debut album includes a disco song called \"Gotta Boogie\", an extended pun on the similarity of the disco move to the American slang word \"booger\". Comedian Bill Cosby devoted his entire 1977 album \"Disco Bill\" to disco parodies. In 1980, \"Mad Magazine\" released a flexi-disc titled \"Mad Disco\" featuring six full-length parodies of the genre. Rock and roll songs critical of disco included Bob Seger's \"Old Time Rock and Roll\" and, especially, The Who's \"Sister Disco\" (both 1978)\u2014although The Who's \"Eminence Front\" (four years later) had a disco feel.\n1979\u20131981: Controversy and decline in popularity.\nBy the end of the 1970s, anti-disco sentiment developed among rock music fans and musicians, particularly in the United States. Disco was criticized as mindless, consumerist, overproduced and escapist. The slogans \"Disco sucks\" and \"Death to disco\" became common. Rock artists such as Rod Stewart and David Bowie who added disco elements to their music were accused of selling out.\nThe punk subculture in the United States and United Kingdom was often hostile to disco, although in the UK, many early Sex Pistols fans such as the Bromley Contingent and Jordan liked disco, often congregating at nightclubs such as Louise's in Soho and the Sombrero in Kensington. The track \"Love Hangover\" by Diana Ross, the house anthem at the former, was cited as a particular favourite by many early UK punks. \nThe film \"The Great Rock 'n' Roll Swindle\" and its soundtrack album contained a disco medley of Sex Pistols songs, entitled \"Black Arabs\" and credited to a group of the same name. Jello Biafra of the Dead Kennedys, in the song \"Saturday Night Holocaust\", likened disco to the cabaret culture of Weimar-era Germany for its apathy towards government policies and its escapism. Mark Mothersbaugh of Devo said that disco was \"like a beautiful woman with a great body and no brains\", and a product of political apathy of that era. New Jersey rock critic Jim Testa wrote \"Put a Bullet Through the Jukebox\", a vitriolic screed attacking disco that was considered a punk call to arms. Steve Hillage, shortly prior to his transformation from a progressive rock musician into an electronic artist at the end of the 1970s with the inspiration of disco, disappointed his rockist fans by admitting his love for disco, with Hillage recalling \"it's like I'd killed their pet cat.\"\nAnti-disco sentiment was expressed in some television shows and films. A recurring theme on the show \"WKRP in Cincinnati\" was a hostile attitude towards disco music. In one scene of the 1980 comedy film \"Airplane!\", a wayward airplane slices a radio tower with its wing, knocking out an all-disco radio station. July 12, 1979, became known as \"the day disco died\" because of the Disco Demolition Night, an anti-disco demonstration in a baseball double-header at Comiskey Park in Chicago. Rock station DJs Steve Dahl and Garry Meier, along with Michael Veeck, son of Chicago White Sox owner Bill Veeck, staged the promotional event for disgruntled rock fans between the games of a White Sox doubleheader which involved exploding disco records in centerfield. As the second game was about to begin, the raucous crowd stormed onto the field and proceeded by setting fires, tearing out seats and pieces of turf, and other damage. The Chicago Police Department made numerous arrests, and the extensive damage to the field forced the White Sox to forfeit the second game to the Detroit Tigers, who had won the first game.\nDisco's decline in popularity after Disco Demolition Night was rapid. On July 21, 1979, the top six records on the U.S. music charts were disco songs. By September 22, there were no disco songs in the US Top 10 chart, with the exception of Herb Alpert's instrumental \"Rise,\" a smooth jazz composition with some disco overtones. Some in the media, in celebratory tones, declared disco \"dead\" and rock revived. Karen Mixon Cook, the first female disco DJ, stated that people still pause every July 12 for a moment of silence in honor of disco. Dahl stated in a 2004 interview that disco was \"probably on its way out [at the time]. But I think it [Disco Demolition Night] hastened its demise\".\nImpact on music industry.\nThe anti-disco movement, combined with other societal and radio industry factors, changed the face of pop radio in the years following Disco Demolition Night. Starting in the 1980s, country music began a slow rise in American main pop charts. Emblematic of country music's rise to mainstream popularity was the commercially successful 1980 movie \"Urban Cowboy\". The continued popularity of power pop and the revival of oldies in the late 1970s was also related to disco's decline; the 1978 film \"Grease\" was emblematic of this trend. Coincidentally, the star of both films was John Travolta, who in 1977 had starred in \"Saturday Night Fever\", which remains one of the most iconic disco films of the era.\nDuring this period of decline in disco's popularity, several record companies folded, were reorganized, or were sold. In 1979, MCA Records purchased ABC Records, absorbed some of its artists, and then shut the label down. Midsong International Records ceased operations in 1980. RSO Records founder Robert Stigwood left the label in 1981 and TK Records closed in the same year. Salsoul Records continues to exist in the 2000s, but primarily is used as a reissue brand. Casablanca Records had been releasing fewer records in the 1980s, and was shut down in 1986 by parent company PolyGram.\nMany groups that were popular during the disco period subsequently struggled to maintain their success\u2014even those that tried to adapt to evolving musical tastes. The Bee Gees, for instance, had only one top-10 entry (1989's \"One\") and three more top-40 songs (despite recording and releasing far more than that and completely abandoning disco in their 1980s and 1990s songs) in the United States after the 1970s, even though numerous songs they wrote and had \"other\" artists perform were successful. Of the handful of groups \"not\" taken down by disco's fall from favor, Kool and the Gang, Donna Summer, the Jacksons\u2014and Michael Jackson in particular\u2014stand out: In spite of having helped \"define\" the disco sound early on, they continued to make popular and danceable, if more refined, songs for yet another generation of music fans in the 1980s and beyond. Earth, Wind &amp; Fire also survived the anti-disco trend and continued to produce successful singles at roughly the same pace for several more years, in addition to an even longer string of R&amp;B chart hits that lasted into the 1990s.\nSix months prior to the chaotic event (in December 1978), popular progressive rock radio station WDAI (WLS-FM) had suddenly switched to an all-disco format, disenfranchising thousands of Chicago rock fans and leaving Dahl unemployed. WDAI, who survived the change of public sentiment and still had good ratings at this point, continued to play disco until it flipped to a short-lived hybrid Top 40/rock format in May 1980. Another disco outlet that also competed against WDAI at the time, WGCI-FM, would later incorporate R&amp;B and pop songs into the format, eventually evolving into an urban contemporary outlet that it continues with today. The latter also helped bring the Chicago house genre to the airwaves.\nFactors contributing to disco's decline.\nFactors that have been cited as leading to the decline of disco in the United States include economic and political changes at the end of the 1970s, as well as burnout from the hedonistic lifestyles led by participants. In the years since Disco Demolition Night, some social critics have described the \"Disco sucks\" movement as implicitly macho and bigoted, and an attack on non-white and non-heterosexual cultures. It was also interpreted being part of a wider cultural \"backlash\", the move towards conservatism, that also made its way into US politics with the election of conservative president Ronald Reagan in 1980, which also led to Republican control of the United States Senate for the first time since 1954, plus the subsequent rise of the Religious Right around the same time.\nIn January 1979, rock critic Robert Christgau argued that homophobia, and most likely racism, were reasons behind the movement, a conclusion seconded by John Rockwell. Craig Werner wrote: \"The Anti-disco movement represented an unholy alliance of funkateers and feminists, progressives and puritans, rockers and reactionaries. Nonetheless, the attacks on disco gave respectable voice to the ugliest kinds of unacknowledged racism, sexism and homophobia.\" Legs McNeil, founder of the fanzine \"Punk\", was quoted in an interview as saying, \"the hippies always wanted to be black. We were going, 'fuck the blues, fuck the black experience'.\" He also said that disco was the result of an \"unholy\" union between homosexuals and blacks.\nSteve Dahl, who had spearheaded Disco Demolition Night, denied any racist or homophobic undertones to the promotion, saying, \"It's really easy to look at it historically, from this perspective, and attach all those things to it. But we weren't thinking like that.\" It has been noted that British punk rock critics of disco were very supportive of the pro-black/anti-racist reggae genre as well as the more pro-gay new romantics movement. Christgau and Jim Testa have said that there were legitimate artistic reasons for being critical of disco.\nIn 1979, the music industry in the United States underwent its worst slump in decades, and disco, despite its mass popularity, was blamed. The producer-oriented sound was having difficulty mixing well with the industry's artist-oriented marketing system. Harold Childs, senior vice president at A&amp;M Records, told the \"Los Angeles Times\" that \"radio is really desperate for rock product\" and \"they're all looking for some white rock-n-roll\". Gloria Gaynor argued that the music industry supported the destruction of disco because rock music producers were losing money and rock musicians were losing the spotlight.\n1981\u20131989: Aftermath.\nBirth of electronic dance music.\nDisco, despite its pitfalls, was instrumental in the development of electronic dance music genres like house, techno, eurodance.\nDuring the first years of the 1980s, the traditional disco sound characterized by complex arrangements performed by large ensembles of studio session musicians (including a horn section and an orchestral string section) began to be phased out, and faster tempos and synthesized effects, accompanied by guitar and simplified backgrounds, moved dance music toward electronic and pop genres, starting with hi-NRG. Despite its decline in popularity, so-called club music and European-style disco much remained \"relatively\" successful in the early 1980s, with songs like Irene Cara's \"Flashdance... What a Feeling\" (theme to the film \"Flashdance\") or Laura Branigan's \"Self Control.\" However, a revival of the traditional-style disco called nu-disco has been popular since the 1990s.\nHouse music displayed a strong disco influence, which is why house music, regarding its enormous success in shaping electronic dance music and contemporary club culture, is often described being \"disco's revenge.\" Early house music was generally dance-based music characterized by repetitive four on the floor beats, rhythms mainly provided by drum machines, off-beat hi-hat cymbals, and synthesized basslines. While house displayed several characteristics similar to disco music, it was more electronic and minimalist, and the repetitive rhythm of house was more important than the song itself. As well, house did not use the lush string sections that were a key part of the disco sound.\nLegacy.\nDJ culture.\nThe rising popularity of disco came in tandem with developments in the role of the DJ. DJing developed from the use of multiple record turntables and DJ mixers to create a continuous, seamless mix of songs, with one song transitioning to another with no break in the music to interrupt the dancing. The resulting DJ mix differed from previous forms of dance music in the 1960s, which were oriented towards live performances by musicians. This in turn affected the arrangement of dance music, since songs in the disco era typically contained beginnings and endings marked by a simple beat or riff that could be easily used to transition to a new song. The development of DJing was also influenced by new turntablism techniques, such as beatmatching and scratching, a process facilitated by the introduction of new turntable technologies such as the Technics SL-1200 MK 2, first sold in 1978, which had a precise variable pitch control and a direct drive motor. DJs were often avid record collectors, who would hunt through used record stores for obscure soul records and vintage funk recordings. DJs helped to introduce rare records and new artists to club audiences.\nIn the 1970s, individual DJs became more prominent, and some DJs, such as Larry Levan, the resident at Paradise Garage, Jim Burgess, Tee Scott and Francis Grasso became famous in the disco scene. Levan, for example, developed a cult following among club-goers, who referred to his DJ sets as \"Saturday Mass\". Some DJs would use reel-to-reel tape recorders to make remixes and tape edits of songs. Some DJs who were making remixes made the transition from the DJ booth to becoming a record producer, notably Burgess. Scott developed several innovations. He was the first disco DJ to use three turntables as sound sources, the first to simultaneously play two beat matched records, the first user of electronic effects units in his mixes and an innovator in mixing dialogue in from well-known movies into his mixes, typically over a percussion break. These mixing techniques were also applied to radio DJs, such as Ted Currier of WKTU and WBLS. Grasso is particularly notable for taking the DJ \"profession out of servitude and [making] the DJ the musical head chef\". Once he entered the scene, the DJ was no longer responsible for waiting on the crowd hand and foot, meeting their every song request. Instead, with increased agency and visibility, the DJ was now able to use his own technical and creative skills to whip up a nightly special of innovative mixes, refining his personal sound and aesthetic, and building his own reputation. Known as the first DJ to create a take his audience on a narrative, musical journey, Grasso discovered that music could effectively shift the energy of the crowd, and even more, that he had all this power at his fingertips.\nPost-disco.\nThe post-disco sound and genres associated with it originated in the 1970s and early 1980s with R&amp;B and post-punk musicians focusing on a more electronic and experimental side of disco, spawning boogie, Italo disco, and alternative dance. Drawing from a diverse range of non-disco influences and techniques, such as the \"one-man band\" style of Kashif and Stevie Wonder and alternative approaches of Parliament-Funkadelic, it was driven by synthesizers, keyboards, and drum machines. Post-disco acts include D. Train, Patrice Rushen, ESG, Bill Laswell, Arthur Russell. Post-disco had an important influence on dance-pop and was bridging classical disco and later forms of electronic dance music.\nEarly hip hop.\nThe disco sound had a strong influence on early hip hop. Most of the early hip hop songs were created by isolating existing disco bass-guitar lines and dubbing over them with MC rhymes. The Sugarhill Gang used Chic's \"Good Times\" as the foundation for their 1979 song \"Rapper's Delight\", generally considered to be the song that first popularized rap music in the United States and around the world.\nWith synthesizers and Krautrock influences, that replaced the previous disco foundation, a new genre was born when Afrika Bambaataa released the single \"Planet Rock,\" spawning a hip hop electronic dance trend that includes songs such as Planet Patrol's \"Play at Your Own Risk\" (1982), C-Bank's \"One More Shot\" (1982), Cerrone's \"Club Underworld\" (1984), Shannon's \"Let the Music Play\" (1983), Freeez's \"I.O.U.\" (1983), Midnight Star's \"Freak-a-Zoid\" (1983), Chaka Khan's \"I Feel For You\" (1984).\nHouse music and rave culture.\nHouse music is a genre of electronic dance music that originated in Chicago in the early 1980s (also see: Chicago house). It quickly spread to other American cities such as Detroit, where it developed into the harder and more industrial techno, New York City (also see: garage house) and Newark \u2013 all of which developed their own regional scenes.\nIn the mid- to late 1980s, house music became popular in Europe as well as major cities in South America, and Australia. Early house music commercial success in Europe saw songs such as \"Pump Up The Volume\" by MARRS (1987), \"House Nation\" by House Master Boyz and the Rude Boy of House (1987), \"Theme from S'Express\" by S'Express (1988) and \"Doctorin' the House\" by Coldcut (1988) in the pop charts. Since the early to mid-1990s, house music has been infused in mainstream pop and dance music worldwide.\nHouse music in the 2010s, while keeping several of these core elements, notably the prominent kick drum on every beat, varies widely in style and influence, ranging from the soulful and atmospheric deep house to the more aggressive acid house or the minimalist microhouse. House music has also fused with several other genres creating fusion subgenres, such as euro house, tech house, electro house and jump house.\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, rave culture began to emerge from the house and acid house scene. Like house, it incorporated disco culture's same love of dance music played by DJs over powerful sound systems, recreational drug and club drug exploration, sexual promiscuity, and hedonism. Although disco culture started out underground, it eventually thrived in the mainstream by the late 1970s, and major labels commodified and packaged the music for mass consumption. In contrast, the rave culture started out underground and stayed (mostly) underground. In part, this was to avoid the animosity that was still surrounding disco and dance music. The rave scene also stayed underground to avoid law enforcement attention that was directed at the rave culture due to its use of secret, unauthorized warehouses for some dance events and its association with illegal club drugs like ecstasy.\nPost-punk.\nThe post-punk movement that originated in the late 1970s both supported punk rock's rule breaking while rejecting its move back to raw rock music. Post-punk's mantra of constantly moving forward lent itself to both openness to and experimentation with elements of disco and other styles. Public Image Limited is considered the first post-punk group. The group's second album \"Metal Box\" fully embraced the \"studio as instrument\" methodology of disco. The group's founder John Lydon, the former lead singer for the Sex Pistols, told the press that disco was the only music he cared for at the time.\nNo wave was a subgenre of post-punk centered in New York City. For shock value, James Chance, a notable member of the no wave scene, penned an article in the \"East Village Eye\" urging his readers to move uptown and get \"trancin' with some superradioactive disco voodoo funk\". His band James White and the Blacks wrote a disco album titled \"Off White\". Their performances resembled those of disco performers (horn section, dancers and so on). In 1981 ZE Records led the transition from no wave into the more subtle mutant disco (post-disco/punk) genre. Mutant disco acts such as Kid Creole and the Coconuts, Was Not Was, ESG and Liquid Liquid influenced several British post-punk acts such as New Order, Orange Juice and A Certain Ratio.\nNu-disco.\nNu-disco is a 21st-century dance music genre associated with the renewed interest in 1970s and early 1980s disco, mid-1980s Italo disco, and the synthesizer-heavy Euro disco aesthetics. The moniker appeared in print as early as 2002, and by mid-2008 was used by record shops such as the online retailers Juno and Beatport. These vendors often associate it with re-edits of original-era disco music, as well as with music from European producers who make dance music inspired by original-era American disco, electro and other genres popular in the late 1970s and early 1980s. It is also used to describe the music on several American labels that were previously associated with the genres electroclash and French house.\nRevivals and return to mainstream success.\n1990s resurgence.\nIn the 1990s, after a decade of backlash, disco and its legacy became more accepted by pop music artists and listeners alike, as more songs, films, and compilations were released that referenced disco. This was part of a wave of 1970s nostalgia that was taking place in popular culture at the time. Examples of songs during this time that were influenced by disco included Deee-Lite's \"Groove Is in the Heart\" (1990), U2's \"Lemon\" (1993), Blur's \"Girls &amp; Boys\" (1994) and \"Entertain Me\" (1995), Pulp's \"Disco 2000\" (1995), and Jamiroquai's \"Canned Heat\" (1999), while films such as \"Boogie Nights\" (1997) and \"The Last Days of Disco\" (1998) featured primarily disco soundtracks.\n2000s resurgence.\nIn the early 2000s, an updated genre of disco called \"nu-disco\" began breaking into the mainstream. A few examples like Daft Punk's \"One More Time\" and Kylie Minogue's \"Love At First Sight\" and \"Can't Get You Out of My Head\" became club favorites and commercial successes. Several nu-disco songs were crossovers with funky house, such as Spiller's \"Groovejet (If This Ain't Love)\" and Modjo's \"Lady (Hear Me Tonight)\", both songs sampling older disco songs and both reaching number one on the UK Singles Chart in 2000. Robbie Williams' disco single \"Rock DJ\" was the UK's fourth best-selling single the same year. Rock band Manic Street Preachers released a disco song, \"Miss Europa Disco Dancer\", in 2001. The song's disco influence, which appears on \"Know Your Enemy\", was described as being \"much-discussed\". In 2005, Madonna immersed herself in the disco music of the 1970s, and released her album \"Confessions on a Dance Floor\" to rave reviews. In addition to that, her song \"Hung Up\" became a major top-10 song and club staple, and sampled ABBA's 1979 song \"Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight)\". In addition to her disco-influenced attire to award shows and interviews, her Confessions Tour also incorporated various elements of the 1970s, such as disco balls, a mirrored stage design, and the roller derby.\nThe success of the \"nu-disco\" revival of the early 2000s was described by music critic Tom Ewing as more interpersonal than the pop music of the 1990s: \"The revival of disco within pop put a spotlight on something that had gone missing over the 90s: a sense of music not just for dancing, but for dancing with someone. Disco was a music of mutual attraction: cruising, flirtation, negotiation. Its dancefloor is a space for immediate pleasure, but also for promises kept and otherwise. It's a place where things start, but their resolution, let alone their meaning, is never clear. All of 2000s great disco number ones explore how to play this hand. Madison Avenue look to impose their will upon it, to set terms and roles. Spiller is less rigid. 'Groovejet' accepts the night's changeability, happily sells out certainty for an amused smile and a few great one-liners.\"\n2010s resurgence.\nIn 2013, several 1970s-style disco and funk songs charted, and the pop charts had more dance songs than at any other point since the late 1970s. The biggest disco song of the year as of June was \"Get Lucky\" by Daft Punk, featuring Nile Rodgers on guitar. \"Random Access Memories\" also ended up winning Album of the Year at the 2014 Grammys. Other disco-styled songs that made it into the top 40 were Robin Thicke's \"Blurred Lines\" (number one), Justin Timberlake's \"Take Back the Night\" (number 29), Bruno Mars' \"Treasure\" (number five) and Michael Jackson's posthumous release \"Love Never Felt So Good\" (number nine). In addition, Arcade Fire's \"Reflektor\" featured strong disco elements. In 2014, disco music could be found in Lady Gaga's \"Artpop\" and Katy Perry's \"Birthday\". Other disco songs from 2014 include \"I Want It All\" By Karmin, 'Wrong Club\" by the Ting Tings and \"Blow\" by Beyonc\u00e9.\nIn 2014 Brazilian Globo TV, the second biggest television network in the world, aired Boogie Oogie, a telenovela about the Disco Era that takes place between 1978 and 1979, from the hit fever to the decadence. The show's success was responsible for a Disco revival across the country, bringing back to stage, and to record charts, Discoth\u00e8que Divas like Lady Zu and As Fren\u00e9ticas.\nOther top-10 entries from 2015 like Mark Ronson's disco groove-infused \"Uptown Funk\", Maroon 5's \"Sugar\", the Weeknd's \"Can't Feel My Face\" and Jason Derulo's \"Want To Want Me\" also ascended the charts and have a strong disco influence. Disco mogul and producer Giorgio Moroder also re-appeared with his new album \"D\u00e9j\u00e0 Vu\" in 2015 which has proved to be a modest success. Other songs from 2015 like \"I Don't Like It, I Love It\" by Flo Rida, \"Adventure of a Lifetime\" by Coldplay, \"Back Together\" by Robin Thicke and \"Levels\" by Nick Jonas feature disco elements as well. In 2016, disco songs or disco-styled pop songs are showing a strong presence on the music charts as a possible backlash to the 1980s-styled synthpop, electro house, and dubstep that have been dominating the current charts. Justin Timberlake's 2016 song \"Can't Stop the Feeling!\", which shows strong elements of disco, became the 26th song to debut at number-one on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 in the history of the chart. \"The Martian\", a 2015 film, extensively uses disco music as a soundtrack, although for the main character, astronaut Mark Watney, there's only one thing worse than being stranded on Mars: it's being stranded on Mars with nothing but disco music. \"Kill the Lights\", featured on an episode of the HBO television series \"Vinyl\" (2016) and with Nile Rodgers' guitar licks, hit number one on the US Dance chart in July 2016.\n2020s resurgence.\nIn 2020, disco was revived in mainstream popularity and has become one of the main trends in popular music. In early 2020, disco-influenced hits such as Doja Cat's \"Say So\", Lady Gaga's \"Stupid Love\", and Dua Lipa's \"Don't Start Now\" experienced widespread success on global music charts, with the three songs charting at numbers 1, 5 and 2, respectively, on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart. At the time, \"Billboard\", declared that Lipa was \"leading the charge toward disco-influenced production\" a day after her retro and disco-influenced album \"Future Nostalgia\" was released on March 27, 2020. By mid 2020, multiple disco albums and songs had been released and cultural phenomena associated with 1970s disco, specifically roller skating and roller discos, experienced a resurgence in mainstream popularity across the Western world. The resurgence of roller skating has been powered by social media apps like Instagram, TikTok and Snapchat which have seen an increase of roller skating-related content throughout 2020, partially the result of people seeking escapist hobbies during the COVID-19 pandemic. In Hobart, Australia, it was reported that the popularity of roller skating was at its highest since the 1980s. In early September 2020, South Korean boy band BTS debuted at number 1 in the US with their English\u2013language disco single \"Dynamite\" having sold 265,000 downloads in its first week in the US, marking the biggest pure sales week since Taylor Swift's \"Look What You Made Me Do\" (2017). Other critically acclaimed disco albums from the year include Jessie Ware's \"What's Your Pleasure?\" and R\u00f3is\u00edn Murphy's \"R\u00f3is\u00edn Machine\".\nIn July 2020, Australian singer Kylie Minogue announced she would be releasing her fifteenth studio album, \"Disco\", on November 6, 2020. The album was preceded by two singles, the lead single from the album, \"Say Something\", was released on 23 July of the same year and premiered on BBC Radio 2. The second single, \"Magic\", was released on 24 September. Both singles received critical acclaim, with critics praising Minogue for returning to disco roots, which were prominent in her albums \"Fever\" (2001) and \"Aphrodite\" (2010)."}
{"id": "7967", "revid": "195366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7967", "title": "Double stops", "text": ""}
{"id": "7970", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7970", "title": "Darwin", "text": "Darwin most often refers to:\nDarwin may also refer to:"}
{"id": "7973", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7973", "title": "Donegal fiddle tradition", "text": "The Donegal fiddle tradition is the way of playing the fiddle that is traditional in County Donegal, Ireland. It is one of the distinct fiddle traditions within Irish traditional music.\nThe distinctness of the Donegal tradition developed due to the close relations between Donegal and Scotland, and the Donegal repertoire and style has influences from Scottish fiddle music. For example, in addition to the standard tune types such as Jigs and Reels, the Donegal tradition also has Highlands (influenced by the Scottish Strathspey). The distinctiveness of the Donegal tradition led to some conflict between Donegal players and representatives of the mainstream tradition when Irish traditional music was organised in the 1960s.\nThe tradition has several distinguishing traits compared to other fiddle traditions such as the Sliabh Luachra style of southern Ireland, most of which involves styles of bowing and the ornamentation of the music, and rhythm. Due to the frequency of double stops and the strong bowing it is often compared to the Cape Breton tradition. Another characteristic of the style is the rapid pace at which it tends to proceed. Modern players, such as the fiddle group Altan, continue to be popular due to a variety of reasons.\nAmong the most famous Donegal style players are John Doherty from the early twentieth century and James Byrne, Paddy Glackin, Tommy Peoples and Mair\u00e9ad N\u00ed Mhaonaigh in recent decades.\nHistory.\nThe fiddle has ancient roots in Ireland, the first report of bowed instruments similar to the violin being in the Book of Leinster (ca. 1160). The modern violin was ubiquitous in Ireland by the early 1700s. However the first mention of the fiddle being in use in Donegal is from the blind harper Arthur O'Neill who in his 1760 memoirs described a wedding in Ardara as having \"plenty of pipers and fiddlers\". Donegal fiddlers participated in the development of the Irish music tradition in the 18th century during which jigs and slipjigs and later reels and hornpipes became the dominant musical forms. However, Donegal musicians, many of them being fishermen, also frequently travelled to Scotland, where they acquired tune types from the Scottish repertoire such as the Strathspey which was integrated into the Donegal tradition as \"Highland\" tunes. The Donegal tradition derives much of its unique character from the synthesis of Irish and Scottish stylistic features and repertoires. Aoidh notes however that while different types of art music were commonly played among the upper classes of Scottish society in the 18th century, the Donegal tradition drew exclusively from the popular types of Scottish music. Like some Scottish fiddlers (who, like Donegal fiddlers, tend to use a short bow and play in a straight-ahead fashion), some Donegal fiddlers worked at imitating the sound of the bagpipes. Workers from Donegal would bring their music to Scotland and also bring back Scottish tunes with them such music of J. Scott Skinner and Mackenzie Murdoch. Lilting, unaccompanied singing of wordless tunes, was also an important part of the Donegal musical tradition often performed by women in social settings. Describing the musical life of Arranmore Island in the late 19th century singer R\u00f3ise Rua Nic Gr\u00edanna describes the most popular dances: \"The Sets, the Lancers, the Maggie Pickie [i.e., Maggie Pickins] the Donkey, the Mazurka and the Barn dances\". Among the travelling fiddlers of the late 19th century players such as John Mhosa\u00ed McGinley, Anthony Hilferty, the McConnells and the Dohertys are best known. As skill levels increased through apprenticeships several fiddle masters appeared such as the Cassidy's, Connie Haughey, Jimmy Lyons and Miock McShane of Teelin and Francie Dearg and Mickey B\u00e1n Byrne of Kilcar. These virtuosos played unaccompanied listening pieces in addition to the more common dance music.\nThe influences between Scotland and Donegal went both ways and were furthered by a wave of immigration from Donegal to Scotland in the 19th century (the regions share common names of dances), as can be heard in the volume of strathspeys, schottisches, marches, and Donegal's own strong piping tradition, has influenced and been influenced by music, and by the sounds, ornaments, and repertoire of the P\u00edob Mh\u00f3r, the traditional bagpipes of Ireland and Scotland. There are other differences between the Donegal style and the rest of Ireland. Instruments such as the tin whistle, flute, concertina and accordion were very rare in Donegal until modern times. Traditionally the p\u00edob m\u00f3r and the fiddle were the only instruments used and the use of pipe or fiddle music was common in old wedding customs. Migrant workers carried their music to Scotland and also brought back a number of tunes of Scottish origin. The Donegal fiddlers may well have been the route by which Scottish tunes such as Lucy Campbell, Tarbolton Lodge (Tarbolton) and The Flagon (The Flogging Reel), that entered the Irish repertoire. These players prided themselves on their technical abilities, which included playing in higher positions (fairly uncommon among traditional Irish fiddlers), and sought out material which would demonstrate their skills.\nAs Irish music was consolidated and organised under the Comhaltas Ceolt\u00f3ir\u00ed \u00c9ireann movement in the 1960s, both strengthened the interest in traditional music but sometimes conflicted with the Donegal tradition and its social conventions. The rigidly organised sessions of the Comhaltas reflected the traditions of Southern Ireland and Donegal fiddlers like John Doherty considered the National repertoire with its strong focus on reels to be less diverse than that of Donegal with its varied rhythms. Other old fiddlers dislike the ways comhaltas sessions were organised with a committee player, often not himself a musician, in charge. Sometimes Comhaltas representatives would even disparage the Donegal tradition, with its Scottish flavour, as being un-Irish, and prohibit them from playing local tunes with Scottish genealogies such as the \"Highlands\" at Comhaltas sessions. This sometimes cause antagonism between Donegal players and the main organisation of traditional music in Ireland.\nOutside of the Comhaltas movement however, Donegal fiddling stood strong with Paddy Glackin of Ceoltor\u00ed Laighean and the Bothy Band and later Tommy Peoples also with the Bothy Band and Mairead Ni Mhaonaigh with Altan, who all drew attention and prestige to the Donegal tradition within folk music circles throughout Ireland.\nDescription of style.\nThe Donegal style of fiddling is a label often applied to music from this area, though one also might plausibly identify several different, but related, styles within the county. To the extent to which there is one common style in the county, it is characterised by a rapid pace; a tendency to be more un-swung in the playing of the fast dance tune types (reel and jigs); short (non-slurred), aggressive bowing, sparse ornamentation, the use of bowed triplets more often than trills as ornaments, the use of double stops and droning; and the occurrence of \"playing the octave\", with one player playing the melody and the other playing the melody an octave lower. None of these characteristics are universal, and there is some disagreement as to the extent to which there is a common style at all. In general, however, the style is rather aggressive.\nAnother feature of Donegal fiddling that makes it distinctive among Irish musical traditions is the variety of rare tune types that are played. Highlands, a type of tune in time with some similarities to Scottish strathspeys, which are also played in Donegal, are one of the most commonly played types of tune in the county. Other tune types common solely in the county include barndances, also called \"Germans,\" and mazurkas.\nFiddlers of the Donegal tradition.\nHistorical.\nThere are a number of different strands to the history of fiddle playing in County Donegal. Perhaps the best-known and, in the last half of the twentieth century, the most influential has been that of the Doherty family. Hugh Doherty is the first known musician of this family. Born in 1790, he headed an unbroken tradition of fiddlers and pipers in the Doherty family until the death, in 1980, of perhaps the best-known Donegal fiddler, John Doherty. John, a travelling tinsmith, was known for his extremely precise and fast finger- and bow-work and vast repertoire, and is considered to be one of the greatest Irish fiddlers ever recorded. John's older brother, Mickey, was also recorded and, though Mickey was another of the great Irish fiddlers, his reputation has been overshadowed by John's.\nThere is no single Donegal style but several distinctive styles. These styles traditionally come from the geographical isolated regions of Donegal including Inishowen, eastern Donegal, The Rosses and Gweedore, Croaghs, Teelin, Kilcar, Glencolmcille, Ballyshannon and Bundoran. Even with improved communications and transport, these regions still have recognisably different ways of fiddle playing. Notable deceased players of the older Donegal styles include Neillidh (\"Neilly\") Boyle, Francie Byrne, Con Cassidy, Frank Cassidy, James Byrne (1946\u20132008), P.V. O'Donnell (2011), and Tommy Peoples (1948\u20132018). Currently living Donegal fiddlers, include, Vincent Campbell, John Gallagher, Paddy Glackin, and Danny O'Donnell.\nModern.\nFiddle playing continues to be popular in Donegal. The three fiddlers of the Donegal \"supergroup\" Altan, Mair\u00e9ad N\u00ed Mhaonaigh, Paul O'Shaughnessy, and Ciar\u00e1n Tourish, are generally admired within Donegal. An example of another fiddler-player from Donegal is Liz Doherty.\nAnother well regarded fiddle player hailing from Donegal is Aidan O'Donnell. TG4 Young Musician of the Year 2010 Aidan O'Donnell has been described as one of the finest young Irish musicians at present. He began his music making at the age of 12, and since then has performed with some of traditional music's finest artists, including Donal Lunny, Micheal \u00d3'Suilleabh\u00e1in and the Chieftains. In 2007, he won the prestigious \u2018Oireachtas na Geailge' fiddle title, and has been a regular tutor at the Irish World Academy of Music and Dance, at the University of Limerick for the past number of years.\nThe fiddle, and traditional music in general, remained popular in Donegal not only because of the international coverage of certain artists but because of local pride in the music. Traditional music \"Seisi\u00fans\" are still common place both in pubs and in houses. The Donegal fiddle music has been influenced by recorded music, but this is claimed to have had a positive impact on the tradition. Modern Donegal fiddle music is often played in concerts and recorded on albums."}
{"id": "7975", "revid": "39566278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7975", "title": "Double-barreled shotgun", "text": "A double-barreled shotgun is a break-action shotgun with two parallel barrels, allowing two single shots to be fired in quick succession.\nConstruction.\nModern double-barreled shotguns, often known as \"doubles\", are almost universally break action, with the barrels hinge down at the rear to expose the breech ends for unloading and reloading. Since there is no reciprocating action needed to eject and reload the shells, doubles are more compact than repeating designs such as pump action, lever-action or self-loading shotguns.\nBarrel configuration.\nDouble-barreled shotguns come in two basic configurations:\nThe original double-barreled guns were nearly all S\u00d7S designs, which was a more practical design for muzzleloaders. Early cartridge-firing shotguns also used the S\u00d7S action, because they kept the exposed hammers of the earlier muzzleloading shotguns from which they evolved. When hammerless designs started to become common, the O/U design was introduced, and most modern sporting doubles are O/U designs.\nOne significant advantage that doubles have over single-barrel repeating shotguns is the ability to have more than one choke at a time. Some shotgun shooting sports, such as skeet shooting, use crossing targets presented in a narrow range of distance, and only require one level of choke. Other sports, like sporting clays, give the shooter targets at differing ranges, and targets that might approach or recede from the shooter, and so must be engaged at differing ranges. Having two barrels lets the shooter use a more open choke for near targets, and a tighter choke for distant targets, providing the optimal shot pattern for each distance.\nThe disadvantage lies in the fact that the barrels of a double-barreled shotgun, whether \"O/U\" or \"S\u00d7S\", are not parallel, but slightly angled, so that shots from the barrels converge, usually at \"40 yards out\". For the \"S\u00d7S\" configuration, the shotstring continues on its path to the opposite side of the rib after the converging point; for example, the left barrel's discharge travels on the left of the rib till it hits dead center at 40 yards out, after that, the discharge continues on to the right. In the \"O/U\" configuration with a parallel rib, both barrels' discharges will keep to the dead center, but the discharge from the \"under\" barrel will shoot higher than the discharge from the \"over\" barrel after 40 yards. Thus, double-barreled shotguns are accurate only at practical shotgun ranges, though the range of their ammunition easily exceeds four to six times that distance.\n\"S\u00d7S\" shotguns are often more expensive, and may take more practice to aim effectively than a \"O/U\". The off-center nature of the recoil in a \"S\u00d7S\" gun may make shooting the body-side barrel slightly more painful by comparison to an \"O/U\", single-shot, or pump/lever action shotgun. Gas-operated, and to a lesser extent recoil-operated, designs will recoil less than either. More \"S\u00d7S\" than \"O/U\" guns have traditional \"cast-off\" stocks, where the end of the buttstock veers slightly to the right, allowing a right-handed user to point the gun more easily.\nDouble-barreled shotguns are also inherently more safe, as whether the shotgun is loaded or can be fired can be ascertained by anyone present if the action is broken open, for instance on a skeet, trap or hunting clays course when another shooter is firing; if the action is open, the gun cannot fire. Similarly, doubles are more easily examined to see if loaded than pump or semi-automatic shotguns, whose bolt must be opened and chamber closely examined or felt to make sure it is unloaded; with a double gun (or a break-action single gun), whether the gun is loaded, i.e., has cartridges in any chamber, is easily and immediately seen with a glance (and just as easily unloaded).\nTrigger mechanism.\nThe early doubles used two triggers, one for each barrel, located front to back inside the trigger guard. The index finger was used to pull either trigger, as having two fingers inside the trigger guard can cause a very undesirable recoil-induced double-discharge. Double-trigger designs are typically set up for right-handed users. In double-trigger designs, it is often possible to pull both triggers at once, firing both barrels simultaneously, though this is generally not recommended as it doubles the recoil, battering both shotgun and shooter, particularly if it was unanticipated or unintended. Discharging both barrels at the same time has long been a hunting trick employed by hunters using 8 gauge \"elephant\" shotguns, firing the two two-ounce slugs for sheer stopping power at close range.\nLater models use a single trigger that alternately fires both barrels, called a \"single selective trigger\" or \"SST\". The SST does not allow firing both barrels at once, since the single trigger must be pulled twice in order to fire both barrels. The change from one barrel to the other may be done by a clockwork type system, where a cam alternates between barrels, or by an inertial system where the recoil of firing the first barrel toggles the trigger to the next barrel. A double-barreled shotgun with an inertial trigger works best with full power shotshells; shooting low recoil shotshells often will not reliably toggle the inertial trigger, causing an apparent failure to fire occasionally when attempting to depress the trigger a second time to fire the second barrel (this also can happen if the first shell fails to fire). Generally there is a method of selecting the order in which the barrels of an SST shotgun fire; commonly this is done through manipulation of the safety, pushing to one side to select top barrel first and the other side to select bottom barrel first. In the event that an inertial trigger does not toggle to the second barrel when firing low recoil shotshells, manually selecting the order to the second barrel will enable the second barrel to fire when the trigger is depressed again.\nOne of the advantages of double-barreled shotgun with double triggers or SST, is that the second shot can be taken almost immediately after the first with merely a second trigger pull, without needing to manually operate the action (which will inevitably destabilize the gun from the shoulder position and affect aim), and can utilize different chokes for the two shots (assuming, of course, that full power shotshells are fired, at least for a double-barreled shotgun with an inertial type SST, as needed to toggle the inertial trigger). This can be noticeably faster than a pump shotgun, which requires manually pumping the fore-end to eject and reload for the second shot, and may be faster, or not slower, than a semi-automatic shotgun (as there are no bolt movements to delay the rechambering of a second shell). Note, however, in neither the pump or semi-automatic will the second shot be a different choke pattern from the first shot, whereas for a double, the two shots are usually with different chokes. Thus, depending on the nature of the hunt, the appropriate choke for the shot is always at hand. For example, while field hunting flushing birds, the first shot is usually closer than the second because the bird flies away from the shooter; so, the more open choke (and barrel) would be better for the first shot, and if a second shot is needed, as the bird is flying away, the more closed (and thus longer distance of an effective shot pattern) choke (and barrel) is then appropriate. Conversely, on a driven hunt, where the birds are driven towards the shooter, the closed (longer effective distance) choke (and barrel) should be fired first, saving the open (closer effective distance) choke (and barrel) for the now-closer incoming bird. None of this is possible with single-barrel shotguns, only with a double, whether S\u00d7S or O/U.\nRegulation.\n\"Regulation\" is a term used for multi-barreled firearms that indicates how close to the same point of aim the barrels will shoot. A poorly regulated gun may hit consistently with one barrel, but miss consistently with the other, making the gun nearly useless for anything requiring two shots. However, the short ranges and spread of shot provide a significant overlap, so a small error in regulation in a double is often too small to be noticed. Generally the shotguns are regulated to hit the point of aim at a given distance, usually the maximum expected range since that is the range at which a full choke is used, and where precise regulation matters most. The regulation is usually more important in SxS shotguns, as felt recoil differs. "}
{"id": "7976", "revid": "1023742195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7976", "title": "Dessert", "text": "Dessert () is a course that concludes a meal. The course consists of sweet foods, such as confections, and possibly a beverage such as dessert wine and liqueur. In some parts of the world, such as much of central and western Africa, and most parts of China ,there is no tradition of a dessert course to conclude a meal.\nThe term \"dessert\" can apply to many confections, such as biscuits, cakes, cookies, custards, gelatins, ice creams, pastries, pies, puddings, sweet soups, tarts and fruit salad. Fruit is also commonly found in dessert courses because of its naturally occurring sweetness. Some cultures sweeten foods that are more commonly savory to create desserts.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"dessert\" originated from the French word \"desservir,\" meaning \"to clear the table\". Its first known use was in 1600, in a health education manual entitled \"Naturall and artificial Directions for Health\", written by William Vaughan. \nIn his \"A History of Dessert\" (2013), Michael Krondl explains that it refers to the fact that dessert was served after the table had been cleared of other dishes. \nThe term dates from the 14th century but attained its current meaning around the beginning of the 20th century, when \"service \u00e0 la fran\u00e7aise\" (setting a variety of dishes on the table at the same time) was replaced with \"service \u00e0 la russe\" (presenting a meal in courses).\nOther names.\nThe word \"dessert\" is most commonly used for this course in Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, and the United States, while it is one of several synonyms (including \"\"pudding\", \"sweet\" and \"afters\"\") in the United Kingdom and some other Commonwealth countries.\nHistory.\nSweets were fed to the gods in ancient Mesopotamia and ancient India and other ancient civilizations. Dried fruit and honey were probably the first sweeteners used in most of the world, but the spread of sugarcane around the world was essential to the development of dessert.\nSugarcane was grown and refined in India before 500 BC and was crystallized, making it easy to transport, by AD 500. Sugar and sugarcane were traded, making sugar available to Macedonia by 300 BC and China by AD 600. In the Indian subcontinent, the Middle East, and China, sugar has been a staple of cooking and desserts for over a thousand years. Sugarcane and sugar were little known and rare in Europe until the twelfth century or later when the Crusades and then colonization spread its use.\nHerodotus mentions that, as opposed to the Greeks, the main Persian meal was simple, but they would eat many desserts afterwards.\nEuropeans began to manufacture sugar in the Middle Ages, and more sweet desserts became available. Even then sugar was so expensive usually only the wealthy could indulge on special occasions. The first apple pie recipe was published in 1381. The earliest documentation of the term \"cupcake\" was in \"Seventy-five Receipts for Pastry, Cakes, and Sweetmeats\" in 1828 in Eliza Leslie's \"Receipts\" cookbook.\nThe Industrial Revolution in Europe and later America caused desserts (and food in general) to be mass-produced, processed, preserved, canned, and packaged. Frozen foods, including desserts, became very popular starting in the 1920s when freezing emerged. These processed foods became a large part of diets in many industrialized nations. Many countries have desserts and foods distinctive to their nations or region.\nIngredients.\nSweet desserts usually contain cane sugar, palm sugar, brown sugar, honey, or some types of syrup such as molasses, maple syrup, treacle, or corn syrup. Other common ingredients in Western-style desserts are flour or other starches, Cooking fats such as butter or lard, dairy, eggs, salt, acidic ingredients such as lemon juice, and spices and other flavoring agents such as chocolate, peanut butter, fruits, and nuts. The proportions of these ingredients, along with the preparation methods, play a major part in the consistency, texture, and flavor of the end product.\nSugars contribute moisture and tenderness to baked goods. Flour or starch components serves as a protein and gives the dessert structure. Fats contribute moisture and can enable the development of flaky layers in pastries and pie crusts. The dairy products in baked goods keep the desserts moist. Many desserts also contain eggs, in order to form custard or to aid in the rising and thickening of a cake-like substance. Egg yolks specifically contribute to the richness of desserts. Egg whites can act as a leavening agent or provide structure. Further innovation in the healthy eating movement has led to more information being available about vegan and gluten-free substitutes for the standard ingredients, as well as replacements for refined sugar.\nDesserts can contain many spices and extracts to add a variety of flavors. Salt and acids are added to desserts to balance sweet flavors and create a contrast in flavors. Some desserts are coffee-flavored, for example an iced coffee souffl\u00e9 or coffee biscuits. Alcohol can also be used as an ingredient, to make alcoholic desserts.\nVarieties &amp; elements.\nDessert consist of variations of tasted, textures, and appearances. Desserts can be defined as a usually sweeter course that concludes a meal. This definition includes a range of courses ranging from fruits or dried nuts to multi-ingredient cakes and pies. Many cultures have different variations of dessert. In modern times the variations of desserts have usually been passed down or come from geographical regions. This is one cause for the variation of desserts. These are some major categories in which desserts can be placed.\nCakes.\nCakes are sweet tender breads made with sugar and delicate flour. Cakes can vary from light, airy sponge cakes to dense cakes with less flour. Common flavorings include dried, candied or fresh fruit, nuts, cocoa or extracts. They may be filled with fruit preserves or dessert sauces (like pastry cream), iced with buttercream or other icings, and decorated with marzipan, piped borders, or candied fruit. Cake is often served as a celebratory dish on ceremonial occasions, for example weddings, anniversaries, and birthdays. Small-sized cakes have become popular, in the form of cupcakes and petits fours.\nPuddings.\nPuddings are thickened with starches such as corn starch or tapioca.\nSmall cakes &amp; pastries.\nA batched dough between a cake and pastry by the mix of ingredients. An Old French \"bescuit\", commonly spelt in English as biscuit, is a derivation of Latin for \"twice-baked\". A Dutch \"koekje\", commonly spelt in English as cookie, is a derivation of \"cake-ie \", meaning little cake.\nThis form of dough can have a texture that is crisp, hard, chewy, or soft \u2013 in the UK a biscuit is the former two and a cookie is typically the latter. Examples include a ginger nut, shortbread biscuit and chocolate chip cookie.\nOther small cakes and pastries can also be counted as under these terms, due to their size and relative similarity to cookies and biscuits, such as jaffa cakes and Eccles cakes.\nConfection.\nConfection, also called candy, sweets or lollies, features sugar or honey as a principal ingredient.\nMany involve sugar heated into crystals with subtle differences. Dairy and sugar based include caramel, fudge and toffee or taffy. They are multiple forms of egg and sugar meringues. and similar confections. Unheated sugar co-adulate into icings, preservatives and sauces with other ingredients.\nChocolate.\n\"Theobroma cacao beans\" can be a substitute or more commonly mixed with sugar to form chocolate is Pure, unsweetened dark chocolate contains primarily cocoa solids. Cocoa butter is also added in varying proportions. Much of the chocolate currently consumed is in the form of sweet chocolate, combining chocolate with sugar. Milk chocolate is sweet chocolate that additionally contains milk powder or condensed milk. White chocolate contains cocoa butter, sugar, and milk, but no cocoa solids. Dark chocolate is produced by adding fat and sugar to the cacao mixture, with no milk or much less than milk chocolate.\nCustards.\nThese kinds of desserts usually include a thickened dairy base. Custards are cooked and thickened with eggs. Baked custards include cr\u00e8me br\u00fbl\u00e9e and flan. They are often used as ingredients in other desserts, for instance as a filling for pastries or pies.\nDeep-fried.\nMany cuisines include a dessert made of deep-fried starch-based batter or dough. In many countries, a doughnut is a flour-based batter that has been deep-fried. It is sometimes filled with custard or jelly. Fritters are fruit pieces in a thick batter that have been deep fried. Gulab jamun is an Indian dessert made of milk solids kneaded into a dough, deep-fried, and soaked in honey. Churros are a deep-fried and sugared dough that is eaten as dessert or a snack in many countries. Doughnuts are most famous for being a trademark favorite of fictional character Homer Simpson from the animated television series \"The Simpsons\".\nFrozen.\nIce cream, gelato, sorbet and shaved-ice desserts fit into this category. Ice cream is a cream base that is churned as it is frozen to create a creamy consistency. Gelato uses a milk base and has less air whipped in than ice cream, making it denser. Sorbet is made from churned fruit and is not dairy based. Shaved-ice desserts are made by shaving a block of ice and adding flavored syrup or juice to the ice shavings.\nGelatin.\nJellied desserts are made with a sweetened liquid thickened with gelatin or another thickening agent. They are traditional in many cultures. Grass jelly and annin tofu are Chinese jellied desserts. Y\u014dkan is a Japanese jellied dessert. In English-speaking countries, many dessert recipes are based on gelatin with fruit or whipped cream added. The vegetarian substitute for Gelatin is Agar. Marshmallow is also most commonly made with gelatin.\nPastries.\n Pastries are sweet baked pastry products. Pastries can either take the form of light and flaky bread with an airy texture, such as a croissant or unleavened dough with a high fat content and crispy texture, such as shortbread. Pastries are often flavored or filled with fruits, chocolate, nuts, and spices. Pastries are sometimes eaten with tea or coffee as a breakfast food.\nPies, cobblers, and clafoutis.\nPies and cobblers are a crust with a filling. The crust can be either made from either a pastry or crumbs. Pie fillings range from fruits to puddings; cobbler fillings are generally fruit-based. Clafoutis are a batter with fruit-based filling poured over the top before baking.\nSweet soups.\nTong sui, literally translated as \"sugar water\" and also known as tim tong, is a collective term for any sweet, warm soup or custard served as a dessert at the end of a meal in Cantonese cuisine. \"Tong sui\" are a Cantonese specialty and are rarely found in other regional cuisines of China. Outside of Cantonese-speaking communities, soupy desserts generally are not recognized as a distinct category, and the term \"tong sui\" is not used.\nWines.\nDessert wines are sweet wines typically served with dessert. There is no simple definition of a dessert wine. In the UK, a dessert wine is considered to be any sweet wine drunk with a meal, as opposed to the white fortified wines (fino and amontillado sherry) drunk before the meal, and the red fortified wines (port and madeira) drunk after it. Thus, most fortified wines are regarded as distinct from dessert wines, but some of the less strong fortified white wines, such as Pedro Xim\u00e9nez sherry and Muscat de Beaumes-de-Venise, are regarded as honorary dessert wines. In the United States, by contrast, a dessert wine is legally defined as any wine over 14% alcohol by volume, which includes all fortified wines - and is taxed at higher rates as a result. Examples include Sauternes and Tokaji Asz\u00fa.\nBy continent.\nAfrica.\nThroughout much of central and western Africa, there is no tradition of a dessert course following a meal. Fruit or fruit salad would be eaten instead, which may be spiced, or sweetened with a sauce. In some former colonies in the region, the colonial power has influenced desserts \u2013 for example, the Angolan \"cocada amarela\" (yellow coconut) resembles baked desserts in Portugal.\nAsia.\nIn Asia, desserts are often eaten between meals as snacks rather than as a concluding course. There is widespread use of rice flour in East Asian desserts, which often include local ingredients such as coconut milk, palm sugar, and tropical fruit. In India, where sugarcane has been grown and refined since before 500 BC, desserts have been an important part of the diet for thousands of years; types of desserts include burfis, halvahs, jalebis, and laddus.\nDessert nowadays are made into drinks as well, such as Bubble Tea. It is originated in Taiwan, which locates in East Asia. Bubble tea is a kind of dessert made with flavor tea or milk with tapioca. It is well-known across the world.\nRecently, CNN Travel released a list of 50 of the world\u2019s best desserts after travelling around the world and one of the items on the list is cendol. While the origins of cendol are not confirmed, there have been reports that it either came from Malaysia or Indonesia.\nEurope.\nIn Ukraine and Russia, breakfast foods such as nalysnyky or blintz or oladi (pancake), and syrniki are served with honey and jam as desserts.\nIn the Netherlands vla is a popular dessert. It's a custard-like dessert that's served cold. Popular flavours are: vanilla, chocolate, caramel, and several fruit flavours. There's also hopjesvla which is flavoured like a Hopje: a Dutch coffee&amp;caramel sweet.\nNorth America.\nEuropean colonization of the Americas yielded the introduction of a number of ingredients and cooking styles. The various styles continued expanding well into the 19th and 20th centuries, proportional to the influx of immigrants.\nSouth America.\nDulce de leche is a very common confection in Argentina. In Bolivia, sugarcane, honey and coconut are traditionally used in desserts. \"Tawa tawa\" is a Bolivian sweet fritter prepared using sugar cane, and \"helado de canela\" is a dessert that is similar to sherbet which is prepared with cane sugar and cinnamon. Coconut tarts, puddings cookies and candies are also consumed in Bolivia. Brazil has a variety of candies such as brigadeiros (chocolate fudge balls), cocada (a coconut sweet), beijinhos (coconut truffles and clove) and romeu e julieta (cheese with a guava jam known as goiabada). Peanuts are used to make pa\u00e7oca, rapadura and p\u00e9-de-moleque. Local common fruits are turned in juices and used to make chocolates, ice pops and ice cream. In Chile, \"kuchen\" has been described as a \"trademark dessert\". Several desserts in Chile are prepared with \"manjar\", (caramelized milk), including \"alfajor\", \"flan\", \"cuchufli\" and \"arroz con leche\". Desserts consumed in Colombia include dulce de leche, waffle cookies, puddings, nougat, coconut with syrup and thickened milk with sugarcane syrup. Desserts in Ecuador tend to be simple, and desserts are a moderate part of the cuisine. Desserts consumed in Ecuador include tres leches cake, flan, candies and various sweets.\nOceania.\nDesserts are typically eaten in Australia, and most daily meals \"end with simple desserts\", which can include various fruits. More complex desserts include cakes, pies and cookies, which are sometimes served during special occasions.\nMarket.\nThe market for desserts has grown over the last few decades, which was greatly increased by the commercialism of baking desserts and the rise of food productions. Desserts are present in most restaurants as the popularity has increased. Many commercial stores have been established as solely desserts stores. Ice cream parlors have been around since before 1800. Many businesses started advertising campaigns focusing solely on desserts. The tactics used to market desserts are very different depending on the audience for example desserts can be advertised with popular movie characters to target children. The rise of companies like Food Network has marketed many shows which feature dessert and their creation. Shows like these have displayed extreme desserts and made a game show atmosphere which made desserts a more competitive field.\nDesserts are a standard staple in restaurant menus, with different degrees of variety. Pie and cheesecake were among the most popular dessert courses ordered in U.S. restaurants in 2012.\nNutrition.\nDessert foods often contain relatively high amounts of sugar and fats and, as a result, higher calorie counts per gram than other foods. Fresh or cooked fruit with minimal added sugar or fat is an exception."}
{"id": "7977", "revid": "31197", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7977", "title": "Non-independent areas", "text": ""}
{"id": "7978", "revid": "41769719", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7978", "title": "Data Encryption Standard", "text": "The Data Encryption Standard (DES ) is a symmetric-key algorithm for the encryption of digital data. Although its short key length of 56 bits makes it too insecure for applications, it has been highly influential in the advancement of cryptography.\nDeveloped in the early 1970s at IBM and based on an earlier design by Horst Feistel, the algorithm was submitted to the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) following the agency's invitation to propose a candidate for the protection of sensitive, unclassified electronic government data. In 1976, after consultation with the National Security Agency (NSA), the NBS selected a slightly modified version (strengthened against differential cryptanalysis, but weakened against brute-force attacks), which was published as an official Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) for the United States in 1977.\nThe publication of an NSA-approved encryption standard led to its quick international adoption and widespread academic scrutiny. Controversies arose from classified design elements, a relatively short key length of the symmetric-key block cipher design, and the involvement of the NSA, raising suspicions about a backdoor. The S-boxes that had prompted those suspicions were designed by the NSA to remove a backdoor they secretly knew (differential cryptanalysis). However, the NSA also ensured that the key size was drastically reduced so that they could break the cipher by brute force attack. The intense academic scrutiny the algorithm received over time led to the modern understanding of block ciphers and their cryptanalysis.\nDES is insecure due to the relatively short 56-bit key size. In January 1999, distributed.net and the Electronic Frontier Foundation collaborated to publicly break a DES key in 22 hours and 15 minutes (see chronology). There are also some analytical results which demonstrate theoretical weaknesses in the cipher, although they are infeasible in practice. The algorithm is believed to be practically secure in the form of Triple DES, although there are theoretical attacks. This cipher has been superseded by the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES). DES has been withdrawn as a standard by the National Institute of Standards and Technology.\nSome documents distinguish between the DES standard and its algorithm, referring to the algorithm as the DEA (Data Encryption Algorithm).\nHistory.\nThe origins of DES date to 1972, when a National Bureau of Standards study of US government computer security identified a need for a government-wide standard for encrypting unclassified, sensitive information.\nAround the same time, engineer Mohamed Atalla in 1972 founded Atalla Corporation and developed the first hardware security module (HSM), the so-called \"Atalla Box\" which was commercialized in 1973. It protected offline devices with a secure PIN generating key, and was a commercial success. Banks and credit card companies were fearful that Atalla would dominate the market, which spurred the development of an international encryption standard. Atalla was an early competitor to IBM in the banking market, and was cited as an influence by IBM employees who worked on the DES standard. The IBM 3624 later adopted a similar PIN verification system to the earlier Atalla system.\nOn 15 May 1973, after consulting with the NSA, NBS solicited proposals for a cipher that would meet rigorous design criteria. None of the submissions was suitable. A second request was issued on 27 August 1974. This time, IBM submitted a candidate which was deemed acceptable\u2014a cipher developed during the period 1973\u20131974 based on an earlier algorithm, Horst Feistel's Lucifer cipher. The team at IBM involved in cipher design and analysis included Feistel, Walter Tuchman, Don Coppersmith, Alan Konheim, Carl Meyer, Mike Matyas, Roy Adler, Edna Grossman, Bill Notz, Lynn Smith, and Bryant Tuckerman.\nNSA's involvement in the design.\nOn 17 March 1975, the proposed DES was published in the \"Federal Register\". Public comments were requested, and in the following year two open workshops were held to discuss the proposed standard. There was criticism received from public-key cryptography pioneers Martin Hellman and Whitfield Diffie, citing a shortened key length and the mysterious \"S-boxes\" as evidence of improper interference from the NSA. The suspicion was that the algorithm had been covertly weakened by the intelligence agency so that they\u2014but no one else\u2014could easily read encrypted messages. Alan Konheim (one of the designers of DES) commented, \"We sent the S-boxes off to Washington. They came back and were all different.\" The United States Senate Select Committee on Intelligence reviewed the NSA's actions to determine whether there had been any improper involvement. In the unclassified summary of their findings, published in 1978, the Committee wrote:\nHowever, it also found that\nAnother member of the DES team, Walter Tuchman, stated \"We developed the DES algorithm entirely within IBM using IBMers. The NSA did not dictate a single wire!\"\nIn contrast, a declassified NSA book on cryptologic history states:\nand\nSome of the suspicions about hidden weaknesses in the S-boxes were allayed in 1990, with the independent discovery and open publication by Eli Biham and Adi Shamir of differential cryptanalysis, a general method for breaking block ciphers. The S-boxes of DES were much more resistant to the attack than if they had been chosen at random, strongly suggesting that IBM knew about the technique in the 1970s. This was indeed the case; in 1994, Don Coppersmith published some of the original design criteria for the S-boxes. According to Steven Levy, IBM Watson researchers discovered differential cryptanalytic attacks in 1974 and were asked by the NSA to keep the technique secret. Coppersmith explains IBM's secrecy decision by saying, \"that was because [differential cryptanalysis] can be a very powerful tool, used against many schemes, and there was concern that such information in the public domain could adversely affect national security.\" Levy quotes Walter Tuchman: \"[t]hey asked us to stamp all our documents confidential... We actually put a number on each one and locked them up in safes, because they were considered U.S. government classified. They said do it. So I did it\". Bruce Schneier observed that \"It took the academic community two decades to figure out that the NSA 'tweaks' actually improved the security of DES.\"\nThe algorithm as a standard.\nDespite the criticisms, DES was approved as a federal standard in November 1976, and published on 15 January 1977 as FIPS PUB 46, authorized for use on all unclassified data. It was subsequently reaffirmed as the standard in 1983, 1988 (revised as FIPS-46-1), 1993 (FIPS-46-2), and again in 1999 (FIPS-46-3), the latter prescribing \"Triple DES\" (see below). On 26 May 2002, DES was finally superseded by the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), following a public competition. On 19 May 2005, FIPS 46-3 was officially withdrawn, but NIST has approved Triple DES through the year 2030 for sensitive government information.\nThe algorithm is also specified in ANSI X3.92 (Today X3 is known as INCITS and ANSI X3.92 as ANSI INCITS 92), NIST SP 800-67 and ISO/IEC 18033-3 (as a component of TDEA).\nAnother theoretical attack, linear cryptanalysis, was published in 1994, but it was the Electronic Frontier Foundation's DES cracker in 1998 that demonstrated that DES could be attacked very practically, and highlighted the need for a replacement algorithm. These and other methods of cryptanalysis are discussed in more detail later in this article.\nThe introduction of DES is considered to have been a catalyst for the academic study of cryptography, particularly of methods to crack block ciphers. According to a NIST retrospective about DES,\nDescription.\nDES is the archetypal block cipher\u2014an algorithm that takes a fixed-length string of plaintext bits and transforms it through a series of complicated operations into another ciphertext bitstring of the same length. In the case of DES, the block size is 64 bits. DES also uses a key to customize the transformation, so that decryption can supposedly only be performed by those who know the particular key used to encrypt. The key ostensibly consists of 64 bits; however, only 56 of these are actually used by the algorithm. Eight bits are used solely for checking parity, and are thereafter discarded. Hence the effective key length is 56 bits.\nThe key is nominally stored or transmitted as 8 bytes, each with odd parity. According to ANSI X3.92-1981 (Now, known as ANSI INCITS 92-1981), section 3.5:\nLike other block ciphers, DES by itself is not a secure means of encryption, but must instead be used in a mode of operation. FIPS-81 specifies several modes for use with DES. Further comments on the usage of DES are contained in FIPS-74.\nDecryption uses the same structure as encryption, but with the keys used in reverse order. (This has the advantage that the same hardware or software can be used in both directions.)\nOverall structure.\nThe algorithm's overall structure is shown in Figure 1: there are 16 identical stages of processing, termed \"rounds\". There is also an initial and final permutation, termed \"IP\" and \"FP\", which are inverses (IP \"undoes\" the action of FP, and vice versa). IP and FP have no cryptographic significance, but were included in order to facilitate loading blocks in and out of mid-1970s 8-bit based hardware.\nBefore the main rounds, the block is divided into two 32-bit halves and processed alternately; this criss-crossing is known as the Feistel scheme. The Feistel structure ensures that decryption and encryption are very similar processes\u2014the only difference is that the subkeys are applied in the reverse order when decrypting. The rest of the algorithm is identical. This greatly simplifies implementation, particularly in hardware, as there is no need for separate encryption and decryption algorithms.\nThe \u2295 symbol denotes the exclusive-OR (XOR) operation. The \"F-function\" scrambles half a block together with some of the key. The output from the F-function is then combined with the other half of the block, and the halves are swapped before the next round. After the final round, the halves are swapped; this is a feature of the Feistel structure which makes encryption and decryption similar processes.\nThe Feistel (F) function.\nThe F-function, depicted in Figure 2, operates on half a block (32 bits) at a time and consists of four stages:\nThe alternation of substitution from the S-boxes, and permutation of bits from the P-box and E-expansion provides so-called \"confusion and diffusion\" respectively, a concept identified by Claude Shannon in the 1940s as a necessary condition for a secure yet practical cipher.\nKey schedule.\nFigure 3 illustrates the \"key schedule\" for encryption\u2014the algorithm which generates the subkeys. Initially, 56 bits of the key are selected from the initial 64 by \"Permuted Choice 1\" (\"PC-1\")\u2014the remaining eight bits are either discarded or used as parity check bits. The 56 bits are then divided into two 28-bit halves; each half is thereafter treated separately. In successive rounds, both halves are rotated left by one or two bits (specified for each round), and then 48 subkey bits are selected by \"Permuted Choice 2\" (\"PC-2\")\u201424 bits from the left half, and 24 from the right. The rotations (denoted by \"\u00ab&lt;\" in the diagram) mean that a different set of bits is used in each subkey; each bit is used in approximately 14 out of the 16 subkeys.\nThe key schedule for decryption is similar\u2014the subkeys are in reverse order compared to encryption. Apart from that change, the process is the same as for encryption. The same 28 bits are passed to all rotation boxes.\nSecurity and cryptanalysis.\nAlthough more information has been published on the cryptanalysis of DES than any other block cipher, the most practical attack to date is still a brute-force approach. Various minor cryptanalytic properties are known, and three theoretical attacks are possible which, while having a theoretical complexity less than a brute-force attack, require an unrealistic number of known or chosen plaintexts to carry out, and are not a concern in practice.\nBrute-force attack.\nFor any cipher, the most basic method of attack is brute force\u2014trying every possible key in turn. The length of the key determines the number of possible keys, and hence the feasibility of this approach. For DES, questions were raised about the adequacy of its key size early on, even before it was adopted as a standard, and it was the small key size, rather than theoretical cryptanalysis, which dictated a need for a replacement algorithm. As a result of discussions involving external consultants including the NSA, the key size was reduced from 128 bits to 56 bits to fit on a single chip.\nIn academia, various proposals for a DES-cracking machine were advanced. In 1977, Diffie and Hellman proposed a machine costing an estimated US$20 million which could find a DES key in a single day. By 1993, Wiener had proposed a key-search machine costing US$1 million which would find a key within 7 hours. However, none of these early proposals were ever implemented\u2014or, at least, no implementations were publicly acknowledged. The vulnerability of DES was practically demonstrated in the late 1990s. In 1997, RSA Security sponsored a series of contests, offering a $10,000 prize to the first team that broke a message encrypted with DES for the contest. That contest was won by the DESCHALL Project, led by Rocke Verser, Matt Curtin, and Justin Dolske, using idle cycles of thousands of computers across the Internet. The feasibility of cracking DES quickly was demonstrated in 1998 when a custom DES-cracker was built by the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF), a cyberspace civil rights group, at the cost of approximately US$250,000 (see EFF DES cracker). Their motivation was to show that DES was breakable in practice as well as in theory: \"There are many people who will not believe a truth until they can see it with their own eyes. Showing them a physical machine that can crack DES in a few days is the only way to convince some people that they really cannot trust their security to DES.\" The machine brute-forced a key in a little more than 2 days' worth of searching.\nThe next confirmed DES cracker was the COPACOBANA machine built in 2006 by teams of the Universities of Bochum and Kiel, both in Germany. Unlike the EFF machine, COPACOBANA consists of commercially available, reconfigurable integrated circuits. 120 of these field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) of type XILINX Spartan-3 1000 run in parallel. They are grouped in 20 DIMM modules, each containing 6 FPGAs. The use of reconfigurable hardware makes the machine applicable to other code breaking tasks as well. One of the more interesting aspects of COPACOBANA is its cost factor. One machine can be built for approximately $10,000. The cost decrease by roughly a factor of 25 over the EFF machine is an example of the continuous improvement of digital hardware\u2014see Moore's law. Adjusting for inflation over 8 years yields an even higher improvement of about 30x. Since 2007, SciEngines GmbH, a spin-off company of the two project partners of COPACOBANA has enhanced and developed successors of COPACOBANA. In 2008 their COPACOBANA RIVYERA reduced the time to break DES to less than one day, using 128 Spartan-3 5000's. SciEngines RIVYERA held the record in brute-force breaking DES, having utilized 128 Spartan-3 5000 FPGAs. Their 256 Spartan-6 LX150 model has further lowered this time.\nIn 2012, David Hulton and Moxie Marlinspike announced a system with 48 Xilinx Virtex-6 LX240T FPGAs, each FPGA containing 40 fully pipelined DES cores running at 400\u00a0MHz, for a total capacity of 768 gigakeys/sec. The system can exhaustively search the entire 56-bit DES key space in about 26 hours and this service is offered for a fee online.\nAttacks faster than brute force.\nThere are three attacks known that can break the full 16 rounds of DES with less complexity than a brute-force search: differential cryptanalysis (DC), linear cryptanalysis (LC), and Davies' attack. However, the attacks are theoretical and are generally considered infeasible to mount in practice; these types of attack are sometimes termed certificational weaknesses.\nThere have also been attacks proposed against reduced-round versions of the cipher, that is, versions of DES with fewer than 16 rounds. Such analysis gives an insight into how many rounds are needed for safety, and how much of a \"security margin\" the full version retains.\nDifferential-linear cryptanalysis was proposed by Langford and Hellman in 1994, and combines differential and linear cryptanalysis into a single attack. An enhanced version of the attack can break 9-round DES with 215.8 chosen plaintexts and has a 229.2 time complexity (Biham and others, 2002).\nMinor cryptanalytic properties.\nDES exhibits the complementation property, namely that\nwhere formula_2 is the bitwise complement of formula_3 formula_4 denotes encryption with key formula_5 formula_6 and formula_7 denote plaintext and ciphertext blocks respectively. The complementation property means that the work for a brute-force attack could be reduced by a factor of 2 (or a single bit) under a chosen-plaintext assumption. By definition, this property also applies to TDES cipher.\nDES also has four so-called \"weak keys\". Encryption (\"E\") and decryption (\"D\") under a weak key have the same effect (see involution):\nThere are also six pairs of \"semi-weak keys\". Encryption with one of the pair of semiweak keys, formula_10, operates identically to decryption with the other, formula_11:\nIt is easy enough to avoid the weak and semiweak keys in an implementation, either by testing for them explicitly, or simply by choosing keys randomly; the odds of picking a weak or semiweak key by chance are negligible. The keys are not really any weaker than any other keys anyway, as they do not give an attack any advantage.\nDES has also been proved not to be a group, or more precisely, the set formula_14 (for all possible keys formula_15) under functional composition is not a group, nor \"close\" to being a group. This was an open question for some time, and if it had been the case, it would have been possible to break DES, and multiple encryption modes such as Triple DES would not increase the security, because repeated encryption (and decryptions) under different keys would be equivalent to encryption under another, single key.\nSimplified DES.\nSimplified DES (SDES) was designed for educational purposes only, to help students learn about modern cryptanalytic techniques.\nSDES has similar properties and structure as DES, but has been simplified to make it much easier to perform encryption and decryption by hand with pencil and paper.\nSome people feel that learning SDES gives insight into DES and other block ciphers, and insight into various cryptanalytic attacks against them.\nReplacement algorithms.\nConcerns about security and the relatively slow operation of DES in software motivated researchers to propose a variety of alternative block cipher designs, which started to appear in the late 1980s and early 1990s: examples include RC5, Blowfish, IDEA, NewDES, SAFER, CAST5 and FEAL. Most of these designs kept the 64-bit block size of DES, and could act as a \"drop-in\" replacement, although they typically used a 64-bit or 128-bit key. In the Soviet Union the GOST 28147-89 algorithm was introduced, with a 64-bit block size and a 256-bit key, which was also used in Russia later.\nDES itself can be adapted and reused in a more secure scheme. Many former DES users now use Triple DES (TDES) which was described and analysed by one of DES's patentees (see FIPS Pub 46-3); it involves applying DES three times with two (2TDES) or three (3TDES) different keys. TDES is regarded as adequately secure, although it is quite slow. A less computationally expensive alternative is DES-X, which increases the key size by XORing extra key material before and after DES. GDES was a DES variant proposed as a way to speed up encryption, but it was shown to be susceptible to differential cryptanalysis.\nOn January 2, 1997, NIST announced that they wished to choose a successor to DES. In 2001, after an international competition, NIST selected a new cipher, the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), as a replacement. The algorithm which was selected as the AES was submitted by its designers under the name Rijndael. Other finalists in the NIST AES competition included RC6, Serpent, MARS, and Twofish."}
{"id": "7979", "revid": "4", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7979", "title": "DeMoivresFormula", "text": ""}
{"id": "7983", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7983", "title": "Double-hulled tanker", "text": "A double-hulled tanker refers to an oil tanker which has a double hull. They reduce the likelihood of leaks occurring compared to single-hulled tankers, and their ability to prevent or reduce oil spills led to double hulls being standardized for oil tankers and other types of ships including by the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships or MARPOL Convention. After the Exxon Valdez oil spill disaster in Alaska in 1989, the US Government required all new oil tankers built for use between US ports to be equipped with a full double hull.\nReasons for use.\nA number of manufacturers have embraced oil tankers with a double hull because it strengthens the hull of ships, reducing the likelihood of oil disasters in low-impact collisions and groundings over single-hull ships. They reduce the likelihood of leaks occurring at low speed impacts in port areas when the ship is under pilotage. Research of impact damage of ships has revealed that double-hulled tankers are unlikely to perforate both hulls in a collision, preventing oil from seeping out. However, for smaller tankers, U shaped tanks might be susceptible to \"free flooding\" across the double bottom and up to the outside water level each side of the cargo tank. Salvors prefer to salvage doubled-hulled tankers because they permit the use of air pressure to vacuum out the flood water. In the 1960s, collision proof double hulls for nuclear ships were extensively investigated, due to escalating concerns over nuclear accidents.\nThe ability of double-hulled tankers to prevent or reduce oil spills led to double hulls being standardized for other types of ships including oil tankers by the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships or MARPOL Convention. In 1992, MARPOL was amended, making it \"mandatory for tankers of 5,000 dwt and more ordered after 6 July 1993 to be fitted with double hulls, or an alternative design approved by IMO\". However, in the aftermath of the Erika incident of the coast off France in December 1999, members of IMO adopted a revised schedule for the phase-out of single-hull tankers, which came into effect on 1 September 2003, with further amendments validated on 5 April 2005.\nAfter the Exxon Valdez oil spill disaster, when that ship grounded on Bligh Reef outside the port of Valdez, Alaska in 1989, the US Government required all new oil tankers built for use between US ports to be equipped with a full double hull. However, the damage to the Exxon Valdez penetrated sections of the hull (the slops oil tanks, or slop tanks) that were protected by a double bottom, or partial double hull.\nMaintenance issues.\nAlthough double-hulled tankers reduce the likelihood of ships grazing rocks and creating holes in the hull, a double hull does not protect against major, high-energy collisions or groundings which cause the majority of oil pollution, despite this being the reason that the double hull was mandated by United States legislation. Double-hulled tankers, if poorly designed, constructed, maintained and operated can be as problematic, if not more problematic than their single-hulled counterparts. Double-hulled tankers have a more complex design and structure than their single-hulled counterparts, which means that they require more maintenance and care in operating, which if not subject to responsible monitoring and policing, may cause problems. Double hulls often result in the weight of the hull increasing by at least 20%, and because the steel weight of doubled-hulled tanks should not be greater than that of single-hulled ships, the individual hull walls are typically thinner and theoretically less resistant to wear. Double hulls by no means eliminate the possibility of the hulls breaking apart. Due to the air space between the hulls, there is also a potential problem with volatile gases seeping out through worn areas of the internal hull, increasing the risk of an explosion.\nAlthough several international conventions against pollution are in place, as of 2003 there was still no formal body setting international mandatory standards, although the International Safety Guide for Oil Tankers and Terminals (ISGOTT) does provide guidelines giving advice on optimum use and safety, such as recommending that ballast tanks are not entered while loaded with cargo, and that weekly samples are made of the atmosphere inside for hydrocarbon gas. Due to the difficulties of maintenance, ship builders have been competitive in producing double-hulled ships which are easier to inspect, such as ballast and cargo tanks which are easily accessible and easier to spot corrosion in the hull. The Tanker Structure Cooperative Forum (TSCF) published the \"Guide to Inspection and Maintenance of Double-Hull Tanker Structures\" in 1995 giving advice based on experience of operating double-hulled tankers."}
{"id": "7984", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7984", "title": "Drink", "text": "A drink (or beverage) is a liquid intended for human consumption. In addition to their basic function of satisfying thirst, drinks play important roles in human culture. Common types of drinks include plain drinking water, milk, coffee, tea, hot chocolate, juice and soft drinks. In addition, alcoholic drinks such as wine, beer, and liquor, which contain the drug ethanol, have been part of human culture for more than 8,000 years.\nNon-alcoholic drinks often signify drinks that would normally contain alcohol, such as beer and wine, but are made with a sufficiently low concentration of alcohol by volume. The category includes drinks that have undergone an alcohol removal process such as non-alcoholic beers and de-alcoholized wines.\nBiology.\nWhen the human body becomes dehydrated, it experiences thirst. This craving of fluids results in an instinctive need to drink. Thirst is regulated by the hypothalamus in response to subtle changes in the body's electrolyte levels, and also as a result of changes in the volume of blood circulating. The complete deprivation of drinks, that is, water, will result in death faster than the removal of any other substance besides oxygen. Water and milk have been basic drinks throughout history. As water is essential for life, it has also been the carrier of many diseases.\nAs society developed, techniques were discovered to create alcoholic drinks from the plants that were available in different areas. The earliest archaeological evidence of wine production yet found has been at sites in Georgia ( BCE) and Iran ( BCE). Beer may have been known in Neolithic Europe as far back as 3000 BCE, and was mainly brewed on a domestic scale. The invention of beer (and bread) has been argued to be responsible for humanity's ability to develop technology and build civilization. Tea likely originated in Yunnan, China during the Shang Dynasty (1500 BCE\u20131046 BCE) as a medicinal drink.\nHistory.\nDrinking has been a large part of socialising throughout the centuries. In Ancient Greece, a social gathering for the purpose of drinking was known as a symposium, where watered down wine would be drunk. The purpose of these gatherings could be anything from serious discussions to direct indulgence. In Ancient Rome, a similar concept of a \"convivium\" took place regularly.\nMany early societies considered alcohol a gift from the gods, leading to the creation of gods such as Dionysus. Other religions forbid, discourage, or restrict the drinking of alcoholic drinks for various reasons. In some regions with a dominant religion the production, sale, and consumption of alcoholic drinks is forbidden to everybody, regardless of religion.\nToasting is a method of honouring a person or wishing good will by taking a drink. Another tradition is that of the loving cup, at weddings or other celebrations such as sports victories a group will share a drink in a large receptacle, shared by everyone until empty.\nIn East Africa and Yemen, coffee was used in native religious ceremonies. As these ceremonies conflicted with the beliefs of the Christian church, the Ethiopian Church banned the secular consumption of coffee until the reign of Emperor Menelik II. The drink was also banned in Ottoman Turkey during the 17th century for political reasons and was associated with rebellious political activities in Europe.\nProduction.\nA drink is a form of liquid which has been prepared for human consumption. The preparation can include a number of different steps, some prior to transport, others immediately prior to consumption.\nPurification of water.\nWater is the chief constituent in all drinks, and the primary ingredient in most. Water is purified prior to drinking. Methods for purification include filtration and the addition of chemicals, such as chlorination. The importance of purified water is highlighted by the World Health Organization, who point out 94% of deaths from diarrhea \u2013 the third biggest cause of infectious death worldwide at 1.8 million annually \u2013 could be prevented by improving the quality of the victim's environment, particularly safe water.\nPasteurisation.\nPasteurisation is the process of heating a liquid for a period of time at a specified temperature, then immediately cooling. The process reduces the growth of microorganisms within the liquid, thereby increasing the time before spoilage. It is primarily used on milk, which prior to pasteurisation is commonly infected with pathogenic bacteria and therefore is more likely than any other part of the common diet in the developed world to cause illness.\nJuicing.\nThe process of extracting juice from fruits and vegetables can take a number of forms. Simple crushing of most fruits will provide a significant amount of liquid, though a more intense pressure can be applied to get the maximum amount of juice from the fruit. Both crushing and pressing are processes used in the production of wine.\nInfusion.\nInfusion is the process of extracting flavours from plant material by allowing the material to remain suspended within water. This process is used in the production of teas, herbal teas and can be used to prepare coffee (when using a coffee press).\nPercolation.\nThe name is derived from the word \"percolate\" which means \"to cause (a solvent) to pass through a permeable substance especially for extracting a soluble constituent\".\nIn the case of coffee-brewing the solvent is water, the permeable substance is the coffee grounds, and the soluble constituents are the chemical compounds that give coffee its color, taste, aroma, and stimulating properties.\nCarbonation.\nCarbonation is the process of dissolving carbon dioxide into a liquid, such as water.\nFermentation.\nFermentation is a metabolic process that converts sugar to ethanol. Fermentation has been used by humans for the production of drinks since the Neolithic age. In winemaking, grape juice is combined with yeast in an anaerobic environment to allow the fermentation. The amount of sugar in the wine and the length of time given for fermentation determine the alcohol level and the sweetness of the wine.\nWhen brewing beer, there are four primary ingredients \u2013 water, grain, yeast and hops. The grain is encouraged to germinate by soaking and drying in heat, a process known as malting. It is then milled before soaking again to create the sugars needed for fermentation. This process is known as mashing. Hops are added for flavouring, then the yeast is added to the mixture (now called wort) to start the fermentation process.\nDistillation.\nDistillation is a method of separating mixtures based on differences in volatility of components in a boiling liquid mixture. It is one of the methods used in the purification of water. It is also a method of producing spirits from milder alcoholic drinks.\nMixing.\nAn alcoholic mixed drink that contains two or more ingredients is referred to as a cocktail. Cocktails were originally a mixture of spirits, sugar, water, and bitters. The term is now often used for almost any mixed drink that contains alcohol, including mixers, mixed shots, etc. A cocktail today usually contains one or more kinds of spirit and one or more mixers, such as soda or fruit juice. Additional ingredients may be sugar, honey, milk, cream, and various herbs.\nType.\nNon-alcoholic drinks.\nA non-alcoholic drink is one that contains little or no alcohol. This category includes low-alcohol beer, non-alcoholic wine, and apple cider if they contain a sufficiently low concentration of alcohol by volume (ABV). The exact definition of what is \"non-alcoholic\" and what is not depends on local laws: in the United Kingdom, \"alcohol-free beer\" is under 0.05% ABV, \"de-alcoholised beer\" is under 0.5%, while \"low-alcohol beer\" can contain no more than 1.2% ABV. The term \"soft drink\" specifies the absence of alcohol in contrast to \"hard drink\" and \"drink\". The term \"drink\" is theoretically neutral, but often is used in a way that suggests alcoholic content. Drinks such as soda pop, sparkling water, iced tea, lemonade, root beer, fruit punch, milk, hot chocolate, tea, coffee, milkshakes, and tap water and energy drinks are all soft drinks.\nWater.\nWater is the world's most consumed drink, however, 97% of water on Earth is non-drinkable salt water. Fresh water is found in rivers, lakes, wetlands, groundwater, and frozen glaciers. Less than 1% of the Earth's fresh water supplies are accessible through surface water and underground sources which are cost effective to retrieve.\nIn western cultures, water is often drunk cold. In the Chinese culture, it is typically drunk hot.\nMilk.\nRegarded as one of the \"original\" drinks, milk is the primary source of nutrition for babies. In many cultures of the world, especially the Western world, humans continue to consume dairy milk beyond infancy, using the milk of other animals (especially cattle, goats and sheep) as a drink. Plant milk, a general term for any milk-like product that is derived from a plant source, also has a long history of consumption in various countries and cultures. The most popular varieties internationally are soy milk, almond milk, rice milk and coconut milk.\nSoft drinks.\nCarbonated drinks refer to drinks which have carbon dioxide dissolved into them. This can happen naturally through fermenting and in natural water spas or artificially by the dissolution of carbon dioxide under pressure. The first commercially available artificially carbonated drink is believed to have been produced by Thomas Henry in the late 1770s.\nCola, orange, various roots, ginger, and lemon/lime are commonly used to create non-alcoholic carbonated drinks; sugars and preservatives may be added later.\nThe most consumed carbonated soft drinks are produced by three major global brands: Coca-Cola, PepsiCo and the Dr Pepper Snapple Group.\nJuice and juice drinks.\nFruit juice is a natural product that contains few or no additives. Citrus products such as orange juice and tangerine juice are familiar breakfast drinks, while grapefruit juice, pineapple, apple, grape, lime, and lemon juice are also common. Coconut water is a highly nutritious and refreshing juice. Many kinds of berries are crushed; their juices are mixed with water and sometimes sweetened. Raspberry, blackberry and currants are popular juices drinks but the percentage of water also determines their nutritive value. Grape juice allowed to ferment produces wine.\nFruits are highly perishable so the ability to extract juices and store them was of significant value. Some fruits are highly acidic and mixing them with water and sugars or honey was often necessary to make them palatable. Early storage of fruit juices was labor-intensive, requiring the crushing of the fruits and the mixing of the resulting pure juices with sugars before bottling.\nVegetable juices are usually served warm or cold. Different types of vegetables can be used to make vegetable juice such as carrots, tomatoes, cucumbers, celery and many more. Some vegetable juices are mixed with some fruit juice to make the vegetable juice taste better. Many popular vegetable juices, particularly ones with high tomato content, are high in sodium, and therefore consumption of them for health must be carefully considered. Some vegetable juices provide the same health benefits as whole vegetables in terms of reducing risks of cardiovascular disease and cancer.\nSleep drinks.\nA nightcap is a drink taken shortly before bedtime to induce sleep. For example, a small alcoholic drink or a cup of warm milk can supposedly promote a good night's sleep. Today, most nightcaps and relaxation drinks are generally non-alcoholic beverages containing calming ingredients. They are considered beverages which serve to relax a person. Unlike other calming beverages, such as tea, warm milk or milk with honey; relaxation drinks almost universally contain more than one active ingredient. Relaxation drinks have been known to contain other natural ingredients and are usually free of caffeine and alcohol but some have claimed to contain marijuana.\nAlcoholic drinks.\nA drink is considered \"alcoholic\" if it contains ethanol, commonly known as alcohol (although in chemistry the definition of \"alcohol\" includes many other compounds). Beer has been a part of human culture for 8,000 years.\nIn many countries, imbibing alcoholic drinks in a local bar or pub is a cultural tradition.\nBeer.\nBeer is an alcoholic drink produced by the saccharification of starch and fermentation of the resulting sugar. The starch and saccharification enzymes are often derived from malted cereal grains, most commonly malted barley and malted wheat. Most beer is also flavoured with hops, which add bitterness and act as a natural preservative, though other flavourings such as herbs or fruit may occasionally be included. The preparation of beer is called brewing. Beer is the world's most widely consumed alcoholic drink, and is the third-most popular drink overall, after water and tea. It is said to have been discovered by goddess Ninkasi around 5300 BCE, when she accidentally discovered yeast after leaving grain in jars that were later rained upon and left for several days. Women have been the chief creators of beer throughout history due to its association with domesticity and it, throughout much of history, being brewed in the home for family consumption. Only in recent history have men begun to dabble in the field. It is thought by some to be the oldest fermented drink.\nSome of humanity's earliest known writings refer to the production and distribution of beer: the Code of Hammurabi included laws regulating beer and beer parlours, and \"The Hymn to Ninkasi\", a prayer to the Mesopotamian goddess of beer, served as both a prayer and as a method of remembering the recipe for beer in a culture with few literate people. Today, the brewing industry is a global business, consisting of several dominant multinational companies and many thousands of smaller producers ranging from brewpubs to regional breweries.\nCider.\nCider is a fermented alcoholic drink made from fruit juice, most commonly and traditionally apple juice, but also the juice of peaches, pears (\"Perry\" cider) or other fruit. Cider may be made from any variety of apple, but certain cultivars grown solely for use in cider are known as cider apples. The United Kingdom has the highest per capita consumption of cider, as well as the largest cider-producing companies in the world, , the U.K. produces 600 million litres of cider each year (130 million imperial gallons).\nWine.\nWine is an alcoholic drink made from fermented grapes or other fruits. The natural chemical balance of grapes lets them ferment without the addition of sugars, acids, enzymes, water, or other nutrients. Yeast consumes the sugars in the grapes and converts them into alcohol and carbon dioxide. Different varieties of grapes and strains of yeasts produce different styles of wine. The well-known variations result from the very complex interactions between the biochemical development of the fruit, reactions involved in fermentation, terroir and subsequent appellation, along with human intervention in the overall process. The final product may contain tens of thousands of chemical compounds in amounts varying from a few percent to a few parts per billion.\nWines made from produce besides grapes are usually named after the product from which they are produced (for example, rice wine, pomegranate wine, apple wine and elderberry wine) and are generically called fruit wine. The term \"wine\" can also refer to starch-fermented or fortified drinks having higher alcohol content, such as barley wine, huangjiu, or sake.\nWine has a rich history dating back thousands of years, with the earliest production so far discovered having occurred \u00a0BC in Georgia. It had reached the Balkans by \u00a0BC and was consumed and celebrated in ancient Greece and Rome.\nFrom its earliest appearance in written records, wine has also played an important role in religion. Red wine was closely associated with blood by the ancient Egyptians, who, according to Plutarch, avoided its free consumption as late as the 7th-century BC Saite dynasty, \"thinking it to be the blood of those who had once battled against the gods\". The Greek cult and mysteries of Dionysus, carried on by the Romans in their Bacchanalia, were the origins of western theater. Judaism incorporates it in the Kiddush and Christianity in its Eucharist, while alcohol consumption was forbidden in Islam.\nSpirits.\nSpirits are distilled beverages that contain no added sugar and have at least 20% alcohol by volume (ABV). Popular spirits include borovi\u010dka, brandy, gin, rum, slivovitz, tequila, vodka, and whisky. Brandy is a spirit created by distilling wine, whilst vodka may be distilled from any starch- or sugar-rich plant matter; most vodka today is produced from grains such as sorghum, corn, rye or wheat.\nHot drinks.\nCoffee.\nCoffee is a brewed drink prepared from the roasted seeds of several species of an evergreen shrub of the genus \"Coffea\". The two most common sources of coffee beans are the highly regarded \"Coffea arabica\", and the \"robusta\" form of the hardier \"Coffea canephora\". Coffee plants are cultivated in more than 70 countries. Once ripe, coffee \"berries\" are picked, processed, and dried to yield the seeds inside. The seeds are then roasted to varying degrees, depending on the desired flavor, before being ground and brewed to create coffee.\nCoffee is slightly acidic (pH 5.0\u20135.1) and can have a stimulating effect on humans because of its caffeine content. It is one of the most popular drinks in the world. It can be prepared and presented in a variety of ways. The effect of coffee on human health has been a subject of many studies; however, results have varied in terms of coffee's relative benefit.\nCoffee cultivation first took place in southern Arabia; the earliest credible evidence of coffee-drinking appears in the middle of the 15th century in the Sufi shrines of Yemen.\nHot chocolate.\nHot chocolate, also known as drinking chocolate or cocoa, is a heated drink consisting of shaved chocolate, melted chocolate or cocoa powder, heated milk or water, and usually a sweetener. Hot chocolate may be topped with whipped cream. Hot chocolate made with melted chocolate is sometimes called drinking chocolate, characterized by less sweetness and a thicker consistency.\nThe first chocolate drink is believed to have been created by the Mayans around 2,500-3,000 years ago, and a cocoa drink was an essential part of Aztec culture by 1400 AD, by which they referred to as xoc\u014dl\u0101tl. The drink became popular in Europe after being introduced from Mexico in the New World and has undergone multiple changes since then. Until the 19th century, hot chocolate was even used medicinally to treat ailments such as liver and stomach diseases.\nHot chocolate is consumed throughout the world and comes in multiple variations, including the spiced \"chocolate para mesa\" of Latin America, the very thick \"cioccolata calda\" served in Italy and \"chocolate a la taza\" served in Spain, and the thinner hot cocoa consumed in the United States. Prepared hot chocolate can be purchased from a range of establishments, including cafeterias, fast food restaurants, coffeehouses and teahouses. Powdered hot chocolate mixes, which can be added to boiling water or hot milk to make the drink at home, are sold at grocery stores and online.\nTea.\nTea, the second most consumed drink in the world, is produced from infusing dried leaves of the \"camellia sinensis\" shrub, in boiling water. There are many ways in which tea is prepared for consumption: lemon or milk and sugar are among the most common additives worldwide. Other additions include butter and salt in Bhutan, Nepal, and Tibet; bubble tea in Taiwan; fresh ginger in Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore; mint in North Africa and Senegal; cardamom in Central Asia; rum to make Jagertee in Central Europe; and coffee to make yuanyang in Hong Kong. Tea is also served differently from country to country: in China and Japan tiny cups are used to serve tea; in Thailand and the United States tea is often served cold (as \"iced tea\") or with a lot of sweetener; Indians boil tea with milk and a blend of spices as masala chai; tea is brewed with a samovar in Iran, Kashmir, Russia and Turkey; and in the Australian Outback it is traditionally brewed in a billycan.\nTea leaves can be processed in different ways resulting in a drink which appears and tastes different. Chinese yellow and green tea are steamed, roasted and dried; Oolong tea is semi-oxidised and appears green-black and black teas are fully oxidised.\nAround the world, people refer to other herbal infusions as \"teas\"; it is also argued that these were popular long before the \"Camellia sinensis\" shrub was used for tea making. Leaves, flowers, roots or bark can be used to make a herbal infusion and can be bought fresh, dried or powdered.\nIn culture.\nPlaces to drink.\nThroughout history, people have come together in establishments to socialise whilst drinking. This includes caf\u00e9s and coffeehouses, focus on providing hot drinks as well as light snacks. Many coffee houses in the Middle East, and in West Asian immigrant districts in the Western world, offer \"shisha\" (\"nargile\" in Turkish and Greek), flavored tobacco smoked through a hookah. Espresso bars are a type of coffeehouse that specialize in serving espresso and espresso-based drinks.\nIn China and Japan, the establishment would be a tea house, where people would socialise while drinking tea. Chinese scholars have used the teahouse as a place to share ideas.\nAlcoholic drinks are served in drinking establishments, which have different cultural connotations. For example, pubs are fundamental to the culture of Britain, Ireland, Australia, Canada, New England, Metro Detroit, South Africa and New Zealand. In many places, especially in villages, a pub can be the focal point of the community. The writings of Samuel Pepys describe the pub as the heart of England. Many pubs are controlled by breweries, so cask ale or keg beer may be a better value than wines and spirits.\nIn contrast, types of bars range from seedy bars or nightclubs, sometimes termed \"dive bars\", to elegant places of entertainment for the elite. Bars provide stools or chairs that are placed at tables or counters for their patrons. The term \"bar\" is derived from the specialized counter on which drinks are served. Some bars have entertainment on a stage, such as a live band, comedians, go-go dancers, or strippers. Patrons may sit or stand at the bar and be served by the bartender, or they may sit at tables and be served by cocktail servers.\nMatching with food.\nFood and drink are often paired together to enhance the taste experience. This primarily happens with wine and a culture has grown up around the process. Weight, flavors and textures can either be contrasted or complemented. In recent years, food magazines began to suggest particular wines with recipes and restaurants would offer multi-course dinners matched with a specific wine for each course.\nPresentation.\nDifferent drinks have unique receptacles for their consumption. This is sometimes purely for presentations purposes, such as for cocktails. In other situations, the drinkware has practical application, such as coffee cups which are designed for insulation or brandy snifters which are designed to encourage evaporation but trap the aroma within the glass.\nMany glasses include a stem, which allows the drinker to hold the glass without affecting the temperature of the drink. In champagne glasses, the bowl is designed to retain champagne's signature carbonation, by reducing the surface area at the opening of the bowl. Historically, champagne has been served in a champagne coupe, the shape of which allowed carbonation to dissipate even more rapidly than from a standard wine glass.\nCommercial trade.\nInternational exports and imports.\nAn important export commodity, coffee was the top agricultural export for twelve countries in 2004,\nand it was the world's seventh-largest legal agricultural export by value in 2005. Green (unroasted) coffee is one of the most traded agricultural commodities in the world.\nInvestment.\nSome drinks, such as wine, can be used as an alternative investment. This can be achieved by either purchasing and reselling individual bottles or cases of particular wines, or purchasing shares in an investment wine fund that pools investors' capital."}
{"id": "7985", "revid": "41469077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7985", "title": "Dill", "text": "Dill (\"Anethum graveolens\") is an annual herb in the celery family Apiaceae. It is the only species in the genus \"Anethum\". Dill is grown widely in Eurasia, where its leaves and seeds are used as an herb or spice for flavouring food.\nGrowth.\nDill grows up to , with slender hollow stems and alternate, finely divided, softly delicate leaves long. The ultimate leaf divisions are broad, slightly broader than the similar leaves of fennel, which are threadlike, less than broad, but harder in texture. The flowers are white to yellow, in small umbels diameter. The seeds are long and thick, and straight to slightly curved with a longitudinally ridged surface.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"dill\" and its close relatives are found in most of the Germanic languages; its ultimate origin is unknown. The generic name \"Anethum\" is the Latin form of Greek \u1f04\u03bd\u1fd1\u03c3\u03bf\u03bd / \u1f04\u03bd\u03b7\u03c3\u03bf\u03bd / \u1f04\u03bd\u03b7\u03b8\u03bf\u03bd / \u1f04\u03bd\u03b7\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd, which meant both 'dill' and 'anise'. The form \"an\u012bsum\" came to be used for anise, and \"an\u0113thum\" for dill. The Latin word is the origin of dill's names in the Western Romance languages (\"anet\", \"aneldo\", etc.), and also of the obsolete English \"anet\". Most Slavic language names come from Proto-Slavic \"*kopr\u044a\", which developed from the PIE root *\"ku\u032f\u02591po-\" 'aroma, odor'.\nHistory.\nDill has been found in the tomb of Egyptian Pharaoh Amenhotep II, dating to around 1400 BC. It was also later found in the Greek city of Samos, around the 7th century BC, and mentioned in the writings of Theophrastus (371\u2013287 BC).\nCulinary use.\nFresh and dried dill leaves (sometimes called \"dill weed\" or \"dillweed\" to distinguish it from dill seed) are widely used as herbs in Europe and central Asia.\nLike caraway, the fern-like leaves of dill are aromatic and are used to flavour many foods such as gravlax (cured salmon) and other fish dishes, borscht, and other soups, as well as pickles (where the dill flower is sometimes used). Dill is best when used fresh, as it loses its flavor rapidly if dried. However, freeze-dried dill leaves retain their flavour relatively well for a few months.\nDill oil is extracted from the leaves, stems, and seeds of the plant. The oil from the seeds is distilled and used in the manufacturing of soaps.\nDill is the eponymous ingredient in dill pickles.\nEuropean cuisine.\nIn central and eastern Europe, Scandinavia, the Baltic states, Ukraine, and Russia, dill is a staple culinary herb along with chives and parsley. Fresh, finely cut dill leaves are used as a topping in soups, especially the hot red borsht and the cold borsht mixed with curds, kefir, yogurt, or sour cream, which is served during hot summer weather and is called \"okroshka\". It also is popular in summer to drink fermented milk (curds, kefir, yogurt, or buttermilk) mixed with dill (and sometimes other herbs).\nIn the same way, dill is used as a topping for boiled potatoes covered with fresh butter\u00a0\u2013 especially in summer when there are so-called \"new\", or young, potatoes. The dill leaves may be mixed with butter, making a dill butter, to serve the same purpose. Dill leaves mixed with tvorog form one of the traditional cheese spreads used for sandwiches. Fresh dill leaves are used throughout the year as an ingredient in salads, \"e.g.\", one made of lettuce, fresh cucumbers, and tomatoes, as basil leaves are used in Italy and Greece.\nRussian cuisine is noted for liberal use of dill, where it is known as . Its supposed antiflatulent activity caused some Russian cosmonauts to recommend its use in human spaceflight due to the confined quarters and closed air supply.\nIn Polish cuisine, fresh dill leaves mixed with sour cream are the basis for dressings. It is especially popular to use this kind of sauce with freshly cut cucumbers, which practically are wholly immersed in the sauce, making a salad called \"mizeria\". Dill sauce is used hot for baked freshwater fish and for chicken or turkey breast, or used hot or cold for hard-boiled eggs. A dill-based soup, (\"zupa koperkowa\"), served with potatoes and hard-boiled eggs, is popular in Poland. Whole stems including roots and flower buds are used traditionally to prepare Polish-style pickled cucumbers (\"og\u00f3rki kiszone\"), especially the so-called low-salt cucumbers (\"og\u00f3rki ma\u0142osolne\"). Whole stems of dill (often including the roots) also are cooked with potatoes, especially the potatoes of autumn and winter, so they resemble the flavour of the newer potatoes found in summer. Some kinds of fish, especially trout and salmon, traditionally are baked with the stems and leaves of dill.\nIn the Czech Republic, white dill sauce made of cream (or milk), butter, flour, vinegar, and dill is called \"koprov\u00e1 om\u00e1\u010dka\" (also \"koprovka\" or \"kopra\u010dka\") and is served either with boiled eggs and potatoes, or with dumplings and boiled beef. Another Czech dish with dill is a soup called, \"kulajda\", that contains mushrooms (traditionally wild ones).\nIn Germany, dill is popular as a seasoning for fish and many other dishes, chopped as a garnish on potatoes, and as a flavouring in pickles.\nIn the UK, dill may be used in fish pie.\nIn Bulgaria dill is widely used in traditional vegetable salads, and most notably the yogurt-based cold soup \"Tarator\". It is also used in the preparation of sour pickles, cabbage, and other dishes.\nIn Romania dill (\"m\u0103rar\") is widely used as an ingredient for soups such as \"bor\u015f\" (pronounced \"borsh\"), pickles, and other dishes, especially those based on peas, beans, and cabbage. It is popular for dishes based on potatoes and mushrooms and may be found in many summer salads (especially cucumber salad, cabbage salad and lettuce salad). During springtime, it is used in omelets with spring onions. It often complements sauces based on sour cream or yogurt and is mixed with salted cheese and used as a filling. Another popular dish with dill as a main ingredient is dill sauce, which is served with eggs and fried sausages.\nIn Hungary, dill is very widely used. It is popular as a sauce or filling, and mixed with a type of cottage cheese. Dill is also used for pickling and in salads. The Hungarian name for dill is \"kapor\".\nIn Serbia, dill is known as \"mirodjija\" and is used as an addition to soups, potato and cucumber salads, and French fries. It features in the Serbian proverb, \"\u0431\u0438\u0442\u0438 \u043c\u0438\u0440\u043e\u0452\u0438\u0458\u0430 \u0443 \u0441\u0432\u0430\u043a\u043e\u0458 \u0447\u043e\u0440\u0431\u0438\" /biti mirodjija u svakoj \u010dorbi/ (to be a dill in every soup), which corresponds to the English proverb \"to have a finger in every pie\".\nIn Greece, dill is known as \"\u03ac\u03bd\u03b7\u03b8\u03bf\u03c2\" (anithos). In antiquity it was used as an ingredient in wines that were called \"anithites oinos\" (wine with anithos-dill). In modern days, dill is used in salads, soups, sauces, and fish and vegetable dishes.\nIn Santa Maria, Azores, dill (\"endro\") is the most important ingredient of the traditional Holy Ghost soup (\"sopa do Esp\u00edrito Santo\"). Dill is found ubiquitously in Santa Maria, yet, is rare in the other Azorean Islands.\nIn Sweden, dill is a common spice or herb. The top of fully grown dill is called \"krondill\" (crown dill); this is used when cooking crayfish. The \"krondill\" is put into the water after the crayfish is boiled, but still in hot and salt water. Then the entire dish is refrigerated for at least 24 hours before being served (with toasted bread and butter). \"Krondill\" also is used for pickles, vodka, not wine, sugar, and \"krondill\". After a month or two of fermentation, the cucumber pickles are ready to eat, for instance, with pork, brown sauce, and potatoes, as a \"sweetener\". The thinner part of dill and young plants may be used with boiled fresh potatoes (especially the first potatoes of the year, \"new potatoes\", which usually are small and have a very thin skin). In salads it is used together with, or instead, of other green herbs, such as parsley, chives, and basil. It often is paired up with chives when used in food. Dill often is used to flavour fish and seafood in Sweden, for example, gravlax and various herring pickles, among them the traditional, \"sill i dill\" (literally \"herring in dill\"). In contrast to the various fish dishes flavoured with dill, there is also a traditional Swedish dish called, \"dillk\u00f6tt\", which is a meaty stew flavoured with dill. The dish commonly contains pieces of veal or lamb that are boiled until tender and then served together with a vinegary dill sauce. Dill seeds may be used in breads or \"akvavit\". A newer, non-traditional use of dill is to pair it with chives as a flavouring for potato chips. These are called \"dillchips\" and are quite popular in Sweden.\nAsian and Middle Eastern cooking.\nIn Iran, dill is known as \"shevid\" and sometimes, is used with rice and called \"shevid-polo\". It also is used in Iranian \"aash\" recipes, and similarly, is called in Persian.\nIn India, dill is known as \"Sholpa\" in Bengali, (\u0936\u0947\u092a\u0942) in Marathi and Konkani, in Hindi, or in Punjabi. In Telugu, it is called \"Soa-kura\" (herb greens). It also is called (\u0cb8\u0cac\u0ccd\u0cac\u0cb8\u0cbf\u0c97\u0cc6 \u0cb8\u0cca\u0caa\u0ccd\u0caa\u0cc1) in Kannada. In Tamil it is known as (\u0b9a\u0ba4\u0b95\u0bc1\u0baa\u0bcd\u0baa\u0bbf). In Malayalam, it is \u0d1a\u0d24\u0d15\u0d41\u0d2a\u0d4d\u0d2a () or (). In Sanskrit, this herb is called . In Gujarati, it is known as (\u0ab8\u0ac2\u0ab5\u0abe). In India, dill is prepared in the manner of yellow \"moong dal\", as a main-course dish. It is considered to have very good antiflatulent properties, so it is used as \"mukhwas\", or an after-meal digestive. Traditionally, it is given to mothers immediately after childbirth. In the state of Uttar Pradesh in India, a small amount of fresh dill is cooked along with cut potatoes and fresh fenugreek leaves (Hindi \u0906\u0932\u0942-\u092e\u0947\u0925\u0940-\u0938\u094b\u092f\u093e).\nIn Manipur, dill, locally known as , is an essential ingredient of \u2013 a traditional Manipuri dish made with fermented soybean and rice.\nIn Laos and parts of northern Thailand, dill is known in English as Lao coriander ( or ), and served as a side with salad yum or papaya salad. In the Lao language, it is called \"phak see\", and in Thai, it is known as \"phak chee Lao\". In Lao cuisine, Lao coriander is used extensively in traditional Lao dishes such as \"mok pa\" (steamed fish in banana leaf) and several coconut milk curries that contain fish or prawns.\nIn China dill is called colloquially, \"hu\u00edxi\u0101ng\" (, perfume of Hui people), or more properly \"sh\u00edlu\u00f3\" (). It is a common filling in \"baozi\" and \"xianbing\" and may be used as vegetarian with rice vermicelli, or combined with either meat or eggs. Vegetarian dill \"baozi\" are a common part of a Beijing breakfast. In \"baozi\" and \"xianbing\", it often is interchangeable with non-bulbing fennel and the term also may refer to fennel, similarly to caraway and coriander leaf, sharing a name in Chinese as well. Dill also may be stir fried as a potherb, often with egg, in the same manner as Chinese chives. It commonly is used in Taiwan as well. In Northern China, Beijing, Inner-Mongolia, Ningxia, Gansu, and Xinjiang, dill seeds commonly are called \"z\u012br\u00e1n\" (), but also \"k\u016bm\u00edng\" (), \"k\u016bm\u00edngzi\" (), \"sh\u00edlu\u00f3zi\" (), \"xi\u01ceohu\u00edxi\u0101ngzi\" () and are used with pepper for lamb meat. In the whole of China, \"y\u00e1ngchu\u00e0n\" () or \"y\u00e1ngr\u00f2u chu\u00e0n\" (), lamb brochette, a speciality from Uyghurs, uses cumin and pepper.\nIn Vietnam, the use of dill in cooking is regional. It is used mainly in northern Vietnamese cuisine.\nMiddle East uses.\nIn Arab countries, dill seed, called (grasshopper's eye), is used as a spice in cold dishes such as \"fattoush\" and pickles. In Arab countries of the Persian Gulf, dill is called \"shibint\" and is used mostly in fish dishes. In Egypt, dillweed is commonly used to flavour cabbage dishes, including \"mahshi koronb\" (stuffed cabbage leaves).\nIn Israel, dill weed is used in salads and also to flavour omelettes, often alongside parsley. It is known in Hebrew as (\u05e9\u05de\u05d9\u05e8).\nCultivation.\nSuccessful cultivation requires warm to hot summers with high sunshine levels; even partial shade will reduce the yield substantially. It also prefers rich, well-drained soil. The seeds are viable for three to ten years. The plants are somewhat monocarpic and quickly die after \"bolting\" (producing seeds). Hot temperatures may quicken bolting.\nThe seed is harvested by cutting the flower heads off the stalks when the seed is beginning to ripen. The seed heads are placed upside down in a paper bag and left in a warm, dry place for a week. The seeds then separate from the stems easily for storage in an airtight container.\nThese plants, like their fennel and parsley relatives, often are eaten by black swallowtail caterpillars in areas where that species occurs. For this reason, they may be included in some butterfly gardens.\nCompanion planting.\nWhen used as a companion plant, dill attracts many beneficial insects as the umbrella flower heads go to seed. It makes a good companion plant for cucumbers and broccoli.\nIt is a poor companion plant for carrots and tomatoes."}
{"id": "7987", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7987", "title": "Defensive team", "text": ""}
{"id": "7988", "revid": "13220696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7988", "title": "Dual space", "text": "In mathematics, any vector space \"formula_1\" has a corresponding dual vector space (or just dual space for short) consisting of all linear forms on \"formula_1\", together with the vector space structure of pointwise addition and scalar multiplication by constants.\nThe dual space as defined above is defined for all vector spaces, and to avoid ambiguity may also be called the .\nWhen defined for a topological vector space, there is a subspace of the dual space, corresponding to continuous linear functionals, called the \"continuous dual space\".\nDual vector spaces find application in many branches of mathematics that use vector spaces, such as in tensor analysis with finite-dimensional vector spaces.\nWhen applied to vector spaces of functions (which are typically infinite-dimensional), dual spaces are used to describe measures, distributions, and Hilbert spaces. Consequently, the dual space is an important concept in functional analysis.\nEarly terms for \"dual\" include \"polarer Raum\" [Hahn 1927], \"espace conjugu\u00e9\", \"adjoint space\" [Alaoglu 1940], and \"transponierter Raum\" [Schauder 1930] and [Banach 1932]. The term \"dual\" is due to Bourbaki 1938.\nAlgebraic dual space.\nGiven any vector space formula_1 over a field formula_4, the (algebraic) dual space formula_5 (alternatively denoted by formula_6 or formula_7) is defined as the set of all linear maps \"formula_8\" (linear functionals). Since linear maps are vector space homomorphisms, the dual space may be denoted formula_9.\nThe dual space formula_10 itself becomes a vector space over \"formula_4\" when equipped with an addition and scalar multiplication satisfying:\nfor all formula_13, \"formula_14\", and formula_15.\nElements of the algebraic dual space formula_10 are sometimes called covectors or one-forms.\nThe pairing of a functional \"formula_17\" in the dual space formula_10 and an element \"formula_19\" of \"formula_1\" is sometimes denoted by a bracket: \"formula_21\"\nor \"formula_22\". This pairing defines a nondegenerate bilinear mapping formula_23 called the natural pairing.\nFinite-dimensional case.\nIf \"V\" is finite-dimensional, then \"V\"\u2217 has the same dimension as \"V\". Given a basis in \"V\", it is possible to construct a specific basis in \"V\"\u2217, called the dual basis. This dual basis is a set of linear functionals on \"V\", defined by the relation\nfor any choice of coefficients . In particular, letting in turn each one of those coefficients be equal to one and the other coefficients zero, gives the system of equations\nwhere formula_26 is the Kronecker delta symbol. This property is referred to as \"bi-orthogonality property\".\nFor example, if \"V\" is R2, let its basis be chosen as . The basis vectors are not orthogonal to each other. Then, e1 and e2 are one-forms (functions that map a vector to a scalar) such that , , , and . (Note: The superscript here is the index, not an exponent.) This system of equations can be expressed using matrix notation as\nSolving this equation shows the dual basis to be . Because e1 and e2 are functionals, they can be rewritten as e1(\"x\", \"y\") = 2\"x\" and e2(\"x\", \"y\") = \u2212\"x\" + \"y\". In general, when \"V\" is R\"n\", if E = (e1, ..., e\"n\") is a matrix whose columns are the basis vectors and \u00ca = (e1, ..., e\"n\") is a matrix whose columns are the dual basis vectors, then\nwhere \"I\"\"n\" is an identity matrix of order . The biorthogonality property of these two basis sets allows any point x \u2208 \"V\" to be represented as\neven when the basis vectors are not orthogonal to each other. Strictly speaking, the above statement only makes sense once the inner product formula_30 and the corresponding duality pairing are introduced, as described below in \"\".\nIn particular, R\"n\" can be interpreted as the space of columns of real numbers, its dual space is typically written as the space of \"rows\" of real numbers. Such a row acts on R\"n\" as a linear functional by ordinary matrix multiplication. This is because a functional maps every -vector \"x\" into a real number \"y\". Then, seeing this functional as a matrix \"M\", and \"x\", \"y\" as a matrix and a matrix (trivially, a real number) respectively, if then, by dimension reasons, \"M\" must be a matrix; that is, \"M\" must be a row vector.\nIf \"V\" consists of the space of geometrical vectors in the plane, then the level curves of an element of \"V\"\u2217 form a family of parallel lines in \"V\", because the range is 1-dimensional, so that every point in the range is a multiple of any one nonzero element.\nSo an element of \"V\"\u2217 can be intuitively thought of as a particular family of parallel lines covering the plane. To compute the value of a functional on a given vector, it suffices to determine which of the lines the vector lies on. Informally, this \"counts\" how many lines the vector crosses.\nMore generally, if \"V\" is a vector space of any dimension, then the level sets of a linear functional in \"V\"\u2217 are parallel hyperplanes in \"V\", and the action of a linear functional on a vector can be visualized in terms of these hyperplanes.\nInfinite-dimensional case.\nIf \"V\" is not finite-dimensional but has a basis e\"\u03b1\" indexed by an infinite set \"A\", then the same construction as in the finite-dimensional case yields linearly independent elements e\"\u03b1\" () of the dual space, but they will not form a basis.\nFor instance, the space R\u221e, whose elements are those sequences of real numbers that contain only finitely many non-zero entries, which has a basis indexed by the natural numbers N: for , e\"i\" is the sequence consisting of all zeroes except in the \"i\"-th position, which is \"1\".\nThe dual space of R\u221e is (isomorphic to) RN, the space of \"all\" sequences of real numbers: each real sequence (\"an\") defines a function where the element (\"xn\") of R\u221e is sent to the number\nwhich is a finite sum because there are only finitely many nonzero \"xn\". The dimension of R\u221e is countably infinite, whereas RN does not have a countable basis.\nThis observation generalizes to any infinite-dimensional vector space \"V\" over any field \"F\": a choice of basis identifies \"V\" with the space (\"FA\")0 of functions such that is nonzero for only finitely many , where such a function \"f\" is identified with the vector\nin \"V\" (the sum is finite by the assumption on \"f\", and any may be written in this way by the definition of the basis).\nThe dual space of \"V\" may then be identified with the space \"FA\" of \"all\" functions from \"A\" to \"F\": a linear functional \"T\" on \"V\" is uniquely determined by the values it takes on the basis of \"V\", and any function (with ) defines a linear functional \"T\" on \"V\" by\nAgain the sum is finite because \"f\u03b1\" is nonzero for only finitely many \"\u03b1\".\nThe set (\"F\"\"A\")0 may be identified (essentially by definition) with the direct sum of infinitely many copies of \"F\" (viewed as a 1-dimensional vector space over itself) indexed by \"A\", i.e. there are linear isomorphisms\nOn the other hand, \"FA\" is (again by definition), the direct product of infinitely many copies of \"F\" indexed by \"A\", and so the identification\nis a special case of a general result relating direct sums (of modules) to direct products.\nIf the basis is infinite, then the algebraic dual space is \"always\" of larger dimension (as a cardinal number) than the original vector space.\nThis is in contrast to the case of the continuous dual space, discussed below, which may be isomorphic to the original vector space even if the latter is infinite-dimensional.\nBilinear products and dual spaces.\nIf \"V\" is finite-dimensional, then \"V\" is isomorphic to \"V\"\u2217. But there is in general no natural isomorphism between these two spaces. Any bilinear form on \"V\" gives a mapping of \"V\" into its dual space via\nwhere the right hand side is defined as the functional on \"V\" taking each to . In other words, the bilinear form determines a linear mapping\ndefined by\nIf the bilinear form is nondegenerate, then this is an isomorphism onto a subspace of \"V\"\u2217.\nIf \"V\" is finite-dimensional, then this is an isomorphism onto all of \"V\"\u2217. Conversely, any isomorphism formula_39 from \"V\" to a subspace of \"V\"\u2217 (resp., all of \"V\"\u2217 if \"V\" is finite dimensional) defines a unique nondegenerate bilinear form on \"V\" by\nThus there is a one-to-one correspondence between isomorphisms of \"V\" to a subspace of (resp., all of) \"V\"\u2217 and nondegenerate bilinear forms on \"V\".\nIf the vector space \"V\" is over the complex field, then sometimes it is more natural to consider sesquilinear forms instead of bilinear forms.\nIn that case, a given sesquilinear form determines an isomorphism of \"V\" with the complex conjugate of the dual space\nThe conjugate space \"V\"\u2217 can be identified with the set of all additive complex-valued functionals such that\nInjection into the double-dual.\nThere is a natural homomorphism formula_43 from formula_1 into the double dual formula_45, defined by formula_46 for all formula_47. In other words, if formula_48 is the evaluation map defined by formula_49, then formula_50 is defined as the map formula_51. This map formula_43 is always injective; it is an isomorphism if and only if formula_1 is finite-dimensional.\nIndeed, the isomorphism of a finite-dimensional vector space with its double dual is an archetypal example of a natural isomorphism.\nInfinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces are not a counterexample to this, as they are isomorphic to their continuous double duals, not to their algebraic double duals.\nTranspose of a linear map.\nIf is a linear map, then the \"transpose\" (or \"dual\") is defined by\nfor every \"formula_55\". The resulting functional \"formula_56\" in \"formula_10\" is called the \"pullback\" of \"formula_17\" along \"formula_59\".\nThe following identity holds for all \"formula_55\" and \"formula_61\":\nwhere the bracket [\u00b7,\u00b7] on the left is the natural pairing of \"V\" with its dual space, and that on the right is the natural pairing of \"W\" with its dual. This identity characterizes the transpose, and is formally similar to the definition of the adjoint.\nThe assignment produces an injective linear map between the space of linear operators from \"V\" to \"W\" and the space of linear operators from \"W\" to \"V\"; this homomorphism is an isomorphism if and only if \"W\" is finite-dimensional.\nIf then the space of linear maps is actually an algebra under composition of maps, and the assignment is then an antihomomorphism of algebras, meaning that .\nIn the language of category theory, taking the dual of vector spaces and the transpose of linear maps is therefore a contravariant functor from the category of vector spaces over \"F\" to itself.\nIt is possible to identify (\"f\") with \"f\" using the natural injection into the double dual.\nIf the linear map \"f\" is represented by the matrix \"A\" with respect to two bases of \"V\" and \"W\", then \"f\" is represented by the transpose matrix \"A\"T with respect to the dual bases of \"W\" and \"V\", hence the name.\nAlternatively, as \"f\" is represented by \"A\" acting on the left on column vectors, \"f\" is represented by the same matrix acting on the right on row vectors.\nThese points of view are related by the canonical inner product on R\"n\", which identifies the space of column vectors with the dual space of row vectors.\nQuotient spaces and annihilators.\nLet \"S\" be a subset of \"V\".\nThe annihilator of \"S\" in \"V\"\u2217, denoted here \"S\", is the collection of linear functionals such that for all .\nThat is, \"S\" consists of all linear functionals such that the restriction to \"S\" vanishes: .\nWithin finite dimensional vector spaces, the annihilator is dual to (isomorphic to) the orthogonal complement.\nThe annihilator of a subset is itself a vector space.\nThe annihilator of the zero vector is the whole dual space: formula_63, and the annihilator of the whole space is just the zero covector: formula_64.\nFurthermore, the assignment of an annihilator to a subset of \"V\" reverses inclusions, so that if , then\nIf \"A\" and \"B\" are two subsets of \"V\" then\nand equality holds provided \"V\" is finite-dimensional. If \"Ai\" is any family of subsets of \"V\" indexed by \"i\" belonging to some index set \"I\", then\nIn particular if \"A\" and \"B\" are subspaces of \"V\" then\nIf \"V\" is finite-dimensional and \"W\" is a vector subspace, then\nafter identifying \"W\" with its image in the second dual space under the double duality isomorphism . In particular, forming the annihilator is a Galois connection on the lattice of subsets of a finite-dimensional vector space.\nIf \"W\" is a subspace of \"V\" then the quotient space \"V\"/\"W\" is a vector space in its own right, and so has a dual. By the first isomorphism theorem, a functional factors through \"V\"/\"W\" if and only if \"W\" is in the kernel of \"f\". There is thus an isomorphism\nAs a particular consequence, if \"V\" is a direct sum of two subspaces \"A\" and \"B\", then \"V\"\u2217 is a direct sum of \"A\" and \"B\".\nContinuous dual space.\nWhen dealing with topological vector spaces, the continuous linear functionals from the space into the base field formula_71 (or formula_72) are particularly important.\nThis gives rise to the notion of the \"continuous dual space\" or \"topological dual\" which is a linear subspace of the algebraic dual space formula_10, denoted by formula_7.\nFor any \"finite-dimensional\" normed vector space or topological vector space, such as Euclidean \"n-\"space, the continuous dual and the algebraic dual coincide.\nThis is however false for any infinite-dimensional normed space, as shown by the example of discontinuous linear maps.\nNevertheless, in the theory of topological vector spaces the terms \"continuous dual space\" and \"topological dual space\" are often replaced by \"dual space\".\nFor a topological vector space formula_1 its \"continuous dual space\", or \"topological dual space\", or just \"dual space\" (in the sense of the theory of topological vector spaces) formula_7 is defined as the space of all continuous linear functionals formula_77.\nProperties.\nIf is a Hausdorff topological vector space (TVS), then the continuous dual space of is identical to the continuous dual space of the completion of .\nTopologies on the dual.\nThere is a standard construction for introducing a topology on the continuous dual formula_7 of a topological vector space formula_1. Fix a collection formula_80 of bounded subsets of formula_1.\nThis gives the topology on formula_1 of uniform convergence on sets from formula_83 or what is the same thing, the topology generated by seminorms of the form\nwhere formula_17 is a continuous linear functional on formula_1, and formula_87 runs over the class formula_88\nThis means that a net of functionals formula_89 tends to a functional formula_17 in formula_7 if and only if\nUsually (but not necessarily) the class formula_80 is supposed to satisfy the following conditions:\nIf these requirements are fulfilled then the corresponding topology on formula_7 is Hausdorff and the sets\nform its local base.\nHere are the three most important special cases.\nIf formula_1 is a normed vector space (for example, a Banach space or a Hilbert space) then the strong topology on formula_7 is normed (in fact a Banach space if the field of scalars is complete), with the norm\nEach of these three choices of topology on formula_7 leads to a variant of reflexivity property for topological vector spaces:\nExamples.\nLet 1 &lt; \"p\" &lt; \u221e be a real number and consider the Banach space \"\u2113\u2009p\" of all sequences for which\nDefine the number \"q\" by . Then the continuous dual of \"\u2113\"\u2009\"p\" is naturally identified with \"\u2113\"\u2009\"q\": given an element formula_126, the corresponding element of is the sequence formula_127 where formula_128 denotes the sequence whose -th term is 1 and all others are zero. Conversely, given an element , the corresponding continuous linear functional \"formula_17\" on is defined by\nfor all (see H\u00f6lder's inequality).\nIn a similar manner, the continuous dual of is naturally identified with (the space of bounded sequences).\nFurthermore, the continuous duals of the Banach spaces \"c\" (consisting of all convergent sequences, with the supremum norm) and \"c\"0 (the sequences converging to zero) are both naturally identified with .\nBy the Riesz representation theorem, the continuous dual of a Hilbert space is again a Hilbert space which is anti-isomorphic to the original space.\nThis gives rise to the bra\u2013ket notation used by physicists in the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics.\nBy the Riesz\u2013Markov\u2013Kakutani representation theorem, the continuous dual of certain spaces of continuous functions can be described using measures.\nTranspose of a continuous linear map.\nIf is a continuous linear map between two topological vector spaces, then the (continuous) transpose is defined by the same formula as before:\nThe resulting functional is in . The assignment produces a linear map between the space of continuous linear maps from \"V\" to \"W\" and the space of linear maps from to .\nWhen \"T\" and \"U\" are composable continuous linear maps, then\nWhen \"V\" and \"W\" are normed spaces, the norm of the transpose in is equal to that of \"T\" in .\nSeveral properties of transposition depend upon the Hahn\u2013Banach theorem.\nFor example, the bounded linear map \"T\" has dense range if and only if the transpose is injective.\nWhen \"T\" is a compact linear map between two Banach spaces \"V\" and \"W\", then the transpose is compact.\nThis can be proved using the Arzel\u00e0\u2013Ascoli theorem.\nWhen \"V\" is a Hilbert space, there is an antilinear isomorphism \"iV\" from \"V\" onto its continuous dual .\nFor every bounded linear map \"T\" on \"V\", the transpose and the adjoint operators are linked by\nWhen \"T\" is a continuous linear map between two topological vector spaces \"V\" and \"W\", then the transpose is continuous when and are equipped with\"compatible\" topologies: for example, when for and , both duals have the strong topology of uniform convergence on bounded sets of \"X\", or both have the weak-\u2217 topology of pointwise convergence on\u00a0\"X\".\nThe transpose is continuous from to , or from to .\nAnnihilators.\nAssume that \"W\" is a closed linear subspace of a normed space\u00a0\"V\", and consider the annihilator of \"W\" in ,\nThen, the dual of the quotient can be identified with \"W\"\u22a5, and the dual of \"W\" can be identified with the quotient .\nIndeed, let \"P\" denote the canonical surjection from \"V\" onto the quotient ; then, the transpose is an isometric isomorphism from into , with range equal to \"W\"\u22a5.\nIf \"j\" denotes the injection map from \"W\" into \"V\", then the kernel of the transpose is the annihilator of \"W\":\nand it follows from the Hahn\u2013Banach theorem that induces an isometric isomorphism\nFurther properties.\nIf the dual of a normed space is separable, then so is the space itself.\nThe converse is not true: for example, the space is separable, but its dual is not.\nDouble dual.\nIn analogy with the case of the algebraic double dual, there is always a naturally defined continuous linear operator from a normed space \"V\" into its continuous double dual , defined by\nAs a consequence of the Hahn\u2013Banach theorem, this map is in fact an isometry, meaning for all .\nNormed spaces for which the map \u03a8 is a bijection are called reflexive.\nWhen \"V\" is a topological vector space then \u03a8(\"x\") can still be defined by the same formula, for every , however several difficulties arise.\nFirst, when \"V\" is not locally convex, the continuous dual may be equal to { 0 } and the map \u03a8 trivial.\nHowever, if \"V\" is Hausdorff and locally convex, the map \u03a8 is injective from \"V\" to the algebraic dual of the continuous dual, again as a consequence of the Hahn\u2013Banach theorem.\nSecond, even in the locally convex setting, several natural vector space topologies can be defined on the continuous dual , so that the continuous double dual is not uniquely defined as a set. Saying that \u03a8 maps from \"V\" to , or in other words, that \u03a8(\"x\") is continuous on for every , is a reasonable minimal requirement on the topology of , namely that the evaluation mappings\nbe continuous for the chosen topology on . Further, there is still a choice of a topology on , and continuity of \u03a8 depends upon this choice.\nAs a consequence, defining reflexivity in this framework is more involved than in the normed case."}
{"id": "7989", "revid": "16838316", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7989", "title": "Dianetics", "text": "Dianetics (from Greek \"dia\", meaning \"through\", and \"nous\", meaning \"mind\") is a set of ideas and practices regarding the metaphysical relationship between the mind and body created by science fiction writer L. Ron Hubbard. Dianetics is practiced by followers of Scientology and the Nation of Islam (as of 2010).\nDianetics was originally conceived as a branch of psychiatry, which Hubbard would later despise when they refused his form of psychotherapy. Though it is presented as a form of psychological treatment, Dianetics, and its core concepts including auditing and engrams, have been rejected by psychologists and other scientists from the outset and are unsupported by credible evidence.\nBackground.\nDianetics divides the mind into three parts: the conscious \"analytical mind\", the subconscious \"reactive mind\", and the somatic mind. The goal of Dianetics is to erase the content of the \"reactive mind\", which practitioners believe interferes with a person's ethics, awareness, happiness, and sanity. The Dianetics procedure to achieve this erasure is called \"auditing\". In auditing, the Dianetic auditor asks a series of questions (or commands) which are intended to help a person locate and deal with painful past experiences.\nPractitioners of Dianetics believe that \"the basic principle of existence is to survive\" and that the basic personality of humans is sincere, intelligent, and good. The drive for goodness and survival is distorted and inhibited by aberrations. Hubbard proposed this model, and then developed Dianetics with the claim that it could eradicate these aberrations.\nWhen Hubbard formulated Dianetics, he described it as \"a mix of Western technology and Oriental philosophy\". Hubbard claimed that Dianetics could increase intelligence, eliminate unwanted emotions and alleviate a wide range of illnesses he believed to be psychosomatic. Among the conditions purportedly treated were arthritis, allergies, asthma, some coronary difficulties, eye trouble, ulcers, migraine headaches, \"sexual deviation\" (which for Hubbard included homosexuality), and even death.\nHubbard initially described Dianetics as a branch of psychology. Jon Atack writes that the original Dianetic techniques can be derived almost entirely from Sigmund Freud's lectures. Hubbard created the \"Freudian Foundation of America\" and offered graduate auditors certificates which included that of \"Freudian Psychoanalyst.\" Hubbard was influenced in creating Dianetics by many psychologists such as William Sargant's work on abreaction therapy, Carl Jung, Roy Grinker and John Spiegel's writing on hypnosis and hypnoanalysis, Nandor Fodor, Otto Rank, and others. Alfred Korzybski's general semantics was also cited by Hubbard as an influence.\nHubbard differentiated Dianetics from Scientology, saying that Dianetics was a mental therapy science and Scientology was a religion. Dianetics predates Hubbard's classification of Scientology as an \"applied religious philosophy\". Early in 1951, he expanded his writings to include teachings related to the soul, or \"thetan\".\nHistory.\nAccording to Hubbard, when he was sedated for a dental operation in 1938, he had a near-death experience which inspired him to write the manuscript \"Excalibur\", which was never published. This work would eventually become the basis for Dianetics, and later on also Scientology.\nThe first publication on Dianetics was \"\", an article by Hubbard in \"Astounding Science Fiction\" (cover date May 1950). This was followed by the book \"\" published May 9, 1950. In these works Hubbard claimed that the source of all psychological pain, and therefore the cause of mental and physical health problems, was a form of memory known as \"engrams\". According to Hubbard, individuals could reach a state he named \"Clear\" in which a person was freed of these engrams. This would be done by talking with an \"auditor\".\nWhile not accepted by the medical and scientific establishment, in the first two years of its publication, over 100,000 copies of the book were sold. Many enthusiasts emerged to form groups to study and practice Dianetics. The atmosphere from which Dianetics was written about in this period was one of \"excited experimentation\". Sociologist Roy Wallis writes that Hubbard's work was regarded as an \"initial exploration\" for further development. Hubbard wrote an additional six books in 1951, drawing the attention of a significant fan base.\nPublication of \"Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health\" brought in a flood of revenue, which Hubbard used to establish Dianetics foundations in six major American cities. \"Dianetics\" shared \"The New York Times\" best-seller list with other self-help writings, including Norman Vincent Peale's \"True Art of Happiness\" and Henry Overstreet's \"The Mature Mind\". Scholar Hugh B. Urban attributed that the initial success of \"Dianetics\" to Hubbard's \"entrepreneurial skills\". Posthumously, \"Publishers Weekly\" awarded Hubbard a plaque to acknowledge \"Dianetics\" appearing on its bestseller list for one hundred weeks, consecutively.\nTwo of the strongest initial supporters of Dianetics in the 1950s were John W. Campbell, editor of \"Astounding Science Fiction\" and Joseph Augustus Winter, a writer and medical physician. Campbell published some of Hubbard's short stories and Winter hoped that his colleagues would likewise be attracted to Hubbard's Dianetics system.\nPer Wallis, it was Dianetics' popularity as a lay psychotherapy that contributed to the Foundation's downfall. It was the craze of 1950\u201351, but the fad was dead by 1952. Most people read the book, tried it out, then put it down. The remaining practitioners had no ties to the Foundation and resisted its control. Because there were no trained Dianetics professionals, factions formed. The followers challenged Hubbard's movement and his authority. Wallis suggests Hubbard learned an implicit lesson from this experience. He would not make the same mistake when creating Scientology.\nHubbard left the Foundation, which shut down. Creditors began to demand settlement of its outstanding debts. Don Purcell, an oil millionaire Dianeticist from Wichita, Kansas, offered a brief respite from bankruptcy, but the Wichita Foundation's finances soon failed again in 1952 when Hubbard left for Phoenix with all his Dianetics materials to avoid the court bailiffs sent by Purcell, who had purchased from Hubbard for the copyrights to Dianetics in an effort to keep Hubbard from bankruptcy again.\nIn 1954, Hubbard defined Scientology as a religion focused on the spirit, differentiating it from Dianetics, and subsequently Dianetics Auditing Therapy, which he defined as a counseling based science that addressed the physical being. When Hubbard morphed Dianetics therapy into the religion of Scientology, Jesper Aagaard Petersen of Oxford University surmises that it could have been for the benefits from establishing it is a religion as much as it could have been from the result of Hubbard's \"discovery of past life experiences and his exploration of the thetan.\" The reason being to avoid copyright infringement issues with use of the name Dianetics then held by Purcell. Purcell later donated the copyright ownership back to Hubbard as charitable debt relief.\nWith the temporary sale of assets resulting from the HDRF's bankruptcy, Hubbard no longer owned the rights to the name \"Dianetics\". Scientologists refer to the book \"Dianetics: The Modern Science of Mental Health\" as \"Book One.\" In 1952, Hubbard published a new set of teachings as \"Scientology, a religious philosophy.\" Scientology did not replace Dianetics but attempted to extended it to cover new areas: Where the goal of Dianetics is to rid the individual of his \"reactive mind\" engrams, the stated goal of Scientology is to rehabilitate the individual's spiritual nature so that adherents may reach their full potential.\nIn 1963 and again in May 1969, Hubbard reorganized the material in Dianetics, the auditing commands, and original Volney Mathieson invented E-meter use, naming the package \"Standard Dianetics.\" In a 1969 bulletin, \"This bulletin combines HCOB 27 April 1969 'R-3-R Restated' with those parts of HCOB 24 June 1963 'Routine 3-R' used in the new Standard Dianetic Course and its application. This gives the complete steps of Routine 3-R Revised.\"\nIn 1978, Hubbard released \"New Era Dianetics\" (NED), a revised version supposed to produce better results in a shorter period of time. The course consists of 11 \"rundowns\" and requires a specifically trained auditor.\nIn the Church of Scientology, OTs study several levels of before reaching the highest level.\nBasic concepts.\nIn the book, \"\", Hubbard describes techniques that he suggests can rid individuals of fears and psychosomatic illnesses. A basic idea in Dianetics is that the mind consists of two parts: the \"analytical mind\" and the \"reactive mind.\" The \"reactive mind\", the mind which operates when a person is physically unconscious, acts as a record of shock, trauma, pain, and otherwise harmful memories. Experiences such as these, stored in the \"reactive mind\" are dubbed \"engrams\". Dianetics is proposed as a method to erase these engrams in the reactive mind to achieve a state of clear.\nHubbard described Dianetics as \"an organized science of thought built on definite axioms: statements of natural laws on the order of those of the physical sciences\". In April 1950, before the public release of Dianetics, he wrote: \"To date, over two hundred patients have been treated; of those two hundred, two hundred cures have been obtained.\"\nIn Dianetics, the unconscious or reactive mind is described as a collection of \"mental image pictures,\" which contain the recorded experience of past moments of unconsciousness, including all sensory perceptions and feelings involved, ranging from pre-natal experiences, infancy and childhood, to even the traumatic feelings associated with events from past lives and extraterrestrial cultures. The type of mental image picture created during a period of unconsciousness involves the exact recording of a painful experience. Hubbard called this phenomenon an engram, and defined it as \"a complete recording of a moment of unconsciousness containing physical pain or painful emotion and all perceptions.\"\nHubbard proposed that painful physical or emotional traumas caused \"aberrations\" (deviations from rational thinking) in the mind, which produced lasting adverse physical and emotional effects, similar to conversion disorders. When the analytical (conscious) mind shut down during these moments, events and perceptions of this period were stored as engrams in the unconscious or reactive mind. (In Hubbard's earliest publications on the subject, engrams were variously referred to as \"Norns\", \"Impediments,\" and \"comanomes\" before \"engram\" was adapted from its existing usage at the suggestion of Joseph Augustus Winter, MD.) Some commentators noted Dianetics's blend of science fiction and occult orientations at the time.\nHubbard claimed that these engrams are the cause of almost all psychological and physical problems. In addition to physical pain, engrams could include words or phrases spoken in the vicinity while the patient was unconscious. For instance, Winter cites the example of a patient with a persistent headache supposedly tracing the problem to a doctor saying, \"Take him now,\" during the patient's birth. Hubbard similarly claimed that leukemia is traceable to \"an engram containing the phrase 'It turns my blood to water.'\" While it is sometimes claimed that the Church of Scientology no longer stands by Hubbard's claims that Dianetics can treat physical conditions, it still publishes them: \"... when the knee injuries of the past are located and discharged, the arthritis ceases, no other injury takes its place and the person is finished with arthritis of the knee.\" \"[The reactive mind] can give a man arthritis, bursitis, asthma, allergies, sinusitis, coronary trouble, high blood pressure ... And it is the only thing in the human being which can produce these effects ... Discharge the content of [the reactive mind] and the arthritis vanishes, myopia gets better, heart illness decreases, asthma disappears, stomachs function properly and the whole catalog of ills goes away and stays away.\"\nSome of the psychometric ideas in Dianetics, in particular the E-meter, can be traced to Carl Jung. Basic concepts, including conversion disorder, are derived from Sigmund Freud, whom Hubbard credited as an inspiration and source. Freud had speculated 40 years previously that traumas with similar content join together in \"chains,\" embedded in the unconscious mind, to cause irrational responses in the individual. Such a chain would be relieved by inducing the patient to remember the earliest trauma, \"with an accompanying expression of emotion.\"\nAccording to Bent Corydon, Hubbard created the illusion that Dianetics was the first psychotherapy to address traumatic experiences in their own time, but others had done so as standard procedure.\nOne treatment method Hubbard drew from in developing Dianetics was abreaction therapy. Abreaction is a psychoanalytical term that means bringing to consciousness, and thus adequate expression, material that has been unconscious. \"It includes not only the recollection of forgotten memories and experience, but also their reliving with appropriate emotional display and discharge of effect. This process is usually facilitated by the patient's gaining awareness of the causal relationship between the previously undischarged emotion and his symptoms.\"\nAccording to Hubbard, before Dianetics psychotherapists had dealt with very light and superficial incidents (e.g. an incident that reminds the patient of a moment of loss), but with Dianetic therapy, the patient could actually erase moments of pain and unconsciousness. He emphasized: \"The discovery of the engram is entirely the property of Dianetics. Methods of its erasure are also owned entirely by Dianetics...\"\nWhile 1950 style Dianetics was in some respects similar to older therapies, with the development of New Era Dianetics in 1978, the similarity vanished. New Era Dianetics uses an E-Meter and a rote procedure for running \"chains\" of related traumatic incidents.\nDianetics clarifies the understanding of psychosomatic illness in terms of \"predisposition\", \"precipitation\", and \"prolongation\".\nWith the use of Dianetics techniques, Hubbard claimed, the reactive mind could be processed and all stored engrams could be refiled as experience. The central technique was \"auditing,\" a two-person question-and-answer therapy designed to isolate and dissipate engrams (or \"mental masses\"). An auditor addresses questions to a subject, observes and records the subject's responses, and returns repeatedly to experiences or areas under discussion that appear painful until the troubling experience has been identified and confronted. Through repeated applications of this method, the reactive mind could be \"cleared\" of its content having outlived its usefulness in the process of evolution; a person who has completed this process would be \"Clear\".\nThe benefits of going Clear, according to Hubbard, were dramatic. A Clear would have no compulsions, repressions, psychoses or neuroses, and would enjoy a near-perfect memory as well as a rise in IQ of as much as 50 points. He also claimed that \"the atheist is activated by engrams as thoroughly as the zealot\". He further claimed that widespread application of Dianetics would result in \"A world without insanity, without criminals and without war.\"\nOne of the key ideas of Dianetics, according to Hubbard, is the fundamental existential command to survive. According to Hugh B. Urban, this would serve as the foundation of a big part of later Scientology.\nAccording to the Scientology journal \"The Auditor\", the total number of \"Clears\" as of May 2006 stands at 50,311.\nProcedure in practice.\nThe procedure of Dianetics therapy (known as \"auditing\") is a two-person activity. One person, the \"auditor\", guides the other person, the \"pre-clear\". The pre-Clear's job is to look at the mind and talk to the auditor. The auditor acknowledges what the pre-Clear says and controls the process so the pre-Clear may put his full attention on his work.\nThe auditor and pre-Clear sit down in chairs facing each other. The process then follows in eleven distinct steps:\nAuditing sessions are supposedly kept confidential. A few transcripts of auditing sessions with confidential information removed have been published as demonstration examples. Some extracts can be found in J.A. Winter's book \"\". Other, more comprehensive, transcripts of auditing sessions carried out by Hubbard himself can be found in volume 1 of the \"Research &amp; Discovery Series\" (Bridge Publications, 1980). Examples of public group processing sessions can be found throughout the \"Congresses\" lecture series.\nAccording to Hubbard, auditing enables the pre-Clear to \"contact\" and \"release\" engrams stored in the reactive mind, relieving him of the physical and mental aberrations connected with them. The pre-Clear is asked to inspect and familiarize himself with the exact details of his own experience; the auditor may not tell him anything about his case or evaluate any of the information the pre-Clear finds.\nTherapeutic claims.\nIn August 1950, amidst the success of \"\", Hubbard held a demonstration in Los Angeles' Shrine Auditorium where he presented a young woman called Sonya Bianca (a pseudonym) to a large audience including many reporters and photographers as 'the world's first Clear.\" Despite Hubbard's claim that she had \"full and perfect recall of every moment of her life\", Bianca proved unable to answer questions from the audience testing her memory and analytical abilities, including the question of the color of Hubbard's tie. Hubbard explained Bianca's failure to display her promised powers of recall to the audience by saying that he had used the word \"now\" in calling her to the stage, and thus inadvertently froze her in \"present time,\" which blocked her abilities. Later, in the late 1950s, Hubbard would claim that several people had reached the state of Clear by the time he presented Bianca as the world's first; these others, Hubbard said, he had successfully cleared in the late 1940s while working \"incognito\" in Hollywood posing as a swami. In 1966, Hubbard declared South African Scientologist John McMaster to be the first true Clear.\nHubbard claimed, in an interview with \"The New York Times\" in November 1950, that \"he had already submitted proof of claims made in the book to a number of scientists and associations.\" He added that the public as well as proper organizations were entitled to such proof and that he was ready and willing to give such proof in detail. In January 1951, the Hubbard Dianetic Research Foundation of Elizabeth, NJ published \"Dianetic Processing: A Brief Survey of Research Projects and Preliminary Results\", a booklet providing the results of psychometric tests conducted on 88 people undergoing Dianetics therapy. It presents case histories and a number of X-ray plates to support claims that Dianetics had cured \"aberrations\" including manic depression, asthma, arthritis, colitis and \"overt homosexuality,\" and that after Dianetic processing, test subjects experienced significantly increased scores on a standardized IQ test. The report's subjects are not identified by name, but one of them is clearly Hubbard himself (\"Case 1080A, R. L.\").\nThe authors provide no qualifications, although they are described in Hubbard's book \"Science of Survival\" (where some results of the same study were reprinted) as psychotherapists. Critics of Dianetics are skeptical of this study, both because of the bias of the source and because the researchers appear to ascribe all physical benefits to Dianetics without considering possible outside factors; in other words, the report lacks any scientific controls. J.A. Winter, M.D., originally an associate of Hubbard and an early adopter of Dianetics, had by the end of 1950 cut his ties with Hubbard and written an account of his personal experiences with Dianetics. He described Hubbard as \"absolutistic and authoritarian\", and criticized the Hubbard Dianetic Research Foundation for failing to undertake \"precise scientific research into the functioning of the mind\". He also recommended that auditing be done by experts only and that it was dangerous for laymen to audit each other. Hubbard writes: \"Again, Dianetics is not being released to a profession, for no profession could encompass it.\"\nScientific rejection.\nHubbard's original book on Dianetics attracted highly critical reviews from science and medical writers and organizations. The American Psychological Association passed a resolution in 1950 calling \"attention to the fact that these claims are not supported by empirical evidence of the sort required for the establishment of scientific generalizations.\" Subsequently, Dianetics has achieved no acceptance as a scientific theory, and scientists cite Dianetics as an example of a pseudoscience.\nFew scientific investigations into the effectiveness of Dianetics have been published. Professor John A. Lee states in his 1970 evaluation of Dianetics:\nThe MEDLINE database records two independent scientific studies on Dianetics, both conducted in the 1950s under the auspices of New York University. Harvey Jay Fischer tested Dianetic therapy against three claims made by proponents and found it does not effect any significant changes in intellectual functioning, mathematical ability, or the degree of personality conflicts; Jack Fox tested Hubbard's thesis regarding recall of engrams, with the assistance of the Dianetic Research Foundation, and could not substantiate it.\nCommentators from a variety of backgrounds have described Dianetics as an example of pseudoscience. For example, philosophy professor Robert Carroll points to Dianetics' lack of empirical evidence:\nThe validity and practice of auditing have been questioned by a variety of non-Scientologist commentators. Commenting on the example cited by Winter, the science writer Martin Gardner asserts that \"nothing could be clearer from the above dialogue than the fact that the dianetic explanation for the headache existed only in the mind of the therapist, and that it was with considerable difficulty that the patient was maneuvered into accepting it.\"\nOther critics and medical experts have suggested that Dianetic auditing is a form of hypnosis. Hubbard, who had previously used hypnosis for entertainment purposes, strongly denied this connection and cautioned against hypnosis in Dianetics auditing. Professor Richard J. Ofshe, a leading expert on false memories, suggests that the feeling of well-being reported by pre-Clear at the end of an auditing session may be induced by post-hypnotic suggestion. Other researchers have identified quotations in Hubbard's work suggesting evidence that false memories were created in \"Dianetics,\" specifically in the form of birth and pre-birth memories.\nAccording to an article by physician Martin Gumpert, \u201cHubbard\u2019s concept of psychosomatic disease is definitely wrong. Psychosomatic ailments are not simply caused by emotional disturbances: they are diseases in which the emotional and the organic factor are closely involved and interdependent.\u201d"}
{"id": "7990", "revid": "39761978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7990", "title": "Data warehouse", "text": "In computing, a data warehouse (DW or DWH), also known as an enterprise data warehouse (EDW), is a system used for reporting and data analysis and is considered a core component of business intelligence. DWs are central repositories of integrated data from one or more disparate sources. They store current and historical data in one single place that are used for creating analytical reports for workers throughout the enterprise.\nThe data stored in the warehouse is uploaded from the operational systems (such as marketing or sales). The data may pass through an operational data store and may require data cleansing for additional operations to ensure data quality before it is used in the DW for reporting.\nExtract, transform, load (ETL) and extract, load, transform (ELT) are the two main approaches used to build a data warehouse system. \nETL-based data warehousing.\nThe typical extract, transform, load (ETL)-based data warehouse uses staging, data integration, and access layers to house its key functions. The staging layer or staging database stores raw data extracted from each of the disparate source data systems. The integration layer integrates the disparate data sets by transforming the data from the staging layer often storing this transformed data in an operational data store (ODS) database. The integrated data are then moved to yet another database, often called the data warehouse database, where the data is arranged into hierarchical groups, often called dimensions, and into facts and aggregate facts. The combination of facts and dimensions is sometimes called a star schema. The access layer helps users retrieve data.\nThe main source of the data is cleansed, transformed, catalogued, and made available for use by managers and other business professionals for data mining, online analytical processing, market research and decision support. However, the means to retrieve and analyze data, to extract, transform, and load data, and to manage the data dictionary are also considered essential components of a data warehousing system. Many references to data warehousing use this broader context. Thus, an expanded definition for data warehousing includes business intelligence tools, tools to extract, transform, and load data into the repository, and tools to manage and retrieve metadata.\nIBM InfoSphere DataStage, Ab Initio Software, Informatica \u2013 PowerCenter are some of the tools which are widely used to implement ETL-based data warehouse.\nELT-based data warehousing.\nELT-based data warehousing gets rid of a separate ETL tool for data transformation. Instead, it maintains a staging area inside the data warehouse itself. In this approach, data gets extracted from heterogeneous source systems and are then directly loaded into the data warehouse, before any transformation occurs. All necessary transformations are then handled inside the data warehouse itself. Finally, the manipulated data gets loaded into target tables in the same data warehouse.\nBenefits.\nA data warehouse maintains a copy of information from the source transaction systems. This architectural complexity provides the opportunity to:\nGeneric.\nThe environment for data warehouses and marts includes the following:\nIn regards to source systems listed above, R. Kelly Rainer states, \"A common source for the data in data warehouses is the company's operational databases, which can be relational databases\".\nRegarding data integration, Rainer states, \"It is necessary to extract data from source systems, transform them, and load them into a data mart or warehouse\".\nRainer discusses storing data in an organization's data warehouse or data marts.\nMetadata is data about data. \"IT personnel need information about data sources; database, table, and column names; refresh schedules; and data usage measures\".\nToday, the most successful companies are those that can respond quickly and flexibly to market changes and opportunities. A key to this response is the effective and efficient use of data and information by analysts and managers. A \"data warehouse\" is a repository of historical data that is organized by the subject to support decision-makers in the organization. Once data is stored in a data mart or warehouse, it can be accessed.\nRelated systems (data mart, OLAPS, OLTP, predictive analytics).\nA data mart is a simple form of a data warehouse that is focused on a single subject (or functional area), hence they draw data from a limited number of sources such as sales, finance or marketing. Data marts are often built and controlled by a single department within an organization. The sources could be internal operational systems, a central data warehouse, or external data. Denormalization is the norm for data modeling techniques in this system. Given that data marts generally cover only a subset of the data contained in a data warehouse, they are often easier and faster to implement.\nTypes of data marts include dependent, independent, and hybrid data marts.\nOnline analytical processing (OLAP) is characterized by a relatively low volume of transactions. Queries are often very complex and involve aggregations. For OLAP systems, response time is an effective measure. OLAP applications are widely used by Data Mining techniques. OLAP databases store aggregated, historical data in multi-dimensional schemas (usually star schemas). OLAP systems typically have a data latency of a few hours, as opposed to data marts, where latency is expected to be closer to one day. The OLAP approach is used to analyze multidimensional data from multiple sources and perspectives. The three basic operations in OLAP are Roll-up (Consolidation), Drill-down, and Slicing &amp; Dicing.\nOnline transaction processing (OLTP) is characterized by a large number of short on-line transactions (INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE). OLTP systems emphasize very fast query processing and maintaining data integrity in multi-access environments. For OLTP systems, effectiveness is measured by the number of transactions per second. OLTP databases contain detailed and current data. The schema used to store transactional databases is the entity model (usually 3NF). Normalization is the norm for data modeling techniques in this system.\nPredictive analytics is about finding and quantifying hidden patterns in the data using complex mathematical models that can be used to predict future outcomes. Predictive analysis is different from OLAP in that OLAP focuses on historical data analysis and is reactive in nature, while predictive analysis focuses on the future. These systems are also used for customer relationship management (CRM).\nHistory.\nThe concept of data warehousing dates back to the late 1980s when IBM researchers Barry Devlin and Paul Murphy developed the \"business data warehouse\". In essence, the data warehousing concept was intended to provide an architectural model for the flow of data from operational systems to decision support environments. The concept attempted to address the various problems associated with this flow, mainly the high costs associated with it. In the absence of a data warehousing architecture, an enormous amount of redundancy was required to support multiple decision support environments. In larger corporations, it was typical for multiple decision support environments to operate independently. Though each environment served different users, they often required much of the same stored data. The process of gathering, cleaning and integrating data from various sources, usually from long-term existing operational systems (usually referred to as legacy systems), was typically in part replicated for each environment. Moreover, the operational systems were frequently reexamined as new decision support requirements emerged. Often new requirements necessitated gathering, cleaning and integrating new data from \"data marts\" that was tailored for ready access by users.\nAdditionally, with the publication of The IRM Imperative (Wiley &amp; Sons, 1991) by James M. Kerr, the idea of managing and putting a dollar value on an organization's data resources and then reporting that value as an asset on a balance sheet became popular. In the book, Kerr described a way to populate subject-area databases from data derived from transaction-driven systems to create a storage area where summary data could be further leveraged to inform executive decision-making. This concept served to promote further thinking of how a data warehouse could be developed and managed in a practical way within any enterprise.\nKey developments in early years of data warehousing:\nInformation storage.\nFacts.\nA fact is a value, or measurement, which represents a fact about the managed entity or system.\nFacts, as reported by the reporting entity, are said to be at raw level; e.g., in a mobile telephone system, if a BTS (base transceiver station) receives 1,000 requests for traffic channel allocation, allocates for 820, and rejects the remaining, it would report three facts or measurements to a management system:\nFacts at the raw level are further aggregated to higher levels in various dimensions to extract more service or business-relevant information from it. These are called aggregates or summaries or aggregated facts.\nFor instance, if there are three BTS in a city, then the facts above can be aggregated from the BTS to the city level in the network dimension. For example:\nDimensional versus normalized approach for storage of data.\nThere are three or more leading approaches to storing data in a data warehouse\u00a0\u2013 the most important approaches are the dimensional approach and the normalized approach.\nThe dimensional approach refers to Ralph Kimball's approach in which it is stated that the data warehouse should be modeled using a Dimensional Model/star schema. The normalized approach, also called the 3NF model (Third Normal Form), refers to Bill Inmon's approach in which it is stated that the data warehouse should be modeled using an E-R model/normalized model.\nDimensional approach.\nIn a dimensional approach, transaction data is partitioned into \"facts\", which are generally numeric transaction data, and \"dimensions\", which are the reference information that gives context to the facts. For example, a sales transaction can be broken up into facts such as the number of products ordered and the total price paid for the products, and into dimensions such as order date, customer name, product number, order ship-to and bill-to locations, and salesperson responsible for receiving the order.\nA key advantage of a dimensional approach is that the data warehouse is easier for the user to understand and to use. Also, the retrieval of data from the data warehouse tends to operate very quickly. Dimensional structures are easy to understand for business users, because the structure is divided into measurements/facts and context/dimensions. Facts are related to the organization's business processes and operational system whereas the dimensions surrounding them contain context about the measurement (Kimball, Ralph 2008). Another advantage offered by dimensional model is that it does not involve a relational database every time. Thus, this type of modeling technique is very useful for end-user queries in data warehouse.\nThe model of facts and dimensions can also be understood as a data cube. Where the dimensions are the categorical coordinates in a multi-dimensional cube, the fact is a value corresponding to the coordinates.\nThe main disadvantages of the dimensional approach are the following:\nNormalized approach.\nIn the normalized approach, the data in the data warehouse are stored following, to a degree, database normalization rules. Tables are grouped together by \"subject areas\" that reflect general data categories (e.g., data on customers, products, finance, etc.). The normalized structure divides data into entities, which creates several tables in a relational database. When applied in large enterprises the result is dozens of tables that are linked together by a web of joins. Furthermore, each of the created entities is converted into separate physical tables when the database is implemented (Kimball, Ralph 2008).\nThe main advantage of this approach is that it is straightforward to add information into the database. Some disadvantages of this approach are that, because of the number of tables involved, it can be difficult for users to join data from different sources into meaningful information and to access the information without a precise understanding of the sources of data and of the data structure of the data warehouse.\nBoth normalized and dimensional models can be represented in entity-relationship diagrams as both contain joined relational tables. The difference between the two models is the degree of normalization (also known as Normal Forms). These approaches are not mutually exclusive, and there are other approaches. Dimensional approaches can involve normalizing data to a degree (Kimball, Ralph 2008).\nIn \"Information-Driven Business\", Robert Hillard proposes an approach to comparing the two approaches based on the information needs of the business problem. The technique shows that normalized models hold far more information than their dimensional equivalents (even when the same fields are used in both models) but this extra information comes at the cost of usability. The technique measures information quantity in terms of information entropy and usability in terms of the Small Worlds data transformation measure.\nDesign methods.\nBottom-up design.\nIn the \"bottom-up\" approach, data marts are first created to provide reporting and analytical capabilities for specific business processes. These data marts can then be integrated to create a comprehensive data warehouse. The data warehouse bus architecture is primarily an implementation of \"the bus\", a collection of conformed dimensions and conformed facts, which are dimensions that are shared (in a specific way) between facts in two or more data marts.\nTop-down design.\nThe \"top-down\" approach is designed using a normalized enterprise data model. \"Atomic\" data, that is, data at the greatest level of detail, are stored in the data warehouse. Dimensional data marts containing data needed for specific business processes or specific departments are created from the data warehouse.\nHybrid design.\nData warehouses (DW) often resemble the hub and spokes architecture. Legacy systems feeding the warehouse often include customer relationship management and enterprise resource planning, generating large amounts of data. To consolidate these various data models, and facilitate the extract transform load process, data warehouses often make use of an operational data store, the information from which is parsed into the actual DW. To reduce data redundancy, larger systems often store the data in a normalized way. Data marts for specific reports can then be built on top of the data warehouse.\nA hybrid DW database is kept on third normal form to eliminate data redundancy. A normal relational database, however, is not efficient for business intelligence reports where dimensional modelling is prevalent. Small data marts can shop for data from the consolidated warehouse and use the filtered, specific data for the fact tables and dimensions required. The DW provides a single source of information from which the data marts can read, providing a wide range of business information. The hybrid architecture allows a DW to be replaced with a master data management repository where operational (not static) information could reside.\nThe data vault modeling components follow hub and spokes architecture. This modeling style is a hybrid design, consisting of the best practices from both third normal form and star schema. The data vault model is not a true third normal form, and breaks some of its rules, but it is a top-down architecture with a bottom up design. The data vault model is geared to be strictly a data warehouse. It is not geared to be end-user accessible, which, when built, still requires the use of a data mart or star schema-based release area for business purposes.\nData warehouse characteristics.\nThere are basic features that define the data in the data warehouse that include subject orientation, data integration, time-variant, nonvolatile data, and data granularity.\nSubject-oriented.\nUnlike the operational systems, the data in the data warehouse revolves around subjects of the enterprise. Subject orientation is not database normalization. Subject orientation can be really useful for decision making.\nGathering the required objects is called subject-oriented.\nIntegrated.\nThe data found within the data warehouse is integrated. Since it comes from several operational systems, all inconsistencies must be removed. Consistencies include naming conventions, measurement of variables, encoding structures, physical attributes of data, and so forth.\nTime-variant.\nWhile operational systems reflect current values as they support day-to-day operations, data warehouse data represents a long time horizon (up to 10 years) which means it stores mostly historical data. It is mainly meant for data mining and forecasting. (E.g. if a user is searching for a buying pattern of a specific customer, the user needs to look at data on the current and past purchases.)\nNonvolatile.\nThe data in the data warehouse is read-only, which means it cannot be updated, created, or deleted (unless there is a regulatory or statutory obligation to do so).\nData warehouse options.\nAggregation.\nIn the data warehouse process, data can be aggregated in data marts at different levels of abstraction. The user may start looking at the total sale units of a product in an entire region. Then the user looks at the states in that region. Finally, they may examine the individual stores in a certain state. Therefore, typically, the analysis starts at a higher level and drills down to lower levels of details.\nData warehouse architecture.\nThe different methods used to construct/organize a data warehouse specified by an organization are numerous. The hardware utilized, software created and data resources specifically required for the correct functionality of a data warehouse are the main components of the data warehouse architecture. All data warehouses have multiple phases in which the requirements of the organization are modified and fine-tuned.\nVersus operational system.\nOperational systems are optimized for the preservation of data integrity and speed of recording of business transactions through use of database normalization and an entity-relationship model. Operational system designers generally follow Codd's 12 rules of database normalization to ensure data integrity. Fully normalized database designs (that is, those satisfying all Codd rules) often result in information from a business transaction being stored in dozens to hundreds of tables. Relational databases are efficient at managing the relationships between these tables. The databases have very fast insert/update performance because only a small amount of data in those tables is affected each time a transaction is processed. To improve performance, older data are usually periodically purged from operational systems.\nData warehouses are optimized for analytic access patterns. Analytic access patterns generally involve selecting specific fields and rarely if ever , which selects all fields/columns, as is more common in operational databases. Because of these differences in access patterns, operational databases (loosely, OLTP) benefit from the use of a row-oriented DBMS whereas analytics databases (loosely, OLAP) benefit from the use of a column-oriented DBMS. Unlike operational systems which maintain a snapshot of the business, data warehouses generally maintain an infinite history which is implemented through ETL processes that periodically migrate data from the operational systems over to the data warehouse.\nEvolution in organization use.\nThese terms refer to the level of sophistication of a data warehouse:"}
{"id": "7991", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7991", "title": "Disperser", "text": "A disperser is a one-sided extractor. Where an extractor requires that every event gets the same probability under the uniform distribution and the extracted distribution, only the latter is required for a disperser. So for a disperser, an event formula_1 we have:\nformula_2\nDefinition (Disperser): \"A\" formula_3\"-disperser is a function\"\nformula_4\n\"such that for every distribution\" formula_5 \"on\" formula_6 \"with\" formula_7 \"the support of the distribution\" formula_8 \"is of size at least\" formula_9.\nGraph theory.\nAn (\"N\", \"M\", \"D\", \"K\", \"e\")-disperser is a bipartite graph with \"N\" vertices on the left side, each with degree \"D\", and \"M\" vertices on the right side, such that every subset of \"K\" vertices on the left side is connected to more than (1\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"e\")\"M\" vertices on the right.\nAn extractor is a related type of graph that guarantees an even stronger property; every (\"N\", \"M\", \"D\", \"K\", \"e\")-extractor is also an (\"N\", \"M\", \"D\", \"K\", \"e\")-disperser.\nOther meanings.\nA disperser is a high-speed mixing device used to disperse or dissolve pigments and other solids into a liquid."}
{"id": "7992", "revid": "2510232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7992", "title": "Devonian", "text": "The Devonian ( ) is a geologic period and system of the Paleozoic, spanning 60.3\u00a0million years from the end of the Silurian, million years ago (Mya), to the beginning of the Carboniferous, Mya. It is named after Devon, England, where rocks from this period were first studied.\nThe first significant adaptive radiation of life on dry land occurred during the Devonian. Free-sporing vascular plants began to spread across dry land, forming extensive forests which covered the continents. By the middle of the Devonian, several groups of plants had evolved leaves and true roots, and by the end of the period the first seed-bearing plants appeared. Various terrestrial arthropods also became well-established.\nFish reached substantial diversity during this time, leading the Devonian to often be dubbed the Age of Fishes. The placoderms began dominating almost every known aquatic environment. The ancestors of all four-limbed vertebrates (tetrapods) began adapting to walking on land, as their strong pectoral and pelvic fins gradually evolved into legs. In the oceans, primitive sharks became more numerous than in the Silurian and Late Ordovician.\nThe first ammonites, species of molluscs, appeared. Trilobites, the mollusc-like brachiopods, and the great coral reefs were still common. The Late Devonian extinction which started about 375\u00a0million years ago severely affected marine life, killing off all placodermi, and all trilobites, save for a few species of the order Proetida.\nThe palaeogeography was dominated by the supercontinent of Gondwana to the south, the continent of Siberia to the north, and the early formation of the small continent of Euramerica in between.\nHistory.\nThe period is named after Devon, a county in southwestern England, where a controversial argument in the 1830s over the age and structure of the rocks found distributed throughout the county was eventually resolved by the definition of the Devonian period in the geological timescale. The Great Devonian Controversy was a long period of vigorous argument and counter-argument between the main protagonists of Roderick Murchison with Adam Sedgwick against Henry De la Beche supported by George Bellas Greenough. Murchison and Sedgwick won the debate and named the period they proposed as the Devonian System.\nWhile the rock beds that define the start and end of the Devonian period are well identified, the exact dates are uncertain. According to the International Commission on Stratigraphy, the Devonian extends from the end of the Silurian Mya, to the beginning of the Carboniferous Mya \u2013 in North America, at the beginning of the Mississippian subperiod of the Carboniferous.\nIn nineteenth-century texts the Devonian has been called the \"Old Red Age\", after the red and brown terrestrial deposits known in the United Kingdom as the Old Red Sandstone in which early fossil discoveries were found. Another common term is \"Age of the Fishes\", referring to the evolution of several major groups of fish that took place during the period. Older literature on the Anglo-Welsh basin divides it into the Downtonian, Dittonian, Breconian, and Farlovian stages, the latter three of which are placed in the Devonian.\nThe Devonian has also erroneously been characterised as a \"greenhouse age\", due to sampling bias: most of the early Devonian-age discoveries came from the strata of western Europe and eastern North America, which at the time straddled the Equator as part of the supercontinent of Euramerica where fossil signatures of widespread reefs indicate tropical climates that were warm and moderately humid but in fact the climate in the Devonian differed greatly during its epochs and between geographic regions. For example, during the Early Devonian, arid conditions were prevalent through much of the world including Siberia, Australia, North America, and China, but Africa and South America had a warm temperate climate. In the Late Devonian, by contrast, arid conditions were less prevalent across the world and temperate climates were more common.\nSubdivisions.\nThe Devonian Period is formally broken into Early, Middle and Late subdivisions. The rocks corresponding to those epochs are referred to as belonging to the Lower, Middle and Upper parts of the Devonian System.\nThe Early Devonian lasted from and began with the Lochkovian stage , which was followed by the Pragian from and then by the Emsian, which lasted until the Middle Devonian began, . \nDuring this time, the first ammonoids appeared, descending from bactritoid nautiloids. Ammonoids during this time period were simple and differed little from their nautiloid counterparts. These ammonoids belong to the order Agoniatitida, which in later epochs evolved to new ammonoid orders, for example Goniatitida and Clymeniida. This class of cephalopod molluscs would dominate the marine fauna until the beginning of the Mesozoic era.\nThe Middle Devonian comprised two subdivisions: first the Eifelian, which then gave way to the Givetian .\nDuring this time the jawless agnathan fishes began to decline in diversity in freshwater and marine environments partly due to drastic environmental changes and partly due to the increasing competition, predation, and diversity of jawed fishes. The shallow, warm, oxygen-depleted waters of Devonian inland lakes, surrounded by primitive plants, provided the environment necessary for certain early fish to develop such essential characteristics as well developed lungs, and the ability to crawl out of the water and onto the land for short periods of time.\nFinally, the Late Devonian started with the Frasnian, , during which the first forests took shape on land. The first tetrapods appeared in the fossil record in the ensuing Famennian subdivision, the beginning and end of which are marked with extinction events. This lasted until the end of the Devonian, .\nClimate.\nThe Devonian was a relatively warm period, and probably lacked any glaciers. The temperature gradient from the equator to the poles was not as large as it is today. The weather was also very arid, mostly along the equator where it was the driest. Reconstruction of tropical sea surface temperature from conodont apatite implies an average value of in the Early Devonian. levels dropped steeply throughout the Devonian period. The newly evolved forests drew carbon out of the atmosphere, which were then buried into sediments. This may be reflected by a Mid-Devonian cooling of around . The Late Devonian warmed to levels equivalent to the Early Devonian; while there is no corresponding increase in concentrations, continental weathering increases (as predicted by warmer temperatures); further, a range of evidence, such as plant distribution, points to a Late Devonian warming. The climate would have affected the dominant organisms in reefs; microbes would have been the main reef-forming organisms in warm periods, with corals and stromatoporoid sponges taking the dominant role in cooler times. The warming at the end of the Devonian may even have contributed to the extinction of the stromatoporoids.\nPaleogeography.\nThe Devonian period was a time of great tectonic activity, as Euramerica and Gondwana drew closer together.\nThe continent Euramerica (or Laurussia) was created in the early Devonian by the collision of Laurentia and Baltica, which rotated into the natural dry zone along the Tropic of Capricorn, which is formed as much in Paleozoic times as nowadays by the convergence of two great air-masses, the Hadley cell and the Ferrel cell. In these near-deserts, the Old Red Sandstone sedimentary beds formed, made red by the oxidised iron (hematite) characteristic of drought conditions.\nNear the equator, the plate of Euramerica and Gondwana were starting to meet, beginning the early stages of the assembling of Pangaea. This activity further raised the northern Appalachian Mountains and formed the Caledonian Mountains in Great Britain and Scandinavia.\nThe west coast of Devonian North America, by contrast, was a passive margin with deep silty embayments, river deltas and estuaries, found today in Idaho and Nevada; an approaching volcanic island arc reached the steep slope of the continental shelf in Late Devonian times and began to uplift deep water deposits, a collision that was the prelude to the mountain-building episode at the beginning of the Carboniferous called the Antler orogeny.\nSea levels were high worldwide, and much of the land lay under shallow seas, where tropical reef organisms lived. The deep, enormous Panthalassa (the \"universal ocean\") covered the rest of the planet. Other minor oceans were the Paleo-Tethys Ocean, Proto-Tethys Ocean, Rheic Ocean, and Ural Ocean (which was closed during the collision with Siberia and Baltica).\nDuring the Devonian, Chaitenia, an island arc, accreted to Patagonia.\nLife.\nMarine biota.\nSea levels in the Devonian were generally high. Marine faunas continued to be dominated by bryozoa, diverse and abundant brachiopods, the enigmatic hederellids, microconchids and corals. Lily-like crinoids (animals, their resemblance to flowers notwithstanding) were abundant, and trilobites were still fairly common. Among vertebrates, jawless armored fish (ostracoderms) declined in diversity, while the jawed fish (gnathostomes) simultaneously increased in both the sea and fresh water. Armored placoderms were numerous during the lower stages of the Devonian Period and became extinct in the Late Devonian, perhaps because of competition for food against the other fish species. Early cartilaginous (Chondrichthyes) and bony fishes (Osteichthyes) also become diverse and played a large role within the Devonian seas. The first abundant genus of shark, \"Cladoselache\", appeared in the oceans during the Devonian Period. The great diversity of fish around at the time has led to the Devonian being given the name \"The Age of Fish\" in popular culture.\nThe first ammonites also appeared during or slightly before the early Devonian Period around 400\u00a0Mya.\nReefs.\nA now dry barrier reef, located in present-day Kimberley Basin of northwest Australia, once extended , fringing a Devonian continent. Reefs in general are built by various carbonate-secreting organisms that have the ability to erect wave-resistant structures close to sea level. Although modern reefs are constructed mainly by corals and calcareous algae, Devonian reefs were either microbial reefs built up mostly by autotrophic cyanobacteria, or coral-stromatoporoid reefs built up by coral-like stromatoporoids and tabulate and rugose corals. Microbial reefs dominated under the warmer conditions of the early and late Devonian, while coral-stromatoporoid reefs dominated during the cooler middle Devonian.\nTerrestrial biota.\nBy the Devonian Period, life was well underway in its colonisation of the land. The moss forests and bacterial and algal mats of the Silurian were joined early in the period by primitive rooted plants that created the first stable soils and harbored arthropods like mites, scorpions, trigonotarbids and myriapods (although arthropods appeared on land much earlier than in the Early Devonian and the existence of fossils such as \"Protichnites\" suggest that amphibious arthropods may have appeared as early as the Cambrian). By far the largest land organism at the beginning of this period was the enigmatic \"Prototaxites\", which was possibly the fruiting body of an enormous fungus, rolled liverwort mat, or another organism of uncertain affinities that stood more than tall, and towered over the low, carpet-like vegetation during the early part of the Devonian. Also the first possible fossils of insects appeared around 416\u00a0Mya, in the Early Devonian. Evidence for the earliest tetrapods takes the form of trace fossils in shallow lagoon environments within a marine carbonate platform / shelf during the Middle Devonian, although these traces have been questioned and an interpretation as fish feeding traces (Piscichnus) has been advanced.\nThe greening of land.\nMany Early Devonian plants did not have true roots or leaves like extant plants although vascular tissue is observed in many of those plants. Some of the early land plants such as \"Drepanophycus\" likely spread by vegetative growth and spores. The earliest land plants such as \"Cooksonia\" consisted of leafless, dichotomous axes and terminal sporangia and were generally very short-statured, and grew hardly more than a few centimetres tall. Fossils of \"Armoricaphyton chateaupannense\", about 400 million years old, represent the oldest known plants with woody tissue. By the Middle Devonian, shrub-like forests of primitive plants existed: lycophytes, horsetails, ferns, and progymnosperms had evolved. Most of these plants had true roots and leaves, and many were quite tall. The earliest-known trees appeared in the Middle Devonian These included a lineage of lycopods and another arborescent, woody vascular plant, the cladoxylopsids. These tracheophytes were able to grow to large size on dry land because they had evolved the ability to biosynthesize lignin, which gave them physical rigidity and improved the effectiveness of their vascular system while giving them resistance to pathogens and herbivores. These are the oldest-known trees of the world's first forests. By the end of the Devonian, the first seed-forming plants had appeared. This rapid appearance of so many plant groups and growth forms has been called the \"Devonian Explosion\".\nThe 'greening' of the continents acted as a carbon sink, and atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide may have dropped. This may have cooled the climate and led to a massive extinction event. (\"See\" Late Devonian extinction).\nAnimals and the first soils.\nPrimitive arthropods co-evolved with this diversified terrestrial vegetation structure. The evolving co-dependence of insects and seed-plants that characterised a recognisably modern world had its genesis in the Late Devonian period. The development of soils and plant root systems probably led to changes in the speed and pattern of erosion and sediment deposition. The rapid evolution of a terrestrial ecosystem that contained copious animals opened the way for the first vertebrates to seek out a terrestrial living. By the end of the Devonian, arthropods were solidly established on the land.\nLate Devonian extinction.\nThe Late Devonian extinction is not a single event, but rather is a series of pulsed extinctions at the Givetian-Frasnian boundary, the Frasnian-Famennian boundary, and the Devonian-Carboniferous boundary. Together, these are considered one of the \"Big Five\" mass extinctions in Earth's history. The Devonian extinction crisis primarily affected the marine community, and selectively affected shallow warm-water organisms rather than cool-water organisms. The most important group to be affected by this extinction event were the reef-builders of the great Devonian reef systems.\nAmongst the severely affected marine groups were the brachiopods, trilobites, ammonites, and acritarchs, and the world saw the disappearance of an estimated 96% of vertebrates like conodonts and bony fishes, and all of the ostracoderms and placoderms. Land plants as well as freshwater species, such as our tetrapod ancestors, were relatively unaffected by the Late Devonian extinction event (there is a counterargument that the Devonian extinctions nearly wiped out the tetrapods).\nThe reasons for the Late Devonian extinctions are still unknown, and all explanations remain speculative. Canadian paleontologist Digby McLaren suggested in 1969 that the Devonian extinction events were caused by an asteroid impact. However, while there were Late Devonian collision events (see the Alamo bolide impact), little evidence supports the existence of a large enough Devonian crater.\nSee also.\nCategories:"}
{"id": "7993", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7993", "title": "Dungeon Master (disambiguation)", "text": "A Dungeon Master is the organizer of a \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" role-playing game.\nDungeon Master may also refer to:"}
{"id": "7994", "revid": "1021646969", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7994", "title": "David Thompson (explorer)", "text": "David Thompson (30 April 1770 \u2013 10 February 1857) was a British-Canadian fur trader, surveyor, and cartographer, known to some native peoples as \"Koo-Koo-Sint\" or \"the Stargazer\". Over Thompson's career, he traveled across North America, mapping of North America along the way. For this historic feat, Thompson has been described as the \"greatest practical land geographer that the world has produced\".\nEarly life.\nDavid Thompson was born in Westminster, Middlesex, to recent Welsh migrants David and Ann Thompson. When Thompson was two, his father died. Due to the financial hardship with his mother without resources, Thompson, 29 April 1777, the day before his seventh birthday, and his older brother were placed in the Grey Coat Hospital, a school for the disadvantaged of Westminster. Thompson graduated to the Grey Coat mathematical school, well known for teaching navigation and surveying. He received an education for the Royal Navy: including mathematics of trigonometry and geometry, practical navigation including using of nautical instruments, finding latitudes and longitudes and making navigational calculations from observing the sun, moon and tides and the drawing of maps and charts, taking land measurements and sketching landscapes. He later built on these to make his career. In 1784, at the age of 14, the Grey Coat treasurer paid the Hudson's Bay Company the sum of five pounds, upon which Thompson became the company's indentured servant for a period of seven years to be trained as a clerk.&lt;ref name=\"Thompson/Moreau p.xxiii\"&gt;Thompson/Moreau p.xxiii&lt;/ref&gt; He set sail on 28 May of that year, and left England for North America.\nHudson's Bay Company (HBC).\nOn 2 September 1784, Thompson arrived in Churchill (now in Manitoba) and was put to work as a clerk/secretary, copying the personal papers of the governor of Fort Churchill, Samuel Hearne. The next year he was transferred to nearby York Factory, and over the next few years spent time as a secretary at Cumberland House, Saskatchewan, and South Branch House before arriving at Manchester House in 1787. During those years he learned to keep accounts and other records, calculate values of furs (It was noted that he also had several expensive beaver pelts at that time even when a secretary's job would not pay terribly well), track supplies and other duties.\nOn 23 December 1788, Thompson seriously fractured his tibia, forcing him to spend the next two winters at Cumberland House convalescing. It was during this time that he greatly refined and expanded his mathematical, astronomical, and surveying skills under the tutelage of Hudson's Bay Company surveyor Philip Turnor. It was also during this time that he lost sight in his right eye.\nIn 1790, with his apprenticeship nearing its end, Thompson requested a set of surveying tools in place of the typical parting gift of fine clothes offered by the company to those completing their indenture. He received both. He entered the employ of the Hudson's Bay Company as a fur trader. In 1792 he completed his first significant survey, mapping a route to Lake Athabasca (where today's Alberta/Saskatchewan border is located). Between February and May 1793, Thompson made 34 observations of the longitude of Cumberland House using lunar distances. The mean of these observations was 102\u00b012\u2032 W, about 2' east of the modern value. The mean error of the 34 observations was about 15' of longitude. Broughton (2009) notes that the precision of the type of sextant used by Thompson was 15\" of arc, corresponding to 7.5' of longitude giving an absolute limit to the precision of an individual observation. The error in Thompson's mean was several times less than this. The time he took on these observations, about 3 hours of calculation each, indicates that he understood the power of averages.\nIn recognition of his map-making and surveying skills, the company promoted Thompson to the surveyor in 1794. He continued working for the Hudson's Bay Company until 23 May 1797 when, frustrated by an order to cease surveying and focus on the fur trade, he left. He walked in the snow in order to enter the employ of the competition, the North West Company. There he continued to work as a fur trader and surveyor.\nNorth West Company.\nThompson's decision to defect to the North West Company (NWC) in 1797 without providing the customary one-year notice was not well received by his former employers. But the North West Company was more supportive of Thompson pursuing his work on surveying and mapping the interior of what was to become Canada, as they judged it in the company's interest to know the exact locations of their settlements and the distance from each other. In 1797, Thompson was sent south by his employers to survey part of the Canada-US boundary along the water routes from Lake Superior to Lake of the Woods to satisfy unresolved questions of territory arising from the Jay Treaty between Great Britain and the United States after the American Revolutionary War.\nBy 1798 Thompson had completed a survey of from Grand Portage, through Lake Winnipeg, to the headwaters of the Assiniboine and Mississippi rivers, as well as two sides of Lake Superior. In 1798, the company sent him to Red Deer Lake (Lac La Biche in present-day Alberta) to establish a trading post. (The English translation of Lac la Biche: Red Deer Lake, was first recorded on the Mackenzie map of 1793.) Thompson spent the next few seasons trading based in Fort George (now in Alberta), and during this time led several expeditions into the Rocky Mountains.\nOn 10 July 1804, at the annual meeting of the North West Company in Kaministiquia, Thompson was made a full partner of the company. He became a 'wintering partner', who was based in the field rather than Montreal, with two of the 92 NWC's shares worth more than \u00a34,000. He spent the next few seasons based there managing the fur trading operations but still finding time to expand his surveys of the waterways around Lake Superior. At the 1806 company meeting, officers decided to send Thompson back out into the interior. Concern over the American-backed expedition of Lewis and Clark prompted the North West Company to charge Thompson with the task of finding a route to the Pacific to open up the lucrative trading territories of the Pacific Northwest.\nColumbia River travels.\nAfter the general meeting in 1806, Thompson travelled to Rocky Mountain House and prepared for an expedition to follow the Columbia River to the Pacific. In June 1807 Thompson crossed the Rocky Mountains and spent the summer surveying the Columbia basin; he continued to survey the area over the next few seasons. Thompson mapped and established trading posts in Northwestern Montana, Idaho, Washington, and Western Canada. Trading posts he founded included Kootenae House, Kullyspell House and Saleesh House; the latter two were the first trading posts west of the Rockies in Idaho and Montana, respectively. These posts established by Thompson extended North West Company fur trading territory into the Columbia Basin drainage area. The maps he made of the Columbia River basin east of the Cascade Mountains were of such high quality and detail that they continued to be useful into the 20th-century.\nIn early 1810, Thompson was returning eastward toward Montreal but, while en route at Rainy Lake, received orders to return to the Rocky Mountains and establish a route to the mouth of the Columbia. The North West Company was responding to the plans of American John Jacob Astor to send a ship around the Americas to establish a fur trading post of the Pacific Fur Company on the Pacific Coast. During his return, Thompson was delayed by an angry group of Peigan natives at Howse Pass. He was ultimately forced to seek a new route across the Rocky Mountains and found one through the Athabasca Pass.\nDavid Thompson was the first European to navigate the full length of the Columbia River. Between Kettle Falls (3 July 1811) and the Junction of the Columbia and Snake Rivers (9 July) he was travelling through country that had never been visited by Europeans, and took time to visit the villages along the way to establish good relations, helped by copious quantities of tobacco. In 1805 Lewis and Clark had descended the Snake River, and then continued down the Columbia. On reaching the junction Thompson erected a pole and a notice claiming the country for Great Britain and stating the intention of the North West Company to build a trading post at the site. This notice was found later that year by Astor company workers looking to establish an inland fur post, contributing to their selection of a more northerly site at Fort Okanogan. The North West Company established its post of Fort Nez Perc\u00e9s near the Snake River confluence several years later. Continuing down the Columbia, Thompson passed over the Celilo Falls, almost losing the canoe on the rocks, and portaged around the rapids of The Dalles and the Cascades Rapids. On 14 July 1811, Thompson reached the partially constructed Fort Astoria at the mouth of the Columbia, arriving two months after the Pacific Fur Company's ship, the \"Tonquin\".\nBefore returning upriver and across the mountains, Thompson hired Naukane, a Native Hawaiian Takane labourer brought to Fort Astoria by the Pacific Fur Company's ship \"Tonquin\". Naukane, known as Coxe to Thompson, accompanied Thompson across the continent to Lake Superior before journeying on to England.\nThompson wintered at Saleesh House before beginning his final journey back to Montreal in 1812, where the North West Company was based.\nIn his published journals, Thompson recorded seeing large footprints (\u201cwhich measured fourteen inches in length by eight inches in breadth\u201d) near what is now Jasper, Alberta, in 1811. It has been suggested that these prints were similar to what has since been called the sasquatch. However, Thompson noted that these tracks showed \"a small Nail at the end of each [toe]\", and stated that these tracks \"very much resembles a large Bear's Track\".\nThe years 1807-1812 are the most carefully scrutinized in his career and his most enduring historical legacy, due to his development of the commercial routes across the Rockies, and his mapping of the lands they traverse.\nAppearance and personality.\nIn 1820, the English geologist, John Jeremiah Bigsby, attended a dinner party given by The Hon. William McGillivray at his home, Chateau St. Antoine, one of the early estates in Montreal's Golden Square Mile. He describes the party and some of the guests in his entertaining book \"The Shoe and Canoe\", giving an excellent description of David Thompson:\nMarriage and children.\nOn 10 June 1799 at \u00cele-\u00e0-la-Crosse, Thompson married Charlotte Small, a thirteen-year-old M\u00e9tis daughter of Scottish fur trader Patrick Small and a Cree mother. Their marriage was formalised thirteen years later at the Scotch Presbyterian Church in Montreal on 30 October 1812. He and Charlotte had 13 children together; five of them were born before he left the fur trade. The family did not adjust easily to life in Eastern Canada; they lived in Montreal while he was traveling. Two of the children, John (aged 5) and Emma (aged 7), died of round worms, a common parasite. By the time of Thompson's death, the couple had been married 57 years, the longest marriage known in Canada pre-Confederation.\nLater life.\nUpon his arrival back in Montreal, Thompson retired with a generous pension from the North West Company. He settled in nearby Terrebonne and worked on completing his great map, a summary of his lifetime of exploring and surveying the interior of North America. The map covered the wide area stretching from Lake Superior to the Pacific, and was given by Thompson to the North West Company. Thompson's 1814 map, his greatest achievement, was so accurate that 100 years later it was still the basis for many of the maps issued by the Canadian government. It now resides in the Archives of Ontario.\nIn 1815, Thompson moved his family to Williamstown, Upper Canada, and a few years later was employed to survey the newly established borders with the United States from Lake of the Woods to the Eastern Townships of Quebec, established by Treaty of Ghent after the War of 1812. In 1843 Thompson completed his atlas of the region from Hudson Bay to the Pacific Ocean.\nAfterwards, Thompson returned to a life as a land owner, but soon financial misfortune would ruin him. By 1831 he was so deeply in debt he was forced to take up a position as a surveyor for the British American Land Company to provide for his family. His luck continued to worsen and he was forced to move in with his daughter and son-in-law in 1845. He began work on a manuscript chronicling his life exploring the continent, but this project was left unfinished when his sight failed him completely in 1851.\nDeath and afterward.\nThe land mass mapped by Thompson amounted to of wilderness (one-fifth of the continent). His contemporary, the great explorer Alexander Mackenzie, remarked that Thompson did more in ten months than he would have thought possible in two years.\nDespite these significant achievements, Thompson died in Montreal in near obscurity on 10 February 1857, his accomplishments almost unrecognised. He never finished the book of his 28 years in the fur trade, based on his 77 field notebooks, before he died. In the 1890s geologist J.B. Tyrrell resurrected Thompson's notes and in 1916 published them as \"David Thompson's Narrative\", as part of the General Series of the Champlain Society. Further editions and re-examinations of Thompson's life and works were published in 1962 by Richard Glover, in 1971 by Victor Hopwood, and in 2015 by William Moreau.\nThompson's body was interred in Montreal's Mount Royal Cemetery in an unmarked grave. It was not until 1926 that efforts by J.B. Tyrrell and the Canadian Historical Society resulted in the placing of a tombstone to mark his grave. The next year, Thompson was named a National Historic Person by the federal government, one of the earliest such designations. A federal plaque reflecting that status is located at Jasper National Park, Alberta. Meantime, Thompson's achievements are central reasons for other national historic designations:\nIn 1957, one hundred years after his death, Canada's post office department honoured him with his image on a postage stamp. The David Thompson Highway in Alberta was named in his honour, along with David Thompson High School situated on the side of the highway near Leslieville, Alberta. There are also two David Thompson Secondary Schools, one in Vancouver, BC, and one in Invermere, BC.\nHis prowess as a geographer is now well-recognized. He has been called \"the greatest land geographer that the world has produced.\"\nThere is a monument dedicated to David Thompson (maintained by the state of North Dakota) near the former town site of the ghost town Verendrye, North Dakota, located approximately north and west of Karlsruhe, North Dakota. Thompson Falls, Montana, and British Columbia's Thompson River and Thompson Falls on the Blaeberry River are also named after the explorer.\nThe year 2007 marked the 150th year of Thompson's death and the 200th anniversary of his first crossing of the Rocky Mountains. Commemorative events and exhibits were planned across Canada and the United States from 2007 to 2011 as a celebration of his accomplishments.\nIn 2007, a commemorative plaque was placed on a wall at the Grey Coat Hospital, the school for the disadvantaged of Westminster David Thompson attended as a boy, by English author and TV presenter Ray Mears.\nThompson was the subject of a 1964 National Film Board of Canada short film \"David Thompson: The Great Mapmaker \", as well as the BBC2 programme \"Ray Mears' Northern Wilderness\" (Episode 5), broadcast in November 2009. He's also the subject of 2010 KSPS-TV film Uncharted Territory: David Thompson on the Columbia Plateau.\nHe is referenced in the 1981 folk song \"Northwest Passage\" by Stan Rogers.\nThe national park service, Parks Canada, announced in 2018 that it had named its new research vessel , to be used for underwater archaeology, including sea floor mapping, and for marine science in the Pacific, Atlantic, Arctic Oceans, and the Great Lakes. It will be the main platform for research on the Wrecks of HMS \"Erebus\" and HMS \"Terror\" National Historic Site.\nThe David Thompson Astronomical Observatory at Fort William Historical Park was named to commemorate David Thompson and his discoveries."}
{"id": "7995", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=7995", "title": "Dioscoreales", "text": "The Dioscoreales are an order of monocotyledonous flowering plants in modern classification systems, such as the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group and the Angiosperm Phylogeny Web. Within the monocots Dioscoreales are grouped in the lilioid monocots where they are in a sister group relationship with the Pandanales. Of necessity the Dioscoreales contain the family Dioscoreaceae which includes the yam (\"Dioscorea\") that is used as an important food source in many regions around the globe. Older systems tended to place all lilioid monocots with reticulate veined leaves (such as Smilacaceae and Stemonaceae together with Dioscoraceae) in Dioscoreales. As currently circumscribed by phylogenetic analysis using combined morphology and molecular methods, Dioscreales contains many reticulate veined vines in Dioscoraceae, it also includes the myco-heterotrophic Burmanniaceae and the autotrophic Nartheciaceae. The order consists of three families, 22 genera and about 850 species.\nDescription.\nDioscoreales are vines or herbaceous forest floor plants. They may be achlorophyllous or saprophytic. Synapomorphies include tuberous roots, glandular hairs, seed coat characteristics and the presence of calcium oxalate crystals. Other characteristics of the order include the presence of saponin steroids, annular vascular bundles that are found in both the stem and leaf. The leaves are often unsheathed at the base, have a distinctive petiole and reticulate veined lamina. Alternatively they may be small and scale-like with a sheathed base. The flowers are actinomorphic, and may be bisexual or dioecious, while the flowers or inflorescence bear glandular hairs. The perianth may be conspicuous or reduced and the style is short with well developed style branches. The tepals persist in the development of the fruit, which is a dry capsule or berry. In the seed, the endotegmen is tanniferous and the embryo short.\nAll of the species except the genera placed in Nartheciaceae express simultaneous microsporogenesis. Plants in Nartheciaceae show successive microsporogenesis which is one of the traits indicating that the family is sister to all the other members included in the order.\nTaxonomy.\nPre-Darwinian.\nFor the early history from Lindley (1853) onwards, see Caddick \"et al.\" (2000) Table 1, Caddick et al. (2002a) Table 1 and Table 2 in Bouman (1995). The taxonomic classification of Dioscoreales has been complicated by the presence of a number of morphological features reminiscent of the dicotyledons, leading some authors to place the order as intermediate between the monocotyledons and the dicotyledons.\nWhile Lindley did not use the term \"Dioscoreales\", he placed the family Dioscoraceae together with four other families in what he referred to as an Alliance (the equivalent of the modern Order) called Dictyogens. He reflected the uncertainty as to the place of this Alliance by placing it as a class of its own between Endogens (monocots) and Exogens (dicots) The botanical authority is given to von Martius (1835) by APG for his description of the family Dioscoreae or \"Ordo\", while other sources cite Hooker (Dioscoreales Hook.f.) for his use of the term \"Dioscorales\" in 1873 with a single family, Dioscoreae. However, in his more definitive work, the \"Genera plantara\" (1883), he simply placed Dioscoraceae in the Epigynae \"Series\".\nPost-Darwinian.\nAlthough Charles Darwin's Origin of Species (1859) preceded Bentham and Hooker's publication, the latter project was commenced much earlier and George Bentham was initially sceptical of Darwinism. The new phyletic approach changed the way that taxonomists considered plant classification, incorporating evolutionary information into their schemata, but this did little to further define the circumscription of Dioscoreaceae. The major works in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century employing this approach were in the German literature. Authors such as Eichler, Engler and Wettstein placed this family in the Liliiflorae, a major subdivision of monocotyledons. it remained to Hutchinson (1926) to resurrect the Dioscoreales to group Dioscoreaceae and related families together. Hutchinson's circumscription of Dioscoreales included three other families in addition to Dioscoreaceae, Stenomeridaceae, Trichopodaceae and Roxburghiaceae. Of these only Trichopodaceae was included in the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG) classification (see below), but was subsumed into Dioscoraceae. Stenomeridaceae, as \"Stenomeris\" was also included in Dioscoreaceae as subfamily Stenomeridoideae, the remaining genera being grouped in subfamily Dioscoreoideae. Roxburghiaceae on the other hand was segregated in the sister order Pandanales as Stemonaceae. Most taxonomists in the twentieth century (the exception was the 1981 Cronquist system which placed most such plants in order Liliales, subclass Liliidae, class Liliopsida=monocotyledons, division Magnoliophyta=angiosperms) recognised Dioscoreales as a distinct order, but demonstrated wide variations in its composition.\nDahlgren, in the second version of his taxonomic classification (1982) raised the Liliiflorae to a superorder and placed Dioscoreales as an order within it. In his system, Dioscoreales contained only three families, Dioscoreaceae, Stemonaceae (\"i.e.\" Hutchinson's Roxburghiaceae) and Trilliaceae. The latter two families had been treated as a separate order (Stemonales, or Roxburghiales) by other authors, such as Huber (1969). The APG would later assign these to Pandanales and Liliales respectively. Dahlgren's construction of Dioscoreaceae included the Stenomeridaceae and Trichopodaceae, doubting these were distinct, and Croomiaceae in Stemonaceae. Furthermore, he expressed doubts about the order's homogeneity, especially Trilliaceae. The Dioscoreales at that time were marginally distinguishable from the Asparagales. In his examination of Huber's Stemonales, he found that the two constituent families had as close an affinity to Dioscoreaceae as to each other, and hence included them. He also considered closely related families and their relationship to Dioscoreales, such as the monogeneric Taccaceae, then in its own order, Taccales. Similar considerations were discussed with respect to two Asparagales families, Smilacaceae and Petermanniaceae.\nIn Dahlgren's third and final version (1985) that broader circumscription of Dioscoreales was created within the superorder Lilianae, subclass Liliidae (monocotyledons), class Magnoliopsida (angiosperms) and comprised the seven families Dioscoreaceae, Petermanniaceae, Smilacaceae, Stemonaceae, Taccaceae, Trichopodaceae and Trilliaceae. Thismiaceae has either been treated as a separate family closely related to Burmanniaceae or as a tribe (Thismieae) within a more broadly defined Burmanniaceae, forming a separate order, Burmanniales, in the Dahlgren system. The related Nartheciaceae were treated as tribe Narthecieae within the Melanthiaceae in a third order, the Melanthiales, by Dahlgren. Dahlgren considered the Dioscoreales to most strongly resemble the ancestral monocotyledons, and hence sharing \"dicotyledonous\" characteristics, making it the most central monocotyledon order. Of these seven families, Bouman considered Dioscoreaceae, Trichopodaceae, Stemonaceae and Taccaceae to represent the \"core\" families of the order. However, that study also indicated both a clear delineation of the order from other orders particularly Asparagales, and a lack of homogeneity within the order.\nMolecular phylogenetics and the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group.\nThe increasing availability of molecular phylogenetics methods in addition to morphological characteristics in the 1990s led to major reconsiderations of the relationships within the monocotyledons. In that large multi-institutional examination of the seed plants using the plastid gene \"rbc\"L the authors used Dahlgren's system as their basis, but followed Thorne (1992) in altering the suffixes of the superorders from \"\"-iflorae\" to \"-anae\"\". This demonstrated that the Lilianae comprised three lineages corresponding to Dahlgren's orders Dioscoreales, Liliales, and Asparagaless.\nUnder the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group system of 1998, which took Dahlgren's system as a basis, the order was placed in the monocot clade and comprised the five families Burmanniaceae, Dioscoreaceae, Taccaceae, Thismiaceae and Trichopodaceae.\nIn APG II (2003), a number of changes were made to Dioscoreales, as a result of an extensive study by Caddick and colleagues (2002), using an analysis of three genes, \"rbc\"L, \"atp\"B and 18S rDNA, in addition to morphology. These studies resulted in a re-examination of the relationships between most of the genera within the order. Thismiaceae was shown to be a sister group to Burmanniaceae, and so was included in it. The monotypic families Taccaceae and Trichopodaceae were included in Dioscoreaceae, while Nartheciaceae could also be grouped within Dioscoreales. APG III (2009) did not change this, so the order now comprises three families Burmanniaceae, Dioscoreaceae and Nartheciaceae.\nAlthough further research on the deeper relationships within Dioscoreales continues, the APG IV (2016) authors felt it was still premature to propose a restructuring of the order. Specifically these issues involve conflicting information as to the relationship between \"Thismia\" and Burmanniaceae, and hence whether Thismiaceae should be subsumed in the latter, or reinstated.\nPhylogeny.\nMolecular phylogenetics in Dioscoreales poses special problems due to the absence of plastid genes in mycoheterotrophs. Dioscoreales is monophyletic and is placed as a sister order to Pandanales, as shown in Cladogram I.\nEvolution.\nThe data for the evolution of the order is collected from molecular analyses since there are no such fossils found. It is estimated that Dioscoreales and its sister clade Pandanales split up around 121 million years ago during Early Cretaceous when the stem group was formed. Then it took 3 to 6 million years for the crown group to differentiate in Mid Cretaceous.\nSubdivision.\nThe three families of Dioscreales constitutes about 22 genera and about 849 species making it one of the smaller monocot orders. Of these, the largest group is \"Dioscorea\" (yams) with about 450 species. By contrast the second largest genus is \"Burmannia\" with about 60 species, and most have only one or two.\nSome authors, preferring the original APG (1998)families, continue to treat Thismiaceae separately from Burmanniaceae and Taccaceae from Dioscoreaceae. But in the 2015 study of Hertwerk and colleagues, seven genera representing all three families were examined with an eight gene dataset. Dioscoreales was monophyletic and three subclades were represented corresponding to the APG families. Dioscoreaceae and Burmanniaceae were in a sister group relationship.\nEtymology.\nNamed after the type genus \"Dioscorea\", which in turn was named by Linnaeus in 1753 to honour the Greek physician and botanist Dioscorides.\nDistribution and habitat.\nSpecies from this order are distributed across all of the continents except Antarctica. They are mainly tropical or subtropical representatives, but some members of families Dioscoreaceae and Nartheciaceae are found in cooler regions of Europe and North America. Order Dioscoreales contains plants that are able to form an underground organ for reservation of nutritions as many other monocots. An exception is the family Burmanniaceae which is entirely myco-heterotrophic and contains species that lack photosynthetic abilities.\nEcology.\nThe three families included in order Dioscoreales also represent three different ecological groups of plants. Dioscoreaceae contains mainly vines (\"Dioscorea\") and other crawling species (\"Epipetrum\"). Nartheciaceae on the other hand is a family composed of herbaceous plants with a rather lily-like appearance (\"Aletris\") while Burmanniaceae is entirely myco-heterotrophic group.\nUses.\nMany members of Dioscoreaceae produce tuberous starchy roots (yams) which form staple foods in tropical regions. They have also been the source of steroids for the pharmaceutical industry, including the production of oral contraceptives."}
{"id": "8000", "revid": "39526041", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8000", "title": "Default", "text": "Default may refer to:"}
{"id": "8002", "revid": "10759180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8002", "title": "Deposition", "text": "Deposition may refer to:"}
{"id": "8005", "revid": "13267184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8005", "title": "Dentistry", "text": "Dentistry, also known as dental medicine and oral medicine, is a branch of medicine that consists of the study, diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of diseases, disorders, and conditions of the oral cavity, commonly in the dentition but also the oral mucosa, and of adjacent and related structures and tissues, particularly in the maxillofacial (jaw and facial) area. Although primarily associated with teeth among the general public, the field of dentistry or dental medicine is not limited to teeth but includes other aspects of the craniofacial complex including the temporomandibular joint and other supporting, muscular, lymphatic, nervous, vascular, and anatomical structures.\nDentistry is often also understood to subsume the now largely defunct medical specialty of stomatology (the study of the mouth and its disorders and diseases) for which reason the two terms are used interchangeably in certain regions.\nDental treatments are carried out by a dental team, which often consists of a dentist and dental auxiliaries (dental assistants, dental hygienists, dental technicians, as well as dental therapists). Most dentists either work in private practices (primary care), dental hospitals or (secondary care) institutions (prisons, armed forces bases, etc.).\nThe history of dentistry is almost as ancient as the history of humanity and civilization with the earliest evidence dating from 7000 BC to 5500 BC. Skeletal remains from Mehgarh (now in Pakistan) dated to that time show evidence of teeth having been drilled with flint tools to remove decay, a method found to be \"surprisingly effective\". Dentistry is thought to have been the first specialization in medicine. The modern movement of evidence-based dentistry calls for the use of high-quality scientific evidence to guide decision-making.\nTerminology.\nThe term dentistry comes from \"dentist\", which comes from French \"dentiste\", which comes from the French and Latin words for tooth. The term for the associated scientific study of teeth is odontology (from ) \u2013 the study of the structure, development, and abnormalities of the teeth.\nDental treatment.\nDentistry usually encompasses practices related to the oral cavity. According to the World Health Organization, oral diseases are major public health problems due to their high incidence and prevalence across the globe, with the disadvantaged affected more than other socio-economic groups.\nThe majority of dental treatments are carried out to prevent or treat the two most common oral diseases which are dental caries (tooth decay) and periodontal disease (gum disease or pyorrhea). Common treatments involve the restoration of teeth, extraction or surgical removal of teeth, scaling and root planing, endodontic root canal treatment and cosmetic dentistry\nAll dentists in the United States undergo at least three years of undergraduate studies, but nearly all complete a bachelor's degree. This schooling is followed by four years of dental school to qualify as a \"Doctor of Dental Surgery\" (DDS) or \"Doctor of Dental Medicine\" (DMD). Specialization in dentistry is available in the fields of Anesthesiology, Dental Public Health, Endodontics, Oral Radiology, Oral Maxillofacial Surgery, Oral Medicine, Orofacial Pain, Pathology, Orthodontics, Pediatric Dentistry, Periodontics, and Prosthodontics.\nBy nature of their general training they can carry out the majority of dental treatments such as restorative (fillings, crowns, bridges), prosthetic (dentures), endodontic (root canal) therapy, periodontal (gum) therapy, and extraction of teeth, as well as performing examinations, radiographs (x-rays), and diagnosis. Dentists can also prescribe medications such as antibiotics, sedatives, and any other drugs used in patient management. Depending on their licensing boards, general dentists may be required to complete additional training to perform sedation, dental implants, etc.\nDentists also encourage prevention of oral diseases through proper hygiene and regular, twice or more yearly, checkups for professional cleaning and evaluation. Oral infections and inflammations may affect overall health and conditions in the oral cavity may be indicative of systemic diseases, such as osteoporosis, diabetes, celiac disease or cancer. Many studies have also shown that gum disease is associated with an increased risk of diabetes, heart disease, and preterm birth. The concept that oral health can affect systemic health and disease is referred to as \"oral-systemic health\".\nEducation and licensing.\nJohn M. Harris started the world's first dental school in Bainbridge, Ohio, and helped to establish dentistry as a health profession. It opened on 21 February 1828, and today is a dental museum. The first dental college, Baltimore College of Dental Surgery, opened in Baltimore, Maryland, US in 1840. The second in the United States was the Ohio College of Dental Surgery, established in Cincinnati, Ohio, in 1845. The Philadelphia College of Dental Surgery followed in 1852. In 1907, Temple University accepted a bid to incorporate the school.\nStudies show that dentists that graduated from different countries, or even from different dental schools in one country, may make different clinical decisions for the same clinical condition. For example, dentists that graduated from Israeli dental schools may recommend the removal of asymptomatic impacted third molar (wisdom teeth) more often than dentists that graduated from Latin American or Eastern European dental schools.\nIn the United Kingdom, the 1878 British Dentists Act and 1879 Dentists Register limited the title of \"dentist\" and \"dental surgeon\" to qualified and registered practitioners. However, others could legally describe themselves as \"dental experts\" or \"dental consultants\". The practice of dentistry in the United Kingdom became fully regulated with the 1921 Dentists Act, which required the registration of anyone practising dentistry. The British Dental Association, formed in 1880 with Sir John Tomes as president, played a major role in prosecuting dentists practising illegally. Dentists in the United Kingdom are now regulated by the General Dental Council.\nIn Korea, Taiwan, Japan, Finland, Sweden, Brazil, Chile, the United States, and Canada, a dentist is a healthcare professional qualified to practice dentistry after graduating with a degree of either Doctor of Dental Surgery (DDS) or Doctor of Dental Medicine (DMD). This is equivalent to the Bachelor of Dental Surgery/Baccalaureus Dentalis Chirurgiae (BDS, BDent, BChD, BDSc) that is awarded in the UK and British Commonwealth countries. In most western countries, to become a qualified dentist one must usually complete at least four years of postgraduate study; within the European Union the education has to be at least five years. Dentists usually complete between five and eight years of post-secondary education before practising. Though not mandatory, many dentists choose to complete an internship or residency focusing on specific aspects of dental care after they have received their dental degree.\nSpecialties.\nSome dentists undertake further training after their initial degree in order to specialize. Exactly which subjects are recognized by dental registration bodies varies according to location. Examples include:\nHistory.\nTooth decay was low in pre-agricultural societies, but the advent of farming society about 10,000 years ago correlated with an increase in tooth decay (cavities). An infected tooth from Italy partially cleaned with flint tools, between 13,820 and 14,160 years old, represents the oldest known dentistry, although a 2017 study suggests that 130,000 years ago the Neanderthals already used rudimentary dentistry tools. The Indus valley has yielded evidence of dentistry being practised as far back as 7000 BC, during the Stone Age. The Neolithic site of Mehrgarh (now in Pakistan's south western province of Balochistan ) indicates that this form of dentistry involved curing tooth related disorders with bow drills operated, perhaps, by skilled bead-crafters. The reconstruction of this ancient form of dentistry showed that the methods used were reliable and effective. The earliest dental filling, made of beeswax, was discovered in Slovenia and dates from 6500 years ago. Dentistry was practised in prehistoric Malta, as evidenced by a skull which had an abscess lanced from the root of a tooth dating back to around 2500 BC.\nAn ancient Sumerian text describes a \"tooth worm\" as the cause of dental caries. Evidence of this belief has also been found in ancient India, Egypt, Japan, and China. The legend of the worm is also found in the \"Homeric Hymns\", and as late as the 14th century AD the surgeon Guy de Chauliac still promoted the belief that worms cause tooth decay.\nRecipes for the treatment of toothache, infections and loose teeth are spread throughout the Ebers Papyrus, Kahun Papyri, Brugsch Papyrus, and Hearst papyrus of Ancient Egypt. The Edwin Smith Papyrus, written in the 17th century BC but which may reflect previous manuscripts from as early as 3000 BC, discusses the treatment of dislocated or fractured jaws. In the 18th century BC, the Code of Hammurabi referenced dental extraction twice as it related to punishment. Examination of the remains of some ancient Egyptians and Greco-Romans reveals early attempts at dental prosthetics. However, it is possible the prosthetics were prepared after death for aesthetic reasons.\nAncient Greek scholars Hippocrates and Aristotle wrote about dentistry, including the eruption pattern of teeth, treating decayed teeth and gum disease, extracting teeth with forceps, and using wires to stabilize loose teeth and fractured jaws. Some say the first use of dental appliances or bridges comes from the Etruscans from as early as 700 BC. In ancient Egypt, Hesy-Ra is the first named \"dentist\" (greatest of the teeth). The Egyptians bound replacement teeth together with gold wire. Roman medical writer Cornelius Celsus wrote extensively of oral diseases as well as dental treatments such as narcotic-containing emollients and astringents. The earliest dental amalgams were first documented in a Tang Dynasty medical text written by the Chinese physician Su Kung in 659, and appeared in Germany in 1528.\nDuring the Islamic Golden Age Dentistry was discussed in several famous books of medicine such as The Canon in medicine written by Avicenna and Al-Tasreef by Al-Zahrawi who is considered the greatest surgeon of the Middle ages, Avicenna said that jaw fracture should be reduced according to the occlusal guidance of the teeth; this principle is still valid in modern times. while Al-Zahrawi made a lot of surgical tools that resemble the modern tools.\nHistorically, dental extractions have been used to treat a variety of illnesses. During the Middle Ages and throughout the 19th century, dentistry was not a profession in itself, and often dental procedures were performed by barbers or general physicians. Barbers usually limited their practice to extracting teeth which alleviated pain and associated chronic tooth infection. Instruments used for dental extractions date back several centuries. In the 14th century, Guy de Chauliac most probably invented the dental pelican (resembling a pelican's beak) which was used to perform dental extractions up until the late 18th century. The pelican was replaced by the dental key which, in turn, was replaced by modern forceps in the 19th century.\nThe first book focused solely on dentistry was the \"Artzney Buchlein\" in 1530, and the first dental textbook written in English was called \"Operator for the Teeth\" by Charles Allen in 1685.\nIn the United Kingdom, there was no formal qualification for the providers of dental treatment until 1859 and it was only in 1921 that the practice of dentistry was limited to those who were professionally qualified. The Royal Commission on the National Health Service in 1979 reported that there were then more than twice as many registered dentists per 10,000 population in the UK than there were in 1921.\nModern dentistry.\nIt was between 1650 and 1800 that the science of modern dentistry developed. The English physician Thomas Browne in his \"A Letter to a Friend\" ( pub. 1690) made an early dental observation with characteristic humour:\nThe French surgeon Pierre Fauchard became known as the \"father of modern dentistry\". Despite the limitations of the primitive surgical instruments during the late 17th and early 18th century, Fauchard was a highly skilled surgeon who made remarkable improvisations of dental instruments, often adapting tools from watchmakers, jewelers and even barbers, that he thought could be used in dentistry. He introduced dental fillings as treatment for dental cavities. He asserted that sugar-derived acids like tartaric acid were responsible for dental decay, and also suggested that tumors surrounding the teeth and in the gums could appear in the later stages of tooth decay.\nFauchard was the pioneer of dental prosthesis, and he invented many methods to replace lost teeth. He suggested that substitutes could be made from carved blocks of ivory or bone. He also introduced dental braces, although they were initially made of gold, he discovered that the teeth position could be corrected as the teeth would follow the pattern of the wires. Waxed linen or silk threads were usually employed to fasten the braces. His contributions to the world of dental science consist primarily of his 1728 publication Le chirurgien dentiste or The Surgeon Dentist. The French text included \"basic oral anatomy and function, dental construction, and various operative and restorative techniques, and effectively separated dentistry from the wider category of surgery\".\nAfter Fauchard, the study of dentistry rapidly expanded. Two important books, \"Natural History of Human Teeth\" (1771) and \"Practical Treatise on the Diseases of the Teeth\" (1778), were published by British surgeon John Hunter. In 1763 he entered into a period of collaboration with the London-based dentist James Spence. He began to theorise about the possibility of tooth transplants from one person to another. He realised that the chances of a successful tooth transplant (initially, at least) would be improved if the donor tooth was as fresh as possible and was matched for size with the recipient. These principles are still used in the transplantation of internal organs. Hunter conducted a series of pioneering operations, in which he attempted a tooth transplant. Although the donated teeth never properly bonded with the recipients' gums, one of Hunter's patients stated that he had three which lasted for six years, a remarkable achievement for the period.\nMajor advances were made in the 19th century, and dentistry evolved from a trade to a profession. The profession came under government regulation by the end of the 19th century. In the UK the Dentist Act was passed in 1878 and the British Dental Association formed in 1879. In the same year, Francis Brodie Imlach was the first ever dentist to be elected President of the Royal College of Surgeons (Edinburgh), raising dentistry onto a par with clinical surgery for the first time.\nHazards in modern dentistry.\nLong term occupational noise exposure can contribute to permanent hearing loss, which is referred to as noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) and tinnitus. Noise exposure can cause excessive stimulation of the hearing mechanism, which damages the delicate structures of the inner ear. NIHL can occur when an individual is exposed to sound levels above 90 dBA according to the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). Regulations state that the permissible noise exposure levels for individuals is 90 dBA. For the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), exposure limits are set to 85 dBA. Exposures below 85 dBA are not considered to be hazardous. Time limits are placed on how long an individual can stay in an environment above 85 dBA before it causes hearing loss. OSHA places that limitation at 8 hours for 85 dBA. The exposure time becomes shorter as the dBA level increases.\nWithin the field of dentistry, a variety of cleaning tools are used including piezoelectric and sonic scalers, and ultrasonic scalers and cleaners. While a majority of the tools do not exceed 75 dBA, prolonged exposure over many years can lead to hearing loss or complaints of tinnitus. Few dentists have reported using personal hearing protective devices, which could offset any potential hearing loss or tinnitus.\nEvidence-based dentistry.\nThere is a movement in modern dentistry to place a greater emphasis on high-quality scientific evidence in decision-making. Evidence-based dentistry (EBD) uses current scientific evidence to guide decisions. It is an approach to oral health that requires the application and examination of relevant scientific data related to the patient's oral and medical health. Along with the dentist's professional skill and expertise, EBD allows dentists to stay up to date on the latest procedures and patients to receive improved treatment. A new paradigm for medical education designed to incorporate current research into education and practice was developed to help practitioners provide the best care for their patients. It was first introduced by Gordon Guyatt and the Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group at McMaster University in Ontario, Canada in the 1990s. It is part of the larger movement toward evidence-based medicine and other evidence-based practices.\nEthical and medicolegal issues.\nDentistry is unique in that it requires dental students to have competence-based clinical skills that can only be acquired through specialized laboratory training and direct patient care. This necessitates the need for a scientific and professional basis of care with a foundation of research-based education. The accreditation of dental schools plays a role in enhancing the quality of dental education.\nThere are controversial articles that are not evidence based and rely on opinions that are published and attract attention."}
{"id": "8007", "revid": "70", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8007", "title": "Diameter", "text": "In geometry, a diameter of a circle is any straight line segment that passes through the centre of the circle and whose endpoints lie on the circle. It can also be defined as the longest chord of the circle. Both definitions are also valid for the diameter of a sphere.\nIn more modern usage, the length of a diameter is also called the diameter. In this sense one speaks of \"the\" diameter rather than \"a\" diameter (which refers to the line segment itself), because all diameters of a circle or sphere have the same length, this being twice the radius r.\nFor a convex shape in the plane, the diameter is defined to be the largest distance that can be formed between two opposite parallel lines tangent to its boundary, and the \"width\" is often defined to be the smallest such distance. Both quantities can be calculated efficiently using rotating calipers. For a curve of constant width such as the Reuleaux triangle, the width and diameter are the same because all such pairs of parallel tangent lines have the same distance.\nFor an ellipse, the standard terminology is different. A diameter of an ellipse is any chord passing through the centre of the ellipse. For example, conjugate diameters have the property that a tangent line to the ellipse at the endpoint of one diameter is parallel to the conjugate diameter. The longest diameter is called the major axis.\nThe word \"diameter\" is derived from (), \"diameter of a circle\", from (), \"across, through\" and (), \"measure\". It is often abbreviated \"DIA\", \"dia\", \"d\", or \"\u2300\".\nGeneralizations.\nThe definitions given above are only valid for circles, spheres and convex shapes. However, they are special cases of a more general definition that is valid for any kind of \"n\"-dimensional convex or non-convex object, such as a hypercube or a set of scattered points. The diameter of a subset of a metric space is the least upper bound of the set of all distances between pairs of points in the subset. So, if is the subset, the diameter is\nIf the distance function is viewed here as having codomain R (the set of all real numbers), this implies that the diameter of the empty set (the case ) equals \u2212\u221e (negative infinity). Some authors prefer to treat the empty set as a special case, assigning it a diameter of 0, which corresponds to taking the codomain of to be the set of nonnegative reals.\nFor any solid object or set of scattered points in \"n\"-dimensional Euclidean space, the diameter of the object or set is the same as the diameter of its convex hull. In medical parlance concerning a lesion or in geology concerning a rock, the diameter of an object is the supremum of the set of all distances between pairs of points in the object.\nIn differential geometry, the diameter is an important global Riemannian invariant.\nIn plane geometry, a diameter of a conic section is typically defined as any chord which passes through the conic's centre; such diameters are not necessarily of uniform length, except in the case of the circle, which has eccentricity\u00a0\"e\"\u00a0=\u00a00.\nSymbol.\nThe symbol or variable for diameter, , is sometimes used in technical drawings or specifications as a prefix or suffix for a number (e.g. \"\u2300 55 mm\", indicating that it represents diameter. For example, photographic filter thread sizes are often denoted in this way.\nIn German, the diameter symbol (German \"\") is also used as an average symbol (\"Durchschnittszeichen\").\nSimilar symbols.\nIt is similar in size and design to , the Latin small letter o with stroke. The diameter symbol \u2300 is distinct from the empty set symbol , from an (italic) uppercase phi , and from the Nordic vowel (Latin capital letter O with stroke). See also slashed zero.\nEncodings.\nThe symbol has a Unicode code point at , in the Miscellaneous Technical set. On an Apple Macintosh, the diameter symbol can be entered via the character palette (this is opened by pressing in most applications), where it can be found in the Technical Symbols category. In Unix/Linux/ChromeOS systems, it is generated using It can be obtained in UNIX-like operating systems using a Compose key by pressing, in sequence, \nThe character will sometimes not display correctly, however, since many fonts do not include it. In many situations the letter \u00f8 (the Latin small letter o with stroke) is an acceptable substitute, which in Unicode is . and on a Macintosh by pressing (the letter o, not the number 0). In Unix/Linux/ChromeOS systems, it is generated using or . AutoCAD uses available as a shortcut string .\nIn Microsoft Word the diameter symbol can be acquired by typing 2300 and then pressing Alt+X.\nIn LaTeX the diameter symbol can be obtained with the command codice_1 from the wasysym package."}
{"id": "8008", "revid": "38285650", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8008", "title": "Direct examination", "text": "The direct examination or examination-in-chief is one stage in the process of adducing evidence from witnesses in a court of law. Direct examination is the questioning of a witness by the party who called him or her, in a trial. Direct examination is usually performed to elicit evidence in support of facts which will satisfy a required element of a party's claim or defense.\nIn direct examination, one is generally prohibited from asking leading questions. This prevents a lawyer from feeding answers to a favorable witness. An exception to this rule occurs if one side has called a witness, but it is either understood or becomes clear, that the witness is hostile to the questioner's side of the controversy. The lawyer may then ask the court to declare the person he or she has called to the stand a hostile witness. If the court does so, the lawyer may thereafter ask witness leading questions during direct examination.\nThe techniques of direct examination are taught in courses on trial advocacy. Each direct examination is integrated with the overall case strategy through either a theme and theory or, with more advanced strategies, a line of effort."}
{"id": "8009", "revid": "40374695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8009", "title": "Dirigible", "text": ""}
{"id": "8010", "revid": "16861812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8010", "title": "Drunk", "text": ""}
