{"id": "11617", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11617", "title": "Feynman diagram", "text": "In theoretical physics, a Feynman diagram is a pictorial representation of the mathematical expressions describing the behavior and interaction of subatomic particles. The scheme is named after American physicist Richard Feynman, who introduced the diagrams in 1948. The interaction of subatomic particles can be complex and difficult to understand; Feynman diagrams give a simple visualization of what would otherwise be an arcane and abstract formula. According to David Kaiser, \"Since the middle of the 20th century, theoretical physicists have increasingly turned to this tool to help them undertake critical calculations. Feynman diagrams have revolutionized nearly every aspect of theoretical physics.\" While the diagrams are applied primarily to quantum field theory, they can also be used in other fields, such as solid-state theory. Frank Wilczek wrote that the calculations which won him the 2004 Nobel Prize in Physics \"would have been literally unthinkable without Feynman diagrams, as would [Wilczek's] calculations that established a route to production and observation of the Higgs particle.\"\nFeynman used Ernst Stueckelberg's interpretation of the positron as if it were an electron moving backward in time. Thus, antiparticles are represented as moving backward along the time axis in Feynman diagrams.\nThe calculation of probability amplitudes in theoretical particle physics requires the use of rather large and complicated integrals over a large number of variables. Feynman diagrams can represent these integrals graphically.\nA Feynman diagram is a graphical representation of a perturbative contribution to the transition amplitude or correlation function of a quantum mechanical or statistical field theory. Within the canonical formulation of quantum field theory, a Feynman diagram represents a term in the Wick's expansion of the perturbative -matrix. Alternatively, the path integral formulation of quantum field theory represents the transition amplitude as a weighted sum of all possible histories of the system from the initial to the final state, in terms of either particles or fields. The transition amplitude is then given as the matrix element of the -matrix between the initial and the final states of the quantum system.\nMotivation and history.\nWhen calculating scattering cross-sections in particle physics, the interaction between particles can be described by starting from a free field that describes the incoming and outgoing particles, and including an interaction Hamiltonian to describe how the particles deflect one another. The amplitude for scattering is the sum of each possible interaction history over all possible intermediate particle states. The number of times the interaction Hamiltonian acts is the order of the perturbation expansion, and the time-dependent perturbation theory for fields is known as the Dyson series. When the intermediate states at intermediate times are energy eigenstates (collections of particles with a definite momentum) the series is called old-fashioned perturbation theory (or time-dependent/time-ordered perturbation theory).\nThe Dyson series can be alternatively rewritten as a sum over Feynman diagrams, where at each vertex both the energy and momentum are conserved, but where the length of the energy-momentum four-vector is not necessarily equal to the mass, i.e. the intermediate particles are so-called off-shell. The Feynman diagrams are much easier to keep track of than \"old-fashioned\" terms, because the old-fashioned way treats the particle and antiparticle contributions as separate. Each Feynman diagram is the sum of exponentially many old-fashioned terms, because each internal line can separately represent either a particle or an antiparticle. In a non-relativistic theory, there are no antiparticles and there is no doubling, so each Feynman diagram includes only one term.\nFeynman gave a prescription for calculating the amplitude (the Feynman rules, below) for any given diagram from a field theory Lagrangian. Each internal line corresponds to a factor of the virtual particle's propagator; each vertex where lines meet gives a factor derived from an interaction term in the Lagrangian, and incoming and outgoing lines carry an energy, momentum, and spin.\nIn addition to their value as a mathematical tool, Feynman diagrams provide deep physical insight into the nature of particle interactions. Particles interact in every way available; in fact, intermediate virtual particles are allowed to propagate faster than light. The probability of each final state is then obtained by summing over all such possibilities. This is closely tied to the functional integral formulation of quantum mechanics, also invented by Feynman\u2014see path integral formulation.\nThe na\u00efve application of such calculations often produces diagrams whose amplitudes are infinite, because the short-distance particle interactions require a careful limiting procedure, to include particle self-interactions. The technique of renormalization, suggested by Ernst Stueckelberg and Hans Bethe and implemented by Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga compensates for this effect and eliminates the troublesome infinities. After renormalization, calculations using Feynman diagrams match experimental results with very high accuracy.\nFeynman diagram and path integral methods are also used in statistical mechanics and can even be applied to classical mechanics.\nAlternative names.\nMurray Gell-Mann always referred to Feynman diagrams as Stueckelberg diagrams, after a Swiss physicist, Ernst Stueckelberg, who devised a similar notation many years earlier. Stueckelberg was motivated by the need for a manifestly covariant formalism for quantum field theory, but did not provide as automated a way to handle symmetry factors and loops, although he was first to find the correct physical interpretation in terms of forward and backward in time particle paths, all without the path-integral. \nHistorically, as a book-keeping device of covariant perturbation theory, the graphs were called Feynman\u2013Dyson diagrams or Dyson graphs, because the path integral was unfamiliar when they were introduced, and Freeman Dyson's derivation from old-fashioned perturbation theory was easier to follow for physicists trained in earlier methods. Feynman had to lobby hard for the diagrams, which confused the establishment physicists trained in equations and graphs.\nRepresentation of physical reality.\nIn their presentations of fundamental interactions, written from the particle physics perspective, Gerard 't Hooft and Martinus Veltman gave good arguments for taking the original, non-regularized Feynman diagrams as the most succinct representation of our present knowledge about the physics of quantum scattering of fundamental particles. Their motivations are consistent with the convictions of James Daniel Bjorken and Sidney Drell:\nThe Feynman graphs and rules of calculation summarize quantum field theory in a form in close contact with the experimental numbers one wants to understand. Although the statement of the theory in terms of graphs may imply perturbation theory, use of graphical methods in the many-body problem shows that this formalism is flexible enough to deal with phenomena of nonperturbative characters ... Some modification of the Feynman rules of calculation may well outlive the elaborate mathematical structure of local canonical quantum field theory ...\nCurrently, there are no opposing opinions. In quantum field theories the Feynman diagrams are obtained from a Lagrangian by Feynman rules.\nDimensional regularization is a method for regularizing integrals in the evaluation of Feynman diagrams; it assigns values to them that are meromorphic functions of an auxiliary complex parameter , called the dimension. Dimensional regularization writes a Feynman integral as an integral depending on the spacetime dimension and spacetime points.\nParticle-path interpretation.\nA Feynman diagram is a representation of quantum field theory processes in terms of particle interactions. The particles are represented by the lines of the diagram, which can be squiggly or straight, with an arrow or without, depending on the type of particle. A point where lines connect to other lines is a \"vertex\", and this is where the particles meet and interact: by emitting or absorbing new particles, deflecting one another, or changing type.\nThere are three different types of lines: \"internal lines\" connect two vertices, \"incoming lines\" extend from \"the past\" to a vertex and represent an initial state, and \"outgoing lines\" extend from a vertex to \"the future\" and represent the final state (the latter two are also known as \"external lines\"). Traditionally, the bottom of the diagram is the past and the top the future; other times, the past is to the left and the future to the right. When calculating correlation functions instead of scattering amplitudes, there is no past and future and all the lines are internal. The particles then begin and end on little x's, which represent the positions of the operators whose correlation is being calculated.\nFeynman diagrams are a pictorial representation of a contribution to the total amplitude for a process that can happen in several different ways. When a group of incoming particles are to scatter off each other, the process can be thought of as one where the particles travel over all possible paths, including paths that go backward in time.\nFeynman diagrams are often confused with spacetime diagrams and bubble chamber images because they all describe particle scattering. Feynman diagrams are graphs that represent the interaction of particles rather than the physical position of the particle during a scattering process. Unlike a bubble chamber picture, only the sum of all the Feynman diagrams represent any given particle interaction; particles do not choose a particular diagram each time they interact. The law of summation is in accord with the principle of superposition\u2014every diagram contributes to the total amplitude for the process.\nDescription.\nA Feynman diagram represents a perturbative contribution to the amplitude of a quantum transition from some initial quantum state to some final quantum state.\nFor example, in the process of electron-positron annihilation the initial state is one electron and one positron, the final state: two photons.\nThe initial state is often assumed to be at the left of the diagram and the final state at the right (although other conventions are also used quite often).\nA Feynman diagram consists of points, called vertices, and lines attached to the vertices.\nThe particles in the initial state are depicted by lines sticking out in the direction of the initial state (e.g., to the left), the particles in the final state are represented by lines sticking out in the direction of the final state (e.g., to the right).\nIn QED there are two types of particles: matter particles such as electrons or positrons (called fermions) and exchange particles (called gauge bosons). They are represented in Feynman diagrams as follows:\nIn QED a vertex always has three lines attached to it: one bosonic line, one fermionic line with arrow toward the vertex, and one fermionic line with arrow away from the vertex.\nThe vertices might be connected by a bosonic or fermionic propagator. A bosonic propagator is represented by a wavy line connecting two vertices (\u2022~\u2022). A fermionic propagator is represented by a solid line (with an arrow in one or another direction) connecting two vertices, (\u2022\u2190\u2022).\nThe number of vertices gives the order of the term in the perturbation series expansion of the transition amplitude.\nElectron\u2013positron annihilation example.\nThe electron\u2013positron annihilation interaction:\nhas a contribution from the second order Feynman diagram shown adjacent:\nIn the initial state (at the bottom; early time) there is one electron (e\u2212) and one positron (e+) and in the final state (at the top; late time) there are two photons (\u03b3).\nCanonical quantization formulation.\nThe probability amplitude for a transition of a quantum system (between asymptotically free states) from the initial state to the final state is given by the matrix element\nwhere is the -matrix. In terms of the time-evolution operator , it is simply\nIn the interaction picture, this expands to\nwhere is the interaction Hamiltonian and signifies the time-ordered product of operators. Dyson's formula expands the time-ordered matrix exponential into a perturbation series in the powers of the interaction Hamiltonian density,\nEquivalently, with the interaction Lagrangian , it is\nA Feynman diagram is a graphical representation of a single summand in the Wick's expansion of the time-ordered product in the th-order term of the Dyson series of the -matrix,\nwhere signifies the normal-ordered product of the operators and (\u00b1) takes care of the possible sign change when commuting the fermionic operators to bring them together for a contraction (a propagator).\nFeynman rules.\nThe diagrams are drawn according to the Feynman rules, which depend upon the interaction Lagrangian. For the QED interaction Lagrangian\ndescribing the interaction of a fermionic field with a bosonic gauge field , the Feynman rules can be formulated in coordinate space as follows:\nExample: second order processes in QED.\nThe second order perturbation term in the -matrix is\nScattering of fermions.\nThe Wick's expansion of the integrand gives (among others) the following term\nwhere\nis the electromagnetic contraction (propagator) in the Feynman gauge. This term is represented by the Feynman diagram at the right. This diagram gives contributions to the following processes:\nCompton scattering and annihilation/generation of e\u2212 e+ pairs.\nAnother interesting term in the expansion is\nwhere\nis the fermionic contraction (propagator).\nPath integral formulation.\nIn a path integral, the field Lagrangian, integrated over all possible field histories, defines the probability amplitude to go from one field configuration to another. In order to make sense, the field theory should have a well-defined ground state, and the integral should be performed a little bit rotated into imaginary time, i.e. a Wick rotation. The path integral formalism is completely equivalent to the canonical operator formalism above.\nScalar field Lagrangian.\nA simple example is the free relativistic scalar field in dimensions, whose action integral is:\nThe probability amplitude for a process is:\nwhere and are space-like hypersurfaces that define the boundary conditions. The collection of all the on the starting hypersurface give the initial value of the field, analogous to the starting position for a point particle, and the field values at each point of the final hypersurface defines the final field value, which is allowed to vary, giving a different amplitude to end up at different values. This is the field-to-field transition amplitude.\nThe path integral gives the expectation value of operators between the initial and final state:\nand in the limit that A and B recede to the infinite past and the infinite future, the only contribution that matters is from the ground state (this is only rigorously true if the path-integral is defined slightly rotated into imaginary time). The path integral can be thought of as analogous to a probability distribution, and it is convenient to define it so that multiplying by a constant doesn't change anything:\nThe normalization factor on the bottom is called the \"partition function\" for the field, and it coincides with the statistical mechanical partition function at zero temperature when rotated into imaginary time.\nThe initial-to-final amplitudes are ill-defined if one thinks of the continuum limit right from the beginning, because the fluctuations in the field can become unbounded. So the path-integral can be thought of as on a discrete square lattice, with lattice spacing and the limit should be taken carefully. If the final results do not depend on the shape of the lattice or the value of , then the continuum limit exists.\nOn a lattice.\nOn a lattice, (i), the field can be expanded in Fourier modes:\nHere the integration domain is over restricted to a cube of side length , so that large values of are not allowed. It is important to note that the -measure contains the factors of 2 from Fourier transforms, this is the best standard convention for -integrals in QFT. The lattice means that fluctuations at large are not allowed to contribute right away, they only start to contribute in the limit . Sometimes, instead of a lattice, the field modes are just cut off at high values of instead.\nIt is also convenient from time to time to consider the space-time volume to be finite, so that the modes are also a lattice. This is not strictly as necessary as the space-lattice limit, because interactions in are not localized, but it is convenient for keeping track of the factors in front of the -integrals and the momentum-conserving delta functions that will arise.\nOn a lattice, (ii), the action needs to be discretized:\nwhere is a pair of nearest lattice neighbors and . The discretization should be thought of as defining what the derivative means.\nIn terms of the lattice Fourier modes, the action can be written:\nFor near zero this is:\nNow we have the continuum Fourier transform of the original action. In finite volume, the quantity is not infinitesimal, but becomes the volume of a box made by neighboring Fourier modes, or .\nThe field is real-valued, so the Fourier transform obeys:\nIn terms of real and imaginary parts, the real part of is an even function of , while the imaginary part is odd. The Fourier transform avoids double-counting, so that it can be written:\nover an integration domain that integrates over each pair exactly once.\nFor a complex scalar field with action\nthe Fourier transform is unconstrained:\nand the integral is over all .\nIntegrating over all different values of is equivalent to integrating over all Fourier modes, because taking a Fourier transform is a unitary linear transformation of field coordinates. When you change coordinates in a multidimensional integral by a linear transformation, the value of the new integral is given by the determinant of the transformation matrix. If\nthen\nIf is a rotation, then\nso that , and the sign depends on whether the rotation includes a reflection or not.\nThe matrix that changes coordinates from to can be read off from the definition of a Fourier transform.\nand the Fourier inversion theorem tells you the inverse:\nwhich is the complex conjugate-transpose, up to factors of 2. On a finite volume lattice, the determinant is nonzero and independent of the field values.\nand the path integral is a separate factor at each value of .\nThe factor is the infinitesimal volume of a discrete cell in -space, in a square lattice box\nwhere is the side-length of the box. Each separate factor is an oscillatory Gaussian, and the width of the Gaussian diverges as the volume goes to infinity.\nIn imaginary time, the \"Euclidean action\" becomes positive definite, and can be interpreted as a probability distribution. The probability of a field having values is\nThe expectation value of the field is the statistical expectation value of the field when chosen according to the probability distribution:\nSince the probability of is a product, the value of at each separate value of is independently Gaussian distributed. The variance of the Gaussian is , which is formally infinite, but that just means that the fluctuations are unbounded in infinite volume. In any finite volume, the integral is replaced by a discrete sum, and the variance of the integral is .\nMonte Carlo.\nThe path integral defines a probabilistic algorithm to generate a Euclidean scalar field configuration. Randomly pick the real and imaginary parts of each Fourier mode at wavenumber to be a Gaussian random variable with variance . This generates a configuration at random, and the Fourier transform gives . For real scalar fields, the algorithm must generate only one of each pair , and make the second the complex conjugate of the first.\nTo find any correlation function, generate a field again and again by this procedure, and find the statistical average:\nwhere is the number of configurations, and the sum is of the product of the field values on each configuration. The Euclidean correlation function is just the same as the correlation function in statistics or statistical mechanics. The quantum mechanical correlation functions are an analytic continuation of the Euclidean correlation functions.\nFor free fields with a quadratic action, the probability distribution is a high-dimensional Gaussian, and the statistical average is given by an explicit formula. But the Monte Carlo method also works well for bosonic interacting field theories where there is no closed form for the correlation functions.\nScalar propagator.\nEach mode is independently Gaussian distributed. The expectation of field modes is easy to calculate:\nfor , since then the two Gaussian random variables are independent and both have zero mean.\nin finite volume , when the two -values coincide, since this is the variance of the Gaussian. In the infinite volume limit,\nStrictly speaking, this is an approximation: the lattice propagator is:\nBut near , for field fluctuations long compared to the lattice spacing, the two forms coincide.\nIt is important to emphasize that the delta functions contain factors of 2, so that they cancel out the 2 factors in the measure for integrals.\nwhere is the ordinary one-dimensional Dirac delta function. This convention for delta-functions is not universal\u2014some authors keep the factors of 2 in the delta functions (and in the -integration) explicit.\nEquation of motion.\nThe form of the propagator can be more easily found by using the equation of motion for the field. From the Lagrangian, the equation of motion is:\nand in an expectation value, this says:\nWhere the derivatives act on , and the identity is true everywhere except when and coincide, and the operator order matters. The form of the singularity can be understood from the canonical commutation relations to be a delta-function. Defining the (Euclidean) \"Feynman propagator\" as the Fourier transform of the time-ordered two-point function (the one that comes from the path-integral):\nSo that:\nIf the equations of motion are linear, the propagator will always be the reciprocal of the quadratic-form matrix that defines the free Lagrangian, since this gives the equations of motion. This is also easy to see directly from the path integral. The factor of disappears in the Euclidean theory.\nWick theorem.\nBecause each field mode is an independent Gaussian, the expectation values for the product of many field modes obeys \"Wick's theorem\":\nis zero unless the field modes coincide in pairs. This means that it is zero for an odd number of , and for an even number of , it is equal to a contribution from each pair separately, with a delta function.\nwhere the sum is over each partition of the field modes into pairs, and the product is over the pairs. For example,\nAn interpretation of Wick's theorem is that each field insertion can be thought of as a dangling line, and the expectation value is calculated by linking up the lines in pairs, putting a delta function factor that ensures that the momentum of each partner in the pair is equal, and dividing by the propagator.\nHigher Gaussian moments \u2014 completing Wick's theorem.\nThere is a subtle point left before Wick's theorem is proved\u2014what if more than two of the formula_49s have the same momentum? If it's an odd number, the integral is zero; negative values cancel with the positive values. But if the number is even, the integral is positive. The previous demonstration assumed that the formula_49s would only match up in pairs.\nBut the theorem is correct even when arbitrarily many of the formula_49 are equal, and this is a notable property of Gaussian integration:\nDividing by ,\nIf Wick's theorem were correct, the higher moments would be given by all possible pairings of a list of different :\nwhere the are all the same variable, the index is just to keep track of the number of ways to pair them. The first can be paired with others, leaving . The next unpaired can be paired with different leaving , and so on. This means that Wick's theorem, uncorrected, says that the expectation value of should be:\nand this is in fact the correct answer. So Wick's theorem holds no matter how many of the momenta of the internal variables coincide.\nInteraction.\nInteractions are represented by higher order contributions, since quadratic contributions are always Gaussian. The simplest interaction is the quartic self-interaction, with an action:\nThe reason for the combinatorial factor 4! will be clear soon. Writing the action in terms of the lattice (or continuum) Fourier modes:\nWhere is the free action, whose correlation functions are given by Wick's theorem. The exponential of in the path integral can be expanded in powers of , giving a series of corrections to the free action.\nThe path integral for the interacting action is then a power series of corrections to the free action. The term represented by should be thought of as four half-lines, one for each factor of . The half-lines meet at a vertex, which contributes a delta-function that ensures that the sum of the momenta are all equal.\nTo compute a correlation function in the interacting theory, there is a contribution from the terms now. For example, the path-integral for the four-field correlator:\nwhich in the free field was only nonzero when the momenta were equal in pairs, is now nonzero for all values of . The momenta of the insertions can now match up with the momenta of the s in the expansion. The insertions should also be thought of as half-lines, four in this case, which carry a momentum , but one that is not integrated.\nThe lowest-order contribution comes from the first nontrivial term in the Taylor expansion of the action. Wick's theorem requires that the momenta in the half-lines, the factors in , should match up with the momenta of the external half-lines in pairs. The new contribution is equal to:\nThe 4! inside is canceled because there are exactly 4! ways to match the half-lines in to the external half-lines. Each of these different ways of matching the half-lines together in pairs contributes exactly once, regardless of the values of , by Wick's theorem.\nFeynman diagrams.\nThe expansion of the action in powers of gives a series of terms with progressively higher number of s. The contribution from the term with exactly s is called th order.\nThe th order terms has:\nBy Wick's theorem, each pair of half-lines must be paired together to make a \"line\", and this line gives a factor of\nwhich multiplies the contribution. This means that the two half-lines that make a line are forced to have equal and opposite momentum. The line itself should be labelled by an arrow, drawn parallel to the line, and labeled by the momentum in the line . The half-line at the tail end of the arrow carries momentum , while the half-line at the head-end carries momentum . If one of the two half-lines is external, this kills the integral over the internal , since it forces the internal to be equal to the external . If both are internal, the integral over remains.\nThe diagrams that are formed by linking the half-lines in the s with the external half-lines, representing insertions, are the Feynman diagrams of this theory. Each line carries a factor of , the propagator, and either goes from vertex to vertex, or ends at an insertion. If it is internal, it is integrated over. At each vertex, the total incoming is equal to the total outgoing .\nThe number of ways of making a diagram by joining half-lines into lines almost completely cancels the factorial factors coming from the Taylor series of the exponential and the 4! at each vertex.\nLoop order.\nA forest diagram is one where all the internal lines have momentum that is completely determined by the external lines and the condition that the incoming and outgoing momentum are equal at each vertex. The contribution of these diagrams is a product of propagators, without any integration. A tree diagram is a connected forest diagram.\nAn example of a tree diagram is the one where each of four external lines end on an . Another is when three external lines end on an , and the remaining half-line joins up with another , and the remaining half-lines of this run off to external lines. These are all also forest diagrams (as every tree is a forest); an example of a forest that is not a tree is when eight external lines end on two s.\nIt is easy to verify that in all these cases, the momenta on all the internal lines is determined by the external momenta and the condition of momentum conservation in each vertex.\nA diagram that is not a forest diagram is called a \"loop\" diagram, and an example is one where two lines of an are joined to external lines, while the remaining two lines are joined to each other. The two lines joined to each other can have any momentum at all, since they both enter and leave the same vertex. A more complicated example is one where two s are joined to each other by matching the legs one to the other. This diagram has no external lines at all.\nThe reason loop diagrams are called loop diagrams is because the number of -integrals that are left undetermined by momentum conservation is equal to the number of independent closed loops in the diagram, where independent loops are counted as in homology theory. The homology is real-valued (actually valued), the value associated with each line is the momentum. The boundary operator takes each line to the sum of the end-vertices with a positive sign at the head and a negative sign at the tail. The condition that the momentum is conserved is exactly the condition that the boundary of the -valued weighted graph is zero.\nA set of valid -values can be arbitrarily redefined whenever there is a closed loop. A closed loop is a cyclical path of adjacent vertices that never revisits the same vertex. Such a cycle can be thought of as the boundary of a hypothetical 2-cell. The -labellings of a graph that conserve momentum (i.e. which has zero boundary) up to redefinitions of (i.e. up to boundaries of 2-cells) define the first homology of a graph. The number of independent momenta that are not determined is then equal to the number of independent homology loops. For many graphs, this is equal to the number of loops as counted in the most intuitive way.\nSymmetry factors.\nThe number of ways to form a given Feynman diagram by joining together half-lines is large, and by Wick's theorem, each way of pairing up the half-lines contributes equally. Often, this completely cancels the factorials in the denominator of each term, but the cancellation is sometimes incomplete.\nThe uncancelled denominator is called the \"symmetry factor\" of the diagram. The contribution of each diagram to the correlation function must be divided by its symmetry factor.\nFor example, consider the Feynman diagram formed from two external lines joined to one , and the remaining two half-lines in the joined to each other. There are 4\u00a0\u00d7\u00a03 ways to join the external half-lines to the , and then there is only one way to join the two remaining lines to each other. The comes divided by , but the number of ways to link up the half lines to make the diagram is only 4\u00a0\u00d7\u00a03, so the contribution of this diagram is divided by two.\nFor another example, consider the diagram formed by joining all the half-lines of one to all the half-lines of another . This diagram is called a \"vacuum bubble\", because it does not link up to any external lines. There are 4! ways to form this diagram, but the denominator includes a 2! (from the expansion of the exponential, there are two s) and two factors of 4!. The contribution is multiplied by =\u00a0.\nAnother example is the Feynman diagram formed from two s where each links up to two external lines, and the remaining two half-lines of each are joined to each other. The number of ways to link an to two external lines is 4\u00a0\u00d7\u00a03, and either could link up to either pair, giving an additional factor of 2. The remaining two half-lines in the two s can be linked to each other in two ways, so that the total number of ways to form the diagram is , while the denominator is . The total symmetry factor is 2, and the contribution of this diagram is divided by 2.\nThe symmetry factor theorem gives the symmetry factor for a general diagram: the contribution of each Feynman diagram must be divided by the order of its group of automorphisms, the number of symmetries that it has.\nAn automorphism of a Feynman graph is a permutation of the lines and a permutation of the vertices with the following properties:\nThis theorem has an interpretation in terms of particle-paths: when identical particles are present, the integral over all intermediate particles must not double-count states that differ only by interchanging identical particles.\nProof: To prove this theorem, label all the internal and external lines of a diagram with a unique name. Then form the diagram by linking a half-line to a name and then to the other half line.\nNow count the number of ways to form the named diagram. Each permutation of the s gives a different pattern of linking names to half-lines, and this is a factor of . Each permutation of the half-lines in a single gives a factor of 4!. So a named diagram can be formed in exactly as many ways as the denominator of the Feynman expansion.\nBut the number of unnamed diagrams is smaller than the number of named diagram by the order of the automorphism group of the graph.\nConnected diagrams: \"linked-cluster theorem\".\nRoughly speaking, a Feynman diagram is called \"connected\" if all vertices and propagator lines are linked by a sequence of vertices and propagators of the diagram itself. If one views it as an undirected graph it is connected. The remarkable relevance of such diagrams in QFTs is due to the fact that they are sufficient to determine the quantum partition function . More precisely, connected Feynman diagrams determine\nTo see this, one should recall that\nwith constructed from some (arbitrary) Feynman diagram that can be thought to consist of several connected components . If one encounters (identical) copies of a component within the Feynman diagram one has to include a \"symmetry factor\" . However, in the end each contribution of a Feynman diagram to the partition function has the generic form\nwhere labels the (infinitely) many connected Feynman diagrams possible.\nA scheme to successively create such contributions from the to is obtained by\nand therefore yields\nTo establish the \"normalization\" one simply calculates all connected \"vacuum diagrams\", i.e., the diagrams without any \"sources\" (sometimes referred to as \"external legs\" of a Feynman diagram).\nVacuum bubbles.\nAn immediate consequence of the linked-cluster theorem is that all vacuum bubbles, diagrams without external lines, cancel when calculating correlation functions. A correlation function is given by a ratio of path-integrals:\nThe top is the sum over all Feynman diagrams, including disconnected diagrams that do not link up to external lines at all. In terms of the connected diagrams, the numerator includes the same contributions of vacuum bubbles as the denominator:\nWhere the sum over diagrams includes only those diagrams each of whose connected components end on at least one external line. The vacuum bubbles are the same whatever the external lines, and give an overall multiplicative factor. The denominator is the sum over all vacuum bubbles, and dividing gets rid of the second factor.\nThe vacuum bubbles then are only useful for determining itself, which from the definition of the path integral is equal to:\nwhere is the energy density in the vacuum. Each vacuum bubble contains a factor of zeroing the total at each vertex, and when there are no external lines, this contains a factor of , because the momentum conservation is over-enforced. In finite volume, this factor can be identified as the total volume of space time. Dividing by the volume, the remaining integral for the vacuum bubble has an interpretation: it is a contribution to the energy density of the vacuum.\nSources.\nCorrelation functions are the sum of the connected Feynman diagrams, but the formalism treats the connected and disconnected diagrams differently. Internal lines end on vertices, while external lines go off to insertions. Introducing \"sources\" unifies the formalism, by making new vertices where one line can end.\nSources are external fields, fields that contribute to the action, but are not dynamical variables. A scalar field source is another scalar field that contributes a term to the (Lorentz) Lagrangian:\nIn the Feynman expansion, this contributes H terms with one half-line ending on a vertex. Lines in a Feynman diagram can now end either on an vertex, or on an vertex, and only one line enters an vertex. The Feynman rule for an vertex is that a line from an with momentum gets a factor of .\nThe sum of the connected diagrams in the presence of sources includes a term for each connected diagram in the absence of sources, except now the diagrams can end on the source. Traditionally, a source is represented by a little \"\u00d7\" with one line extending out, exactly as an insertion.\nwhere is the connected diagram with external lines carrying momentum as indicated. The sum is over all connected diagrams, as before.\nThe field is not dynamical, which means that there is no path integral over : is just a parameter in the Lagrangian, which varies from point to point. The path integral for the field is:\nand it is a function of the values of at every point. One way to interpret this expression is that it is taking the Fourier transform in field space. If there is a probability density on , the Fourier transform of the probability density is:\nThe Fourier transform is the expectation of an oscillatory exponential. The path integral in the presence of a source is:\nwhich, on a lattice, is the product of an oscillatory exponential for each field value:\nThe Fourier transform of a delta-function is a constant, which gives a formal expression for a delta function:\nThis tells you what a field delta function looks like in a path-integral. For two scalar fields and ,\nwhich integrates over the Fourier transform coordinate, over . This expression is useful for formally changing field coordinates in the path integral, much as a delta function is used to change coordinates in an ordinary multi-dimensional integral.\nThe partition function is now a function of the field , and the physical partition function is the value when is the zero function:\nThe correlation functions are derivatives of the path integral with respect to the source:\nIn Euclidean space, source contributions to the action can still appear with a factor of , so that they still do a Fourier transform.\nSpin ; \"photons\" and \"ghosts\".\nSpin : Grassmann integrals.\nThe field path integral can be extended to the Fermi case, but only if the notion of integration is expanded. A Grassmann integral of a free Fermi field is a high-dimensional determinant or Pfaffian, which defines the new type of Gaussian integration appropriate for Fermi fields.\nThe two fundamental formulas of Grassmann integration are:\nwhere is an arbitrary matrix and are independent Grassmann variables for each index , and\nwhere is an antisymmetric matrix, is a collection of Grassmann variables, and the is to prevent double-counting (since ).\nIn matrix notation, where and are Grassmann-valued row vectors, and are Grassmann-valued column vectors, and is a real-valued matrix:\nwhere the last equality is a consequence of the translation invariance of the Grassmann integral. The Grassmann variables are external sources for , and differentiating with respect to pulls down factors of .\nagain, in a schematic matrix notation. The meaning of the formula above is that the derivative with respect to the appropriate component of and gives the matrix element of . This is exactly analogous to the bosonic path integration formula for a Gaussian integral of a complex bosonic field:\nSo that the propagator is the inverse of the matrix in the quadratic part of the action in both the Bose and Fermi case.\nFor real Grassmann fields, for Majorana fermions, the path integral a Pfaffian times a source quadratic form, and the formulas give the square root of the determinant, just as they do for real Bosonic fields. The propagator is still the inverse of the quadratic part.\nThe free Dirac Lagrangian:\nformally gives the equations of motion and the anticommutation relations of the Dirac field, just as the Klein Gordon Lagrangian in an ordinary path integral gives the equations of motion and commutation relations of the scalar field. By using the spatial Fourier transform of the Dirac field as a new basis for the Grassmann algebra, the quadratic part of the Dirac action becomes simple to invert:\nThe propagator is the inverse of the matrix linking and , since different values of do not mix together.\nThe analog of Wick's theorem matches and in pairs:\nwhere S is the sign of the permutation that reorders the sequence of and to put the ones that are paired up to make the delta-functions next to each other, with the coming right before the . Since a pair is a commuting element of the Grassmann algebra, it doesn't matter what order the pairs are in. If more than one pair have the same , the integral is zero, and it is easy to check that the sum over pairings gives zero in this case (there are always an even number of them). This is the Grassmann analog of the higher Gaussian moments that completed the Bosonic Wick's theorem earlier.\nThe rules for spin- Dirac particles are as follows: The propagator is the inverse of the Dirac operator, the lines have arrows just as for a complex scalar field, and the diagram acquires an overall factor of \u22121 for each closed Fermi loop. If there are an odd number of Fermi loops, the diagram changes sign. Historically, the \u22121 rule was very difficult for Feynman to discover. He discovered it after a long process of trial and error, since he lacked a proper theory of Grassmann integration.\nThe rule follows from the observation that the number of Fermi lines at a vertex is always even. Each term in the Lagrangian must always be Bosonic. A Fermi loop is counted by following Fermionic lines until one comes back to the starting point, then removing those lines from the diagram. Repeating this process eventually erases all the Fermionic lines: this is the Euler algorithm to 2-color a graph, which works whenever each vertex has even degree. The number of steps in the Euler algorithm is only equal to the number of independent Fermionic homology cycles in the common special case that all terms in the Lagrangian are exactly quadratic in the Fermi fields, so that each vertex has exactly two Fermionic lines. When there are four-Fermi interactions (like in the Fermi effective theory of the weak nuclear interactions) there are more -integrals than Fermi loops. In this case, the counting rule should apply the Euler algorithm by pairing up the Fermi lines at each vertex into pairs that together form a bosonic factor of the term in the Lagrangian, and when entering a vertex by one line, the algorithm should always leave with the partner line.\nTo clarify and prove the rule, consider a Feynman diagram formed from vertices, terms in the Lagrangian, with Fermion fields. The full term is Bosonic, it is a commuting element of the Grassmann algebra, so the order in which the vertices appear is not important. The Fermi lines are linked into loops, and when traversing the loop, one can reorder the vertex terms one after the other as one goes around without any sign cost. The exception is when you return to the starting point, and the final half-line must be joined with the unlinked first half-line. This requires one permutation to move the last to go in front of the first , and this gives the sign.\nThis rule is the only visible effect of the exclusion principle in internal lines. When there are external lines, the amplitudes are antisymmetric when two Fermi insertions for identical particles are interchanged. This is automatic in the source formalism, because the sources for Fermi fields are themselves Grassmann valued.\nSpin 1: photons.\nThe naive propagator for photons is infinite, since the Lagrangian for the A-field is:\nThe quadratic form defining the propagator is non-invertible. The reason is the gauge invariance of the field; adding a gradient to does not change the physics.\nTo fix this problem, one needs to fix a gauge. The most convenient way is to demand that the divergence of is some function , whose value is random from point to point. It does no harm to integrate over the values of , since it only determines the choice of gauge. This procedure inserts the following factor into the path integral for :\nThe first factor, the delta function, fixes the gauge. The second factor sums over different values of that are inequivalent gauge fixings. This is simply\nThe additional contribution from gauge-fixing cancels the second half of the free Lagrangian, giving the Feynman Lagrangian:\nwhich is just like four independent free scalar fields, one for each component of . The Feynman propagator is:\nThe one difference is that the sign of one propagator is wrong in the Lorentz case: the timelike component has an opposite sign propagator. This means that these particle states have negative norm\u2014they are not physical states. In the case of photons, it is easy to show by diagram methods that these states are not physical\u2014their contribution cancels with longitudinal photons to only leave two physical photon polarization contributions for any value of .\nIf the averaging over is done with a coefficient different from , the two terms don't cancel completely. This gives a covariant Lagrangian with a coefficient formula_96, which does not affect anything:\nand the covariant propagator for QED is:\nSpin 1: non-Abelian ghosts.\nTo find the Feynman rules for non-Abelian gauge fields, the procedure that performs the gauge fixing must be carefully corrected to account for a change of variables in the path-integral.\nThe gauge fixing factor has an extra determinant from popping the delta function:\nTo find the form of the determinant, consider first a simple two-dimensional integral of a function that depends only on , not on the angle . Inserting an integral over :\nThe derivative-factor ensures that popping the delta function in removes the integral. Exchanging the order of integration,\nbut now the delta-function can be popped in ,\nThe integral over just gives an overall factor of 2, while the rate of change of with a change in is just , so this exercise reproduces the standard formula for polar integration of a radial function:\nIn the path-integral for a nonabelian gauge field, the analogous manipulation is:\nThe factor in front is the volume of the gauge group, and it contributes a constant, which can be discarded. The remaining integral is over the gauge fixed action.\nTo get a covariant gauge, the gauge fixing condition is the same as in the Abelian case:\nWhose variation under an infinitesimal gauge transformation is given by:\nwhere is the adjoint valued element of the Lie algebra at every point that performs the infinitesimal gauge transformation. This adds the Faddeev Popov determinant to the action:\nwhich can be rewritten as a Grassmann integral by introducing ghost fields:\nThe determinant is independent of , so the path-integral over can give the Feynman propagator (or a covariant propagator) by choosing the measure for as in the abelian case. The full gauge fixed action is then the Yang Mills action in Feynman gauge with an additional ghost action:\nThe diagrams are derived from this action. The propagator for the spin-1 fields has the usual Feynman form. There are vertices of degree 3 with momentum factors whose couplings are the structure constants, and vertices of degree 4 whose couplings are products of structure constants. There are additional ghost loops, which cancel out timelike and longitudinal states in loops.\nIn the Abelian case, the determinant for covariant gauges does not depend on , so the ghosts do not contribute to the connected diagrams.\nParticle-path representation.\nFeynman diagrams were originally discovered by Feynman, by trial and error, as a way to represent the contribution to the S-matrix from different classes of particle trajectories.\nSchwinger representation.\nThe Euclidean scalar propagator has a suggestive representation:\nThe meaning of this identity (which is an elementary integration) is made clearer by Fourier transforming to real space.\nThe contribution at any one value of to the propagator is a Gaussian of width . The total propagation function from 0 to is a weighted sum over all proper times of a normalized Gaussian, the probability of ending up at after a random walk of time .\nThe path-integral representation for the propagator is then:\nwhich is a path-integral rewrite of the Schwinger representation.\nThe Schwinger representation is both useful for making manifest the particle aspect of the propagator, and for symmetrizing denominators of loop diagrams.\nCombining denominators.\nThe Schwinger representation has an immediate practical application to loop diagrams. For example, for the diagram in the theory formed by joining two s together in two half-lines, and making the remaining lines external, the integral over the internal propagators in the loop is:\nHere one line carries momentum and the other . The asymmetry can be fixed by putting everything in the Schwinger representation.\nNow the exponent mostly depends on ,\nexcept for the asymmetrical little bit. Defining the variable and , the variable goes from 0 to , while goes from 0 to 1. The variable is the total proper time for the loop, while parametrizes the fraction of the proper time on the top of the loop versus the bottom.\nThe Jacobian for this transformation of variables is easy to work out from the identities:\nand \"wedging\" gives\nThis allows the integral to be evaluated explicitly:\nleaving only the -integral. This method, invented by Schwinger but usually attributed to Feynman, is called \"combining denominator\". Abstractly, it is the elementary identity:\nBut this form does not provide the physical motivation for introducing ; is the proportion of proper time on one of the legs of the loop.\nOnce the denominators are combined, a shift in to symmetrizes everything:\nThis form shows that the moment that is more negative than four times the mass of the particle in the loop, which happens in a physical region of Lorentz space, the integral has a cut. This is exactly when the external momentum can create physical particles.\nWhen the loop has more vertices, there are more denominators to combine:\nThe general rule follows from the Schwinger prescription for denominators:\nThe integral over the Schwinger parameters can be split up as before into an integral over the total proper time and an integral over the fraction of the proper time in all but the first segment of the loop for . The are positive and add up to less than 1, so that the integral is over an -dimensional simplex.\nThe Jacobian for the coordinate transformation can be worked out as before:\nWedging all these equations together, one obtains\nThis gives the integral:\nwhere the simplex is the region defined by the conditions\nas well as\nPerforming the integral gives the general prescription for combining denominators:\nSince the numerator of the integrand is not involved, the same prescription works for any loop, no matter what the spins are carried by the legs. The interpretation of the parameters is that they are the fraction of the total proper time spent on each leg.\nScattering.\nThe correlation functions of a quantum field theory describe the scattering of particles. The definition of \"particle\" in relativistic field theory is not self-evident, because if you try to determine the position so that the uncertainty is less than the compton wavelength, the uncertainty in energy is large enough to produce more particles and antiparticles of the same type from the vacuum. This means that the notion of a single-particle state is to some extent incompatible with the notion of an object localized in space.\nIn the 1930s, Wigner gave a mathematical definition for single-particle states: they are a collection of states that form an irreducible representation of the Poincar\u00e9 group. Single particle states describe an object with a finite mass, a well defined momentum, and a spin. This definition is fine for protons and neutrons, electrons and photons, but it excludes quarks, which are permanently confined, so the modern point of view is more accommodating: a particle is anything whose interaction can be described in terms of Feynman diagrams, which have an interpretation as a sum over particle trajectories.\nA field operator can act to produce a one-particle state from the vacuum, which means that the field operator produces a superposition of Wigner particle states. In the free field theory, the field produces one particle states only. But when there are interactions, the field operator can also produce 3-particle, 5-particle (if there is no +/\u2212 symmetry also 2, 4, 6 particle) states too. To compute the scattering amplitude for single particle states only requires a careful limit, sending the fields to infinity and integrating over space to get rid of the higher-order corrections.\nThe relation between scattering and correlation functions is the LSZ-theorem: The scattering amplitude for particles to go to particles in a scattering event is the given by the sum of the Feynman diagrams that go into the correlation function for field insertions, leaving out the propagators for the external legs.\nFor example, for the interaction of the previous section, the order contribution to the (Lorentz) correlation function is:\nStripping off the external propagators, that is, removing the factors of , gives the invariant scattering amplitude :\nwhich is a constant, independent of the incoming and outgoing momentum. The interpretation of the scattering amplitude is that the sum of over all possible final states is the probability for the scattering event. The normalization of the single-particle states must be chosen carefully, however, to ensure that is a relativistic invariant.\nNon-relativistic single particle states are labeled by the momentum , and they are chosen to have the same norm at every value of . This is because the nonrelativistic unit operator on single particle states is:\nIn relativity, the integral over the -states for a particle of mass m integrates over a hyperbola in space defined by the energy\u2013momentum relation:\nIf the integral weighs each point equally, the measure is not Lorentz-invariant. The invariant measure integrates over all values of and , restricting to the hyperbola with a Lorentz-invariant delta function:\nSo the normalized -states are different from the relativistically normalized -states by a factor of\nThe invariant amplitude is then the probability amplitude for relativistically normalized incoming states to become relativistically normalized outgoing states.\nFor nonrelativistic values of , the relativistic normalization is the same as the nonrelativistic normalization (up to a constant factor ). In this limit, the invariant scattering amplitude is still constant. The particles created by the field scatter in all directions with equal amplitude.\nThe nonrelativistic potential, which scatters in all directions with an equal amplitude (in the Born approximation), is one whose Fourier transform is constant\u2014a delta-function potential. The lowest order scattering of the theory reveals the non-relativistic interpretation of this theory\u2014it describes a collection of particles with a delta-function repulsion. Two such particles have an aversion to occupying the same point at the same time.\nNonperturbative effects.\nThinking of Feynman diagrams as a perturbation series, nonperturbative effects like tunneling do not show up, because any effect that goes to zero faster than any polynomial does not affect the Taylor series. Even bound states are absent, since at any finite order particles are only exchanged a finite number of times, and to make a bound state, the binding force must last forever.\nBut this point of view is misleading, because the diagrams not only describe scattering, but they also are a representation of the short-distance field theory correlations. They encode not only asymptotic processes like particle scattering, they also describe the multiplication rules for fields, the operator product expansion. Nonperturbative tunneling processes involve field configurations that on average get big when the coupling constant gets small, but each configuration is a coherent superposition of particles whose local interactions are described by Feynman diagrams. When the coupling is small, these become collective processes that involve large numbers of particles, but where the interactions between each of the particles is simple. (The perturbation series of any interacting quantum field theory has zero radius of convergence, complicating the limit of the infinite series of diagrams needed (in the limit of vanishing coupling) to describe such field configurations.)\nThis means that nonperturbative effects show up asymptotically in resummations of infinite classes of diagrams, and these diagrams can be locally simple. The graphs determine the local equations of motion, while the allowed large-scale configurations describe non-perturbative physics. But because Feynman propagators are nonlocal in time, translating a field process to a coherent particle language is not completely intuitive, and has only been explicitly worked out in certain special cases. In the case of nonrelativistic bound states, the Bethe\u2013Salpeter equation describes the class of diagrams to include to describe a relativistic atom. For quantum chromodynamics, the Shifman-Vainshtein-Zakharov sum rules describe non-perturbatively excited long-wavelength field modes in particle language, but only in a phenomenological way.\nThe number of Feynman diagrams at high orders of perturbation theory is very large, because there are as many diagrams as there are graphs with a given number of nodes. Nonperturbative effects leave a signature on the way in which the number of diagrams and resummations diverge at high order. It is only because non-perturbative effects appear in hidden form in diagrams that it was possible to analyze nonperturbative effects in string theory, where in many cases a Feynman description is the only one available."}
{"id": "11619", "revid": "1010293486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11619", "title": "Food writing", "text": "Food writing is a type of writing that focuses on food and includes works by food critics and food historians.\nDefinition.\nFood writers regard food as a substance and a cultural phenomenon. John T. Edge, an American food writer, explains how writers in the genre view its topic: \"Food is essential to life. It\u2019s arguably our nation\u2019s biggest industry. Food, not sex, is our most frequently indulged pleasure. Food\u2014too much, not enough, the wrong kind, the wrong frequency\u2014is one of our society\u2019s greatest causes of disease and death.\" Another American food writer, Mark Kurlansky, links this vision of food directly to food writing, giving the genre's scope and range when he observes: \u201cFood is about agriculture, about ecology, about man\u2019s relationship with nature, about the climate, about nation-building, cultural struggles, friends and enemies, alliances, wars, religion. It is about memory and tradition and, at times, even about sex.\u201dBecause food writing is topic centered, it is not a genre in itself, but a writing that uses a wide range of traditional genres, including recipes, journalism, memoir, and travelogues. Food writing can refer to poetry and fiction, such as Marcel Proust\u2019s \"\u00c0 la recherche du temps perdu\" (\"In Search of Lost Time\"), with its famous passage where the narrator recollects his childhood memories as a result of sipping tea and eating a madeleine; or Robert Burns' poem \"Address to a Haggis\", 1787. Charles Dickens, a notable novelist wrote memorably about food, e.g., in his \"A Christmas Carol\" (1843).\nOften, food writing is used to specify writing that takes a more literary approach to food, such as that of the famous American food writer M. F. K. Fisher, who describes her writing about food as follows:\nIt seems to me our three basic needs, for food and security and love, are so mixed and mingled and entwined that we cannot straightly think of one without the others. So it happens that when I write of hunger, I am really writing about love and the hunger for it, and warmth and the love of it and the hunger for it ... and then the warmth and richness and fine reality of hunger satisfied ... and it is all one.\nIn this literary sense, food writing aspires toward more than merely communicating information about food; it also aims to provide readers with an aesthetic experience. Another American food writer, Adam Gopnik, divides food writing into two categories, \"the mock epic and the mystical microcosmic,\" and provides examples of their most noted practitioners: \nThe mock epic (A. J. Liebling, Calvin Trillin, the French writer Robert Courtine, and any good restaurant critic) is essentially comic and treats the small ambitions of the greedy eater as though they were big and noble, spoofing the idea of the heroic while raising the minor subject to at least temporary greatness. The mystical microcosmic, of which Elizabeth David and M. F. K. Fisher are the masters, is essentially poetic, and turns every remembered recipe into a meditation on hunger and the transience of its fulfillment. Contemporary food writers working in this mode include Ruth Reichl, Betty MacDonald, and Jim Harrison.\nAs a term, \"food writing\" is a relatively new descriptor. It came into wide use in the 1990s and, unlike \"sports writing\", or \"nature writing\", it has yet to be included in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\". Consequently, definitions of food writing when applied to historical works are retrospective. Classics of food writing, such as the 18th century French gastronome Jean Anthelme Brillat-Savarin's \"La physiologie du go\u00fbt\" (\"The Physiology of Taste\"), pre-date the term and have helped to shape its meaning.\nIn academia.\nFood writer Michael Pollan holds the Knight Professorship of Science and Environmental Journalism at the University of California, Berkeley and since 2013 has directed the 11th Hour Food and Farming Journalism Fellowship Program.\nIn 2013, the University of South Florida St. Petersburg began a graduate certificate program in Food Writing and Photography, created by longtime \"Tampa Bay Times\" food and travel editor Janet K. Keeler.\nNotable food writers and books.\nAuthors.\nThis is a list of some prominent writers on food, cooking, dining, and cultural history related to food."}
{"id": "11620", "revid": "1018552670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11620", "title": "Four Pillars", "text": "Four Pillars or four pillars may refer to:"}
{"id": "11621", "revid": "127415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11621", "title": "Futurama (New York World's Fair)", "text": "Futurama was an exhibit and ride at the 1939 New York World's Fair designed by Norman Bel Geddes, which presented a possible model of the world 20 years into the future (1959\u20131960). The installation was sponsored by the General Motors Corporation and was characterized by automated highways and vast suburbs.\nBackground.\nGeddes had built a model city for a Shell Oil advertising campaign in 1937 that was described as the Shell Oil City of Tomorrow and was effectively a prototype for the much larger and more ambitious Futurama.\nOverview.\nGeddes' \"vision of the future\" was rather achievable; the most advanced technology posited was the automated highway system of which General Motors built a working prototype by 1960. Futurama is widely held to have first introduced the general American public to the concept of a network of expressways connecting the nation. It provided a direct connection between the streamlined style which was popular in America between 1928 and 1938, and the concept of steady-flow which appeared in street and highway design in the same period. \nGeddes expounds upon his design in his book \"Magic Motorways\":\nThe modeled highway construction emphasized hope for the future as it served as a proposed solution to traffic congestion of the day, and demonstrated the probable development of traffic in proportion to the automotive growth of the next 20 years. Bel Geddes assumed that the automobile would be the same type of carrier and still the most common means of transportation in 1960, albeit with increased vehicle use and traffic lanes also capable of much higher speeds.\nFour general ideas for improvement were incorporated into the exhibition showcase to meet these assumptions. First, each section of road was designed to receive greater capacity of traffic. Second, traffic moving in one direction could be isolated from traffic moving in any other. Third, segregating traffic by subdividing towns and cities into certain units restricted traffic and allowed pedestrians to predominate. And fourth, traffic control included maximum and minimum speeds. Through this, the exhibition was designed to inspire greater public enthusiasm and support for the constructive work and planning of streets and highways.\nThe popularity of the Futurama exhibit fit closely with the fair's overall theme of \"The World of Tomorrow\" in its emphasis on the future and its redesign of the American landscape. The highway system was supported within a animated model of a projected America containing more than 500,000 individually designed buildings, a million trees of 13 different species, and approximately 50,000 cars, 10,000 of which traveled along a 14-lane multi-speed interstate highway. It prophesied an American utopia regulated by an assortment of cutting-edge technologies: multi-lane highways with remote-controlled semi-automated vehicles, power plants, farms for artificially produced crops, rooftop platforms for individual flying machines, and various gadgets, all intended to create an ideal built environment and ultimately to reform society.\nGeddes' \"future\" was synonymous with technological progress in its simulated low-flying airplane journey through the exhibit. The aerial journey was simulated by an 18-minute ride on a conveyor system, carrying 552 seated spectators at a time, covering a \u2153-mile winding path through the model, along with light, sound, and color effects. The ride moved at a rate of approximately per minute or , allowing spectators to look down through a continuous curved pane of glass towards the model. The virtue of this elevated position allowed spectators to see multiple scales simultaneously, viewing city blocks in proportion to a highway system, as well as artificially controlled trees in glass domes. This scale was modeled off 408 topographical sections based on aerial photographs of different regions of the U.S. provided by Fairchild Aircraft Ltd..\nReception.\nBefore General Motors invited Bel Geddes to submit a proposal for the exhibit, they had planned to put in another production line as was featured at their exhibit in the Century of Progress Exposition of 1933 in Chicago. However, after they heard Bel Geddes outline his project all other plans were scrapped as they favored his design for its appeal to a broader audience. The Futurama exhibition was subsequently presented as one of the 1939 New York World Fair's main attractions, as it was the \"number-one hit show\". It captured the fancy of the public and critics alike, with journalists competing to find adequate words to convey Bel Geddes' \"ingenuity\", \"daring\", \"showmanship\" and \"genius\". One neutral survey of 1000 departing fairgoers awarded the General Motors exhibit 39.4 points to only 8.5 points for second place Ford as the most interesting exhibit. \"Business Week\" described the scene:\nHis ideas of the future had a remarkable degree of realism and immediacy, striking a chord with an American audience slowly recovering from the Great Depression and that was longing for prosperity. Futurama's imaginary landscape of 1960 was, at the time, seen not just as a novel physical space, but as a glimpse of the future.\nLegacy.\nThe General Motors pavilion at the 1964 New York World's Fair included a ride that was also known as \"Futurama\", or \"The New Futurama\"."}
{"id": "11622", "revid": "213995", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11622", "title": "Final Fantasy 3", "text": ""}
{"id": "11623", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11623", "title": "Francesco I Sforza", "text": "Francesco I Sforza (; 23 July 1401\u00a0\u2013 8 March 1466) was an Italian condottiero who founded the Sforza dynasty in the duchy of Milan, ruling as its (fourth) duke from 1450 until his death. He was the brother of Alessandro, whom he often fought alongside.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nFrancesco Sforza was born in San Miniato, Tuscany, one of the seven illegitimate sons of the condottiero Muzio Sforza and Lucia da Torsano. He spent his childhood in Tricarico (in the modern Basilicata), the marquisate of which he was granted in 1412 by King Ladislaus of Naples. In 1418, he married Polissena Ruffo, a Calabrese noblewoman.\nFrom 1419, he fought alongside his father, soon gaining fame for being able to bend metal bars with his bare hands. He later proved himself to be an expert tactician and very skilled field commander. After the death of his father during the War of L'Aquila, he participated in Braccio da Montone's final defeat in that campaign; he fought subsequently for the Neapolitan army and then for Pope Martin V and the Duke of Milan, Filippo Maria Visconti. After some successes, he fell in disgrace and was sent to the castle of Mortara as a prisoner \"de facto\". He regained his status after leading an expedition against Lucca.\nIn 1431, after a period during which he fought again for the Papal States, he led the Milanese army against Venice; the following year the duke's daughter, Bianca Maria, was betrothed to him. Despite these moves, the wary Filippo Maria never ceased to be distrustful of Sforza. The allegiance of mercenary leaders was dependent, of course, on pay; in 1433-1435, Sforza led the Milanese attack on the Papal States, but when he conquered Ancona, in the Marche, he changed sides, obtaining the title of vicar of the city directly from Pope Eugene IV. In 1436-39, he served variously both Florence and Venice.\nIn 1440, his fiefs in the Kingdom of Naples were occupied by King Alfonso I, and, to recover the situation, Sforza reconciled himself with Filippo Visconti. On 25 October 1441, in Cremona, he could finally marry Bianca Maria as part of the agreements that ended the war between Milan and Venice. The following year, he allied with Ren\u00e9 of Anjou, pretender to the throne of Naples, and marched against southern Italy. After some initial setbacks, he defeated the Neapolitan commander Niccol\u00f2 Piccinino, who had invaded his possessions in Romagna and Marche, through the help of Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta (who had married his daughter Polissena) and the Venetians, and could return to Milan.\nSforza later found himself warring against Francesco Piccinino (whom he defeated at the Battle of Montolmo in 1444) and, later, the alliance of Visconti, Eugene IV, and Malatesta, who had allegedly murdered Polissena. With the help of Venice, Sforza was again victorious and, in exchange for abandoning the Venetians, received the title of \"capitano generale\" (commander-in-chief) of the Duchy of Milan's armies.\nDuke of Milan.\nAfter Filippo Maria Visconti, duke of Milan, died without a male heir in 1447, fighting broke out to restore the so-called Ambrosian Republic. The name Ambrosian Republic takes its name from St. Ambrose, the patron saint of Milan. Agnese del Maino, his wife's mother, convinced the condottiero who held Pavia to restore it to him.\nHe also received the seigniory of other cities of the duchy, including Lodi, and started to carefully plan the conquest of the ephemeral republic, allying with William VIII of Montferrat and (again) Venice. In 1450, after years of famine, riots raged in the streets of Milan and the city's senate decided to entrust to him the duchy. Sforza entered the city as Duke on 26 February. It was the first time that such a title was handed over by a lay institution. While the other Italian states gradually recognized Sforza as the legitimate Duke of Milan, he was never able to obtain official investiture from the Holy Roman Emperor. That did not come to the Sforza Dukes until 1494, when Emperor Maximilian formally invested Francesco's son, Ludovico, as Duke of Milan.\nUnder his rule (which was moderate and skillful), Sforza modernised the city and duchy. He created an efficient system of taxation that generated enormous revenues for the government, his court became a center of Renaissance learning and culture, and the people of Milan grew to love him. In Milan, he founded the Ospedale Maggiore, restored the , and had the Naviglio d'Adda, a channel connecting with the Adda River, built.\nDuring Sforza's reign, Florence was under the command of Cosimo de' Medici and the two rulers became close friends. This friendship eventually manifested in first the Peace of Lodi and then the Italian League, a multi-polar defensive alliance of Italian states that succeeded in stabilising almost all of Italy for its duration. After the peace, Sforza renounced part of the conquests in eastern Lombardy obtained by his condottieri Bartolomeo Colleoni, Ludovico Gonzaga, and Roberto Sanseverino d'Aragona after 1451. As King Alfonso of Naples was among the signatories of the treaty, Sforza also abandoned his long support of the Angevin pretenders to Naples. He also aimed to conquer Genoa, then an Angevin possession; when a revolt broke out there in 1461, he had Spinetta Campofregoso elected as Doge, as his puppet. Sforza occupied Genoa and Savona in 1464.\nSforza was the first European ruler to follow a foreign policy based on the concept of the balance of power, and the first native Italian ruler to conduct extensive diplomacy outside the peninsula to counter the power of threatening states such as France. Sforza's policies succeeded in keeping foreign powers from dominating Italian politics for the rest of the century.\nSforza suffered from hydropsy and gout. In 1462, rumours spread that he was dead and a riot exploded in Milan. He however survived for four more years, finally dying in March 1466. He was succeeded as duke by his son, Galeazzo Maria Sforza.\nFrancesco's successor Ludovico commissioned Leonardo da Vinci to design an equestrian statue as part of a monument to Francesco I Sforza. A clay model of a horse which was to be used as part of the design was completed by Leonardo in 1492\u00a0\u2014 but the statue was never built. In 1999 the horse alone was cast from Leonardo's original designs in bronze and placed in Milan outside the racetrack of Ippodromo del Galoppo.\nIssue.\nFrancesco Sforza with his second wife Bianca Maria Visconti had:\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "11624", "revid": "12536756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11624", "title": "Folk dance", "text": "A folk dance is a dance developed by people that reflect the life of the people of a certain country or region. Not all ethnic dances are folk dances. For example, ritual dances or dances of ritual origin are not considered to be folk dances. Ritual dances are usually called \"Religious dances\" because of their purpose.\nThe terms \"ethnic\" and \"traditional\" are used when it is required to emphasize the cultural roots of the dance. In this sense, nearly all folk dances are ethnic ones. If some dances, such as polka, cross ethnic boundaries and even cross the boundary between \"folk\" and \"ballroom dance\", ethnic differences are often considerable enough to mention.\nBackground.\nFolk dances share some or all of the following attributes:\nMore controversially, some people define folk dancing as dancing for which there is no governing body or dancing for which there are no competitive or professional institutions. The term \"folk dance\" is sometimes applied to dances of historical importance in European culture and history; typically originating before the 20th century. For other cultures the terms \"ethnic dance\" or \"traditional dance\" are sometimes used, although the latter terms may encompass ceremonial dances.\nThere are a number of modern dances, such as hip hop dance, that evolve spontaneously, but the term \"folk dance\" is generally not applied to them, and the terms \"street dance\" or \"vernacular dance\" are used instead. The term \"folk dance\" is reserved for dances which are to a significant degree bound by tradition and originated in the times when the distinction existed between the dances of \"common folk\" and the dances of the modern ballroom dances originated from folk ones.\nEurope.\nVarieties of European folk dances include:\nSword dances include long sword dances and rapper dancing. Some choreographed dances such as contra dance, Scottish highland dance, Scottish country dance, and modern western square dance, are called folk dances, though this is not true in the strictest sense. Country dance overlaps with contemporary folk dance and ballroom dance. Most country dances and ballroom dances originated from folk dances, with gradual refinement over the years.\nPeople familiar with folk dancing can often determine what country a dance is from even if they have not seen that particular dance before. Some countries' dances have features that are unique to that country, although neighboring countries sometimes have similar features. For example, the German and Austrian schuhplattling dance consists of slapping the body and shoes in a fixed pattern, a feature that few other countries' dances have.\nFolk dances sometimes evolved long before current political boundaries, so that certain dances are shared by several countries. For example, some Serbian, Bulgarian, and Croatian dances share the same or similar dances, and sometimes even use the same name and music for those dances.\nInternational folk dance groups exist in cities and college campuses in many countries, in which dancers learn folk dances from many cultures for recreation.\nBalfolk events are social dance events with live music in Western and Central Europe, originating in the folk revival of the 1970s and becoming more popular since about 2000, where popular European partner dances from the end of the 19th century such as the schottische, polka, mazurka and waltz are danced, with additionally other European folk dances, mainly from France, but also from Sweden, Spain and other countries.\nMiddle East, Central Asia and South Asia.\nvarious dances such as tamang selo and many others"}
{"id": "11625", "revid": "24354407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11625", "title": "Fyodor Dostoevsky", "text": " \nFyodor Mikhailovich Dostoevsky (; ; 11 November 18219 February 1881), sometimes transliterated as Dostoyevsky, was a Russian novelist, philosopher, short story writer, essayist, and journalist. Dostoevsky's literary works explore human psychology in the troubled political, social, and spiritual atmospheres of 19th-century Russia, and engage with a variety of philosophical and religious themes. His most acclaimed novels include \"Crime and Punishment\" (1866), \"The Idiot\" (1869), \"Demons\" (1872), and \"The Brothers Karamazov\" (1880). Dostoevsky's body of works consists of 12 novels, four novellas, 16 short stories, and numerous other works. Many literary critics rate him as one of the greatest psychological novelists in world literature. His 1864 novella \"Notes from Underground\" is considered to be one of the first works of existentialist literature.\nBorn in Moscow in 1821, Dostoevsky was introduced to literature at an early age through fairy tales and legends, and through books by Russian and foreign authors. His mother died in 1837 when he was 15, and around the same time, he left school to enter the Nikolayev Military Engineering Institute. After graduating, he worked as an engineer and briefly enjoyed a lavish lifestyle, translating books to earn extra money. In the mid-1840s he wrote his first novel, \"Poor Folk\", which gained him entry into Saint Petersburg's literary circles. Arrested in 1849 for belonging to a literary group that discussed banned books critical of Tsarist Russia, he was sentenced to death but the sentence was commuted at the last moment. He spent four years in a Siberian prison camp, followed by six years of compulsory military service in exile. In the following years, Dostoevsky worked as a journalist, publishing and editing several magazines of his own and later \"A Writer's Diary\", a collection of his writings. He began to travel around western Europe and developed a gambling addiction, which led to financial hardship. For a time, he had to beg for money, but he eventually became one of the most widely read and highly regarded Russian writers.\nDostoevsky was influenced by a wide variety of philosophers and authors including Pushkin, Gogol, Augustine, Shakespeare, Scott, Dickens, Balzac, Lermontov, Hugo, Poe, Plato, Cervantes, Herzen, Kant, Belinsky, Byron, Hegel, Schiller, Solovyov, Bakunin, Sand, Hoffmann, and Mickiewicz.\nHis writings were widely read both within and beyond his native Russia and influenced an equally great number of later writers including Russians such as Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn and Anton Chekhov, philosophers Friedrich Nietzsche and Jean-Paul Sartre, and the emergence of Existentialism and Freudianism. His books have been translated into more than 170 languages, and served as the basis for many films.\nAncestry.\nDostoevsky's parents were part of a noble family of Russian Orthodox Christians. The family traced its roots back to Danilo Irtishch, who was granted lands in the Pinsk region (for centuries part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, now in modern-day Belarus) in 1509 for his services under a local prince, his progeny then taking the name \"Dostoevsky\" based on a village there called Dosto\u00efevo (from - dignitary).\nDostoevsky's immediate ancestors on his mother's side were merchants; the male line on his father's side were priests. Andriy Dostoevsky, the writer's grandfather, was a priest in 1782\u20131820, signed in Ukrainian \u2013 \"Andriy\". After him, his son Lev ruled in Viitovtsi (1820\u20131829). Another son, Mykhailo (the writer's father), studied at the Podolsk seminary, which was then founded in Shargorod. From there, as one of the best students, he was sent to study at the Medical and Surgical Academy in Moscow (after training he became one of the best doctors at the Mariinsky Hospital for the Poor). Before the war of 1812 he signed in Ukrainian \u2013 \"Mykhailo\" and only during the war, when he worked as a military doctor, he began to sign in Russian \u2013 \"Mikhail\".\nIn 1809, the 20-year-old Mykhailo Dostoevsky enrolled in Moscow's Imperial Medical-Surgical Academy. From there he was assigned to a Moscow hospital, where he served as military doctor, and in 1818, he was appointed a senior physician. In 1819 he married Maria Nechayeva. The following year, he took up a post at the Mariinsky Hospital for the poor. In 1828, when his two sons, Mikhail and Fyodor, were eight and seven respectively, he was promoted to collegiate assessor, a position which raised his legal status to that of the nobility and enabled him to acquire a small estate in Darovoye, a town about 150\u00a0km (100 miles) from Moscow, where the family usually spent the summers. Dostoevsky's parents subsequently had six more children: Varvara (1822\u20131892), Andrei (1825\u20131897), Lyubov (born and died 1829), Vera (1829\u20131896), Nikolai (1831\u20131883) and Aleksandra (1835\u20131889).\nChildhood (1821\u20131835).\nFyodor Dostoevsky, born on in Moscow, was the second child of Dr. Mikhail Dostoevsky and Maria Dostoevskaya (born Nechayeva). He was raised in the family home in the grounds of the Mariinsky Hospital for the Poor, which was in a lower class district on the edges of Moscow. Dostoevsky encountered the patients, who were at the lower end of the Russian social scale, when playing in the hospital gardens.\nDostoevsky was introduced to literature at an early age. From the age of three, he was read heroic sagas, fairy tales and legends by his nanny, Alena Frolovna, an especially influential figure in his upbringing and love for fictional stories. When he was four his mother used the Bible to teach him to read and write. His parents introduced him to a wide range of literature, including Russian writers Karamzin, Pushkin and Derzhavin; Gothic fiction such as the works from writer Ann Radcliffe; romantic works by Schiller and Goethe; heroic tales by Miguel de Cervantes and Walter Scott; and Homer's epics. Dostoevsky was greatly influenced by the work of Nikolai Gogol. Although his father's approach to education has been described as strict and harsh, Dostoevsky himself reports that his imagination was brought alive by nightly readings by his parents.\nSome of his childhood experiences found their way into his writings. When a nine-year-old girl had been raped by a drunk, he was asked to fetch his father to attend to her. The incident haunted him, and the theme of the desire of a mature man for a young girl appears in \"The Devils\", \"The Brothers Karamazov\", \"Crime and Punishment\", and other writings. An incident involving a family servant, or serf, in the estate in Darovoye, is described in \"The Peasant Marey\": when the young Dostoevsky imagines hearing a wolf in the forest, Marey, who is working nearby, comforts him.\nAlthough Dostoevsky had a delicate physical constitution, his parents described him as hot-headed, stubborn, and cheeky. In 1833, Dostoevsky's father, who was profoundly religious, sent him to a French boarding school and then to the Chermak boarding school. He was described as a pale, introverted dreamer and an over-excitable romantic. To pay the school fees, his father borrowed money and extended his private medical practice. Dostoevsky felt out of place among his aristocratic classmates at the Moscow school, and the experience was later reflected in some of his works, notably \"The Adolescent\".\nYouth (1836\u20131843).\nOn 27 September 1837 Dostoevsky's mother died of tuberculosis. The previous May, his parents had sent Dostoevsky and his brother Mikhail to St Petersburg to attend the free Nikolayev Military Engineering Institute, forcing the brothers to abandon their academic studies for military careers. Dostoevsky entered the academy in January 1838, but only with the help of family members. Mikhail was refused admission on health grounds and was sent to an academy in Tallinn, Estonia (then known as Reval).\nDostoevsky disliked the academy, primarily because of his lack of interest in science, mathematics and military engineering and his preference for drawing and architecture. As his friend Konstantin Trutovsky once said, \"There was no student in the entire institution with less of a military bearing than F.M. Dostoevsky. He moved clumsily and jerkily; his uniform hung awkwardly on him; and his knapsack, shako and rifle all looked like some sort of fetter he had been forced to wear for a time and which lay heavily on him.\" Dostoevsky's character and interests made him an outsider among his 120 classmates: he showed bravery and a strong sense of justice, protected newcomers, aligned himself with teachers, criticised corruption among officers and helped poor farmers. Although he was solitary and inhabited his own literary world, he was respected by his classmates. His reclusiveness and interest in religion earned him the nickname \"Monk Photius\".\nSigns of Dostoevsky's epilepsy may have first appeared on learning of the death of his father on 16 June 1839, although the reports of a seizure originated from accounts written by his daughter (later expanded by Sigmund Freud) which are now considered to be unreliable. His father's official cause of death was an apoplectic stroke, but a neighbour, Pavel Khotiaintsev, accused the father's serfs of murder. Had the serfs been found guilty and sent to Siberia, Khotiaintsev would have been in a position to buy the vacated land. The serfs were acquitted in a trial in Tula, but Dostoevsky's brother Andrei perpetuated the story. After his father's death, Dostoevsky continued his studies, passed his exams and obtained the rank of engineer cadet, entitling him to live away from the academy. He visited Mikhail in Reval, and frequently attended concerts, operas, plays and ballets. During this time, two of his friends introduced him to gambling.\nOn 12 August 1843 Dostoevsky took a job as a lieutenant engineer and lived with Adolph Totleben in an apartment owned by Dr. Rizenkampf, a friend of Mikhail. Rizenkampf characterised him as \"no less good-natured and no less courteous than his brother, but when not in a good mood he often looked at everything through dark glasses, became vexed, forgot good manners, and sometimes was carried away to the point of abusiveness and loss of self-awareness\". Dostoevsky's first completed literary work, a translation of Honor\u00e9 de Balzac's novel \"Eug\u00e9nie Grandet\", was published in June and July 1843 in the 6th and 7th volume of the journal \"Repertoire and Pantheon\", followed by several other translations. None were successful, and his financial difficulties led him to write a novel.\nCareer.\nEarly career (1844\u20131849).\nDostoevsky completed his first novel, \"Poor Folk\", in May 1845. His friend Dmitry Grigorovich, with whom he was sharing an apartment at the time, took the manuscript to the poet Nikolay Nekrasov, who in turn showed it to the renowned and influential literary critic Vissarion Belinsky. Belinsky described it as Russia's first \"social novel\". \"Poor Folk\" was released on 15 January 1846 in the \"St Petersburg Collection\" almanac and became a commercial success.\nDostoevsky felt that his military career would endanger his now flourishing literary career, so he wrote a letter asking to resign his post. Shortly thereafter, he wrote his second novel, \"\", which appeared in the journal \"Notes of the Fatherland\" on 30 January 1846, before being published in February. Around the same time, Dostoevsky discovered socialism through the writings of French thinkers Fourier, Cabet, Proudhon and Saint-Simon. Through his relationship with Belinsky he expanded his knowledge of the philosophy of socialism. He was attracted to its logic, its sense of justice and its preoccupation with the destitute and the disadvantaged. However, his relationship with Belinsky became increasingly strained as Belinsky's atheism and dislike of religion clashed with Dostoevsky's Russian Orthodox beliefs. Dostoevsky eventually parted with him and his associates.\nAfter \"The Double\" received negative reviews, Dostoevsky's health declined and he had more frequent seizures, but he continued writing. From 1846 to 1848 he released several short stories in the magazine \"Annals of the Fatherland\", including \"Mr. Prokharchin\", \"The Landlady\", \"A Weak Heart\", and \"White Nights\". These stories were unsuccessful, leaving Dostoevsky once more in financial trouble, so he joined the utopian socialist Betekov circle, a tightly knit community which helped him to survive. When the circle dissolved, Dostoevsky befriended Apollon Maykov and his brother Valerian. In 1846, on the recommendation of the poet Aleksey Pleshcheyev, he joined the Petrashevsky Circle, founded by Mikhail Petrashevsky, who had proposed social reforms in Russia. Mikhail Bakunin once wrote to Alexander Herzen that the group was \"the most innocent and harmless company\" and its members were \"systematic opponents of all revolutionary goals and means\". Dostoevsky used the circle's library on Saturdays and Sundays and occasionally participated in their discussions on freedom from censorship and the abolition of serfdom.\nIn 1849, the first parts of \"Netochka Nezvanova\", a novel Dostoevsky had been planning since 1846, were published in \"Annals of the Fatherland\", but his banishment ended the project. Dostoevsky never attempted to complete it.\nSiberian exile (1849\u20131854).\nThe members of the Petrashevsky Circle were denounced to Liprandi, an official at the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Dostoevsky was accused of reading works by Belinsky, including the banned \"Letter to Gogol\", and of circulating copies of these and other works. Antonelli, the government agent who had reported the group, wrote in his statement that at least one of the papers criticised Russian politics and religion. Dostoevsky responded to these charges by declaring that he had read the essays only \"as a literary monument, neither more nor less\"; he spoke of \"personality and human egoism\" rather than of politics. Even so, he and his fellow \"conspirators\" were arrested on 23 April 1849 at the request of Count A. Orlov and Tsar Nicholas\u00a0I, who feared a revolution like the Decembrist revolt of 1825 in Russia and the Revolutions of 1848 in Europe. The members were held in the well-defended Peter and Paul Fortress, which housed the most dangerous convicts.\nThe case was discussed for four months by an investigative commission headed by the Tsar, with Adjutant General Ivan Nabokov, senator Prince Pavel Gagarin, Prince Vasili Dolgorukov, General Yakov Rostovtsev and General Leonty Dubelt, head of the secret police. They sentenced the members of the circle to death by firing squad, and the prisoners were taken to Semyonov Place in St Petersburg on 23 December 1849 where they were split into three-man groups. Dostoevsky was the third in the second row; next to him stood Pleshcheyev and Durov. The execution was stayed when a cart delivered a letter from the Tsar commuting the sentence. Dostoevsky later alluded to his experience of what he believed to be the last moments of his life in his 1868-1869 novel, \"The Idiot\", where the main character tells the harrowing story of an execution by guillotine that he recently witnessed in France.\nDostoevsky served four years of exile with hard labour at a katorga prison camp in Omsk, Siberia, followed by a term of compulsory military service. After a fourteen-day sleigh ride, the prisoners reached Tobolsk, a prisoner way station. Despite the circumstances, Dostoevsky consoled the other prisoners, such as the Petrashevist Ivan Yastrzhembsky, who was surprised by Dostoevsky's kindness and eventually abandoned his decision to kill himself. In Tobolsk, the members received food and clothes from the Decembrist women, as well as several copies of the New Testament with a ten-ruble banknote inside each copy. Eleven days later, Dostoevsky reached Omsk together with just one other member of the Petrashevsky Circle, the poet Sergei Durov. Dostoevsky described his barracks:\nClassified as \"one of the most dangerous convicts\", Dostoevsky had his hands and feet shackled until his release. He was only permitted to read his New Testament Bible. In addition to his seizures, he had haemorrhoids, lost weight and was \"burned by some fever, trembling and feeling too hot or too cold every night\". The smell of the privy pervaded the entire building, and the small bathroom had to suffice for more than 200 people. Dostoevsky was occasionally sent to the military hospital, where he read newspapers and Dickens novels. He was respected by most of the other prisoners, and despised by some because of his supposedly xenophobic statements.\nRelease from prison and first marriage (1854\u20131866).\nAfter his release on 14 February 1854, Dostoevsky asked Mikhail to help him financially and to send him books by Vico, Guizot, Ranke, Hegel and Kant. \"The House of the Dead\", based on his experience in prison, was published in 1861 in the journal \"Vremya\" (\"Time\") \u2013 it was the first published novel about Russian prisons. Before moving in mid-March to Semipalatinsk, where he was forced to serve in the Siberian Army Corps of the Seventh Line Battalion, Dostoevsky met geographer Pyotr Semyonov and ethnographer Shokan Walikhanuli. Around November 1854, he met Baron Alexander Egorovich Wrangel, an admirer of his books, who had attended the aborted execution. They both rented houses in the Cossack Garden outside Semipalatinsk. Wrangel remarked that Dostoevsky \"looked morose. His sickly, pale face was covered with freckles, and his blond hair was cut short. He was a little over average height and looked at me intensely with his sharp, grey-blue eyes. It was as if he were trying to look into my soul and discover what kind of man I was.\"\nIn Semipalatinsk, Dostoevsky tutored several schoolchildren and came into contact with upper-class families, including that of Lieutenant-Colonel Belikhov, who used to invite him to read passages from newspapers and magazines. During a visit to Belikhov, Dostoevsky met the family of Alexander Ivanovich Isaev and Maria Dmitrievna Isaeva and fell in love with the latter. Alexander Isaev took a new post in Kuznetsk, where he died in August 1855. Maria and her son then moved with Dostoevsky to Barnaul. In 1856 Dostoevsky sent a letter through Wrangel to General Eduard Totleben, apologising for his activity in several utopian circles. As a result, he obtained the right to publish books and to marry, although he remained under police surveillance for the rest of his life. Maria married Dostoevsky in Semipalatinsk on 7 February 1857, even though she had initially refused his marriage proposal, stating that they were not meant for each other and that his poor financial situation precluded marriage. Their family life was unhappy and she found it difficult to cope with his seizures. Describing their relationship, he wrote: \"Because of her strange, suspicious and fantastic character, we were definitely not happy together, but we could not stop loving each other; and the more unhappy we were, the more attached to each other we became\". They mostly lived apart. In 1859 he was released from military service because of deteriorating health and was granted permission to return to European Russia, first to Tver, where he met his brother for the first time in ten years, and then to St Petersburg.\n\"A Little Hero\" (Dostoevsky's only work completed in prison) appeared in a journal, but \"Uncle's Dream\" and \"The Village of Stepanchikovo\" were not published until 1860. \"Notes from the House of the Dead\" was released in \"Russky Mir\" (Russian World) in September 1860. \"The Insulted and the Injured\" was published in the new \"Vremya\" magazine, which had been created with the help of funds from his brother's cigarette factory.\nDostoevsky travelled to western Europe for the first time on 7 June 1862, visiting Cologne, Berlin, Dresden, Wiesbaden, Belgium, and Paris. In London, he met Herzen and visited the Crystal Palace. He travelled with Nikolay Strakhov through Switzerland and several North Italian cities, including Turin, Livorno, and Florence. He recorded his impressions of those trips in \"Winter Notes on Summer Impressions\", in which he criticised capitalism, social modernisation, materialism, Catholicism and Protestantism.\nFrom August to October 1863, Dostoevsky made another trip to western Europe. He met his second love, Polina Suslova, in Paris and lost nearly all his money gambling in Wiesbaden and Baden-Baden. In 1864 his wife Maria and his brother Mikhail died, and Dostoevsky became the lone parent of his stepson Pasha and the sole supporter of his brother's family. The failure of \"Epoch\", the magazine he had founded with Mikhail after the suppression of \"Vremya\", worsened his financial situation, although the continued help of his relatives and friends averted bankruptcy.\nSecond marriage and honeymoon (1866\u20131871).\nThe first two parts of \"Crime and Punishment\" were published in January and February 1866 in the periodical \"The Russian Messenger\", attracting at least 500 new subscribers to the magazine.\nDostoevsky returned to Saint Petersburg in mid-September and promised his editor, Fyodor Stellovsky, that he would complete \"The Gambler\", a short novel focused on gambling addiction, by November, although he had not yet begun writing it. One of Dostoevsky's friends, Milyukov, advised him to hire a secretary. Dostoevsky contacted stenographer Pavel Olkhin from Saint Petersburg, who recommended his pupil, the twenty-year-old Anna Grigoryevna Snitkina. Her shorthand helped Dostoevsky to complete \"The Gambler\" on 30 October, after 26 days' work. She remarked that Dostoevsky was of average height but always tried to carry himself erect. \"He had light brown, slightly reddish hair, he used some hair conditioner, and he combed his hair in a diligent way\u00a0... his eyes, they were different: one was dark brown; in the other, the pupil was so big that you could not see its color, [this was caused by an injury]. The strangeness of his eyes gave Dostoyevsky some mysterious appearance. His face was pale, and it looked unhealthy.\"\nOn 15 February 1867 Dostoevsky married Snitkina in Trinity Cathedral, Saint Petersburg. The 7,000 rubles he had earned from \"Crime and Punishment\" did not cover their debts, forcing Anna to sell her valuables. On 14 April 1867, they began a delayed honeymoon in Germany with the money gained from the sale. They stayed in Berlin and visited the Gem\u00e4ldegalerie Alte Meister in Dresden, where he sought inspiration for his writing. They continued their trip through Germany, visiting Frankfurt, Darmstadt, Heidelberg and Karlsruhe. They spent five weeks in Baden-Baden, where Dostoevsky had a quarrel with Turgenev and again lost much money at the roulette table. The couple travelled on to Geneva.\nIn September 1867, Dostoevsky began work on \"The Idiot\", and after a prolonged planning process that bore little resemblance to the published novel, he eventually managed to write the first 100 pages in only 23 days; the serialisation began in \"The Russian Messenger \"in January 1868.\nTheir first child, Sofya, had been conceived in Baden-Baden, and was born in Geneva on 5 March 1868. The baby died of pneumonia three months later, and Anna recalled how Dostoevsky \"wept and sobbed like a woman in despair\". The couple moved from Geneva to Vevey and then to Milan, before continuing to Florence. \"The Idiot\" was completed there in January 1869, the final part appearing in \"The Russian Messenger \"in February 1869. Anna gave birth to their second daughter, Lyubov, on 26 September 1869 in Dresden. In April 1871, Dostoevsky made a final visit to a gambling hall in Wiesbaden. Anna claimed that he stopped gambling after the birth of their second daughter, but this is a subject of debate.\nAfter hearing news that the socialist revolutionary group \"People's Vengeance\" had murdered one of its own members, Ivan Ivanov, on 21 November 1869, Dostoevsky began writing \"Demons\". In 1871, Dostoevsky and Anna travelled by train to Berlin. During the trip, he burnt several manuscripts, including those of \"The Idiot\", because he was concerned about potential problems with customs. The family arrived in Saint Petersburg on 8 July, marking the end of a honeymoon (originally planned for three months) that had lasted over four years.\nBack in Russia (1871\u20131875).\nBack in Russia in July 1871, the family was again in financial trouble and had to sell their remaining possessions. Their son Fyodor was born on 16 July, and they moved to an apartment near the Institute of Technology soon after. They hoped to cancel their large debts by selling their rental house in Peski, but difficulties with the tenant resulted in a relatively low selling price, and disputes with their creditors continued. Anna proposed that they raise money on her husband's copyrights and negotiate with the creditors to pay off their debts in installments.\nDostoevsky revived his friendships with Maykov and Strakhov and made new acquaintances, including church politician Terty Filipov and the brothers Vsevolod and Vladimir Solovyov. Konstantin Pobedonostsev, future Imperial High Commissioner of the Most Holy Synod, influenced Dostoevsky's political progression to conservatism. Around early 1872 the family spent several months in Staraya Russa, a town known for its mineral spa. Dostoevsky's work was delayed when Anna's sister Maria Svatkovskaya died on 1 May 1872, either from typhus or malaria, and Anna developed an abscess on her throat.\nThe family returned to St Petersburg in September. \"Demons\" was finished on 26 November and released in January 1873 by the \"Dostoevsky Publishing Company\", which was founded by Dostoevsky and his wife. Although they only accepted cash payments and the bookshop was in their own apartment, the business was successful, and they sold around 3,000 copies of \"Demons\". Anna managed the finances. Dostoevsky proposed that they establish a new periodical, which would be called \"A Writer's Diary\" and would include a collection of essays, but funds were lacking, and the \"Diary\" was published in Vladimir Meshchersky's \"The Citizen\", beginning on 1 January, in return for a salary of 3,000 rubles per year. In the summer of 1873, Anna returned to Staraya Russa with the children, while Dostoevsky stayed in St Petersburg to continue with his \"Diary\".\nIn March 1874, Dostoevsky left \"The Citizen\" because of the stressful work and interference from the Russian bureaucracy. In his fifteen months with \"The Citizen\", he had been taken to court twice: on 11 June 1873 for citing the words of Prince Meshchersky without permission, and again on 23 March 1874. Dostoevsky offered to sell a new novel he had not yet begun to write to \"The Russian Messenger\", but the magazine refused. Nikolay Nekrasov suggested that he publish \"A Writer's Diary\" in \"Notes of the Fatherland\"; he would receive 250 rubles for each printer's sheet\u00a0\u2013 100 more than the text's publication in \"The Russian Messenger\" would have earned. Dostoevsky accepted. As his health began to decline, he consulted several doctors in St Petersburg and was advised to take a cure outside Russia. Around July, he reached Ems and consulted a physician, who diagnosed him with acute catarrh. During his stay he began \"The Adolescent\". He returned to Saint Petersburg in late July.\nAnna proposed that they spend the winter in Staraya Russa to allow Dostoevsky to rest, although doctors had suggested a second visit to Ems because his health had previously improved there. On 10 August 1875 his son Alexey was born in Staraya Russa, and in mid-September the family returned to Saint Petersburg. Dostoevsky finished \"The Adolescent\" at the end of 1875, although passages of it had been serialised in \"Notes of the Fatherland\" since January. \"The Adolescent\" chronicles the life of Arkady Dolgoruky, the illegitimate child of the landowner Versilov and a peasant mother. It deals primarily with the relationship between father and son, which became a frequent theme in Dostoevsky's subsequent works.\nLast years (1876\u20131881).\nIn early 1876, Dostoevsky continued work on his \"Diary\". The book includes numerous essays and a few short stories about society, religion, politics and ethics. The collection sold more than twice as many copies as his previous books. Dostoevsky received more letters from readers than ever before, and people of all ages and occupations visited him. With assistance from Anna's brother, the family bought a dacha in Staraya Russa. In the summer of 1876, Dostoevsky began experiencing shortness of breath again. He visited Ems for the third time and was told that he might live for another 15 years if he moved to a healthier climate. When he returned to Russia, Tsar Alexander II ordered Dostoevsky to visit his palace to present the \"Diary\" to him, and he asked him to educate his sons, Sergey and Paul. This visit further increased Dosteyevsky's circle of acquaintances. He was a frequent guest in several salons in Saint Petersburg and met many famous people, including Princess Sophia Tolstaya, Yakov Polonsky, Sergei Witte, Alexey Suvorin, Anton Rubinstein and Ilya Repin.\nDostoevsky's health declined further, and in March 1877 he had four epileptic seizures. Rather than returning to Ems, he visited Maly Prikol, a manor near Kursk. While returning to St Petersburg to finalise his \"Diary\", he visited Darovoye, where he had spent much of his childhood. In December he attended Nekrasov's funeral and gave a speech. He was appointed an honorary member of the Russian Academy of Sciences, from which he received an honorary certificate in February 1879. He declined an invitation to an international congress on copyright in Paris after his son Alyosha had a severe epileptic seizure and died on 16 May. The family later moved to the apartment where Dostoevsky had written his first works. Around this time, he was elected to the board of directors of the Slavic Benevolent Society in Saint Petersburg. That summer, he was elected to the honorary committee of the Association Litt\u00e9raire et Artistique Internationale, whose members included Victor Hugo, Ivan Turgenev, Paul Heyse, Alfred Tennyson, Anthony Trollope, Henry Longfellow, Ralph Waldo Emerson and Leo Tolstoy. Dostoevsky made his fourth and final visit to Ems in early August 1879. He was diagnosed with early-stage pulmonary emphysema, which his doctor believed could be successfully managed, but not cured.\nOn 3 February 1880 Dostoevsky was elected vice-president of the Slavic Benevolent Society, and he was invited to speak at the unveiling of the Pushkin memorial in Moscow. On 8 June he delivered his speech, giving an impressive performance that had a significant emotional impact on his audience. His speech was met with thunderous applause, and even his long-time rival Turgenev embraced him. Konstantin Staniukovich praised the speech in his essay \"The Pushkin Anniversary and Dostoevsky's Speech\" in \"\", writing that \"the language of Dostoevsky's [Pushkin Speech] really looks like a sermon. He speaks with the tone of a prophet. He makes a sermon like a pastor; it is very deep, sincere, and we understand that he wants to impress the emotions of his listeners.\" The speech was criticised later by liberal political scientist Alexander Gradovsky, who thought that Dostoevsky idolised \"the people\", and by conservative thinker Konstantin Leontiev, who, in his essay \"On Universal Love\", compared the speech to French utopian socialism. The attacks led to a further deterioration in his health.\nDeath.\nOn , while searching for members of the terrorist organisation Narodnaya Volya (\"The People's Will\") who would soon assassinate Tsar Alexander II, the Tsar's secret police executed a search warrant in the apartment of one of Dostoevsky's neighbours. On the following day, Dostoevsky suffered a pulmonary haemorrhage. Anna denied that the search had caused it, saying that the haemorrhage had occurred after her husband had been looking for a dropped pen holder. After another haemorrhage, Anna called the doctors, who gave a poor prognosis. A third haemorrhage followed shortly afterwards. While seeing his children before dying, Dostoevsky requested that the parable of the Prodigal Son be read to his children. The profound meaning of this request is pointed out by Frank:\nAmong Dostoevsky's last words was his quotation of : \"But John forbad him, saying, I have a need to be baptised of thee, and comest thou to me? And Jesus answering said unto him, Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness\", and he finished with \"Hear now\u2014permit it. Do not restrain me!\" When he died, his body was placed on a table, following Russian custom. He was interred in the Tikhvin Cemetery at the Alexander Nevsky Convent, near his favourite poets, Nikolay Karamzin and Vasily Zhukovsky. It is unclear how many attended his funeral. According to one reporter, more than 100,000 mourners were present, while others describe attendance between 40,000 and 50,000. His tombstone is inscribed with lines from the New Testament:\nPersonal life.\nExtramarital affairs.\nDostoevsky had his first known affair with Avdotya Yakovlevna, whom he met in the Panayev circle in the early 1840s. He described her as educated, interested in literature, and a femme fatale. He admitted later that he was uncertain about their relationship. According to Anna Dostoevskaya's memoirs, Dostoevsky once asked his sister's sister-in-law, Yelena Ivanova, whether she would marry him, hoping to replace her mortally ill husband after he died, but she rejected his proposal.\nDostoevsky and Apollonia (Polina) Suslova had a short but intimate affair, which peaked in the winter of 1862\u20131863. Suslova's dalliance with a Spaniard in late spring and Dostoevsky's gambling addiction and age ended their relationship. He later described her in a letter to Nadezhda Suslova as a \"great egoist. Her egoism and her vanity are colossal. She demands \"everything\" of other people, all the perfections, and does not pardon the slightest imperfection in the light of other qualities that one may possess\", and later stated \"I still love her, but I do not want to love her any more. She doesn't deserve this love\u00a0...\" In 1858 Dostoevsky had a romance with comic actress Aleksandra Ivanovna Schubert. Although she divorced Dostoevsky's friend Stepan Yanovsky, she would not live with him. Dostoevsky did not love her either, but they were probably good friends. She wrote that he \"became very attracted to me\".\nThrough a worker in \"Epoch\", Dostoevsky learned of the Russian-born Martha Brown (n\u00e9e Elizaveta Andreyevna Chlebnikova), who had had affairs with several westerners. Her relationship with Dostoevsky is known only through letters written between November 1864 and January 1865. In 1865, Dostoevsky met Anna Korvin-Krukovskaya. Their relationship is not verified; Anna Dostoevskaya spoke of a good affair, but Korvin-Krukovskaya's sister, the mathematician Sofia Kovalevskaya, thought that Korvin-Krukovskaya had rejected him.\nPolitical beliefs.\nIn his youth, Dostoevsky enjoyed reading Nikolai Karamzin's \"History of the Russian State\", which praised conservatism and Russian independence, ideas that Dostoevsky would embrace later in life. Before his arrest for participating in the Petrashevsky Circle in 1849, Dostoevsky remarked, \"As far as I am concerned, nothing was ever more ridiculous than the idea of a republican government in Russia.\" In an 1881 edition of his \"Diaries\", Dostoevsky stated that the Tsar and the people should form a unity: \"For the people, the tsar is not an external power, not the power of some conqueror\u00a0... but a power of all the people, an all-unifying power the people themselves desired.\"\nWhile critical of serfdom, Dostoevsky was skeptical about the creation of a constitution, a concept he viewed as unrelated to Russia's history. He described it as a mere \"gentleman's rule\" and believed that \"a constitution would simply enslave the people\". He advocated social change instead, for example removal of the feudal system and a weakening of the divisions between the peasantry and the affluent classes. His ideal was a utopian, Christianized Russia where \"if everyone were actively Christian, not a single social question would come up\u00a0... If they were Christians they would settle everything\". He thought democracy and oligarchy were poor systems; of France he wrote, \"the oligarchs are only concerned with the interest of the wealthy; the democrats, only with the interest of the poor; but the interests of society, the interest of all and the future of France as a whole\u2014no one there bothers about these things.\" He maintained that political parties ultimately led to social discord. In the 1860s, he discovered \"Pochvennichestvo\", a movement similar to Slavophilism in that it rejected Europe's culture and contemporary philosophical movements, such as nihilism and materialism. \"Pochvennichestvo\" differed from Slavophilism in aiming to establish, not an isolated Russia, but a more open state modelled on the Russia of Peter the Great.\nIn his incomplete article \"Socialism and Christianity\", Dostoevsky claimed that civilisation (\"the second stage in human history\") had become degraded, and that it was moving towards liberalism and losing its faith in God. He asserted that the traditional concept of Christianity should be recovered. He thought that contemporary western Europe had \"rejected the single formula for their salvation that came from God and was proclaimed through revelation, 'Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself', and replaced it with practical conclusions such as, \"Chacun pour soi et Dieu pour tous\" [Every man for himself and God for all], or \"scientific\" slogans like 'the struggle for survival. He considered this crisis to be the consequence of the collision between communal and individual interests, brought about by a decline in religious and moral principles.\nDostoevsky distinguished three \"enormous world ideas\" prevalent in his time: Roman Catholicism, Protestantism and (Russian) Orthodoxy. He claimed that Catholicism had continued the tradition of Imperial Rome and had thus become anti-Christian and proto-socialist, inasmuch as the Church's interest in political and mundane affairs led it to abandon the idea of Christ. For Dostoevsky, socialism was \"the latest incarnation of the Catholic idea\" and its \"natural ally\". He found Protestantism self-contradictory and claimed that it would ultimately lose power and spirituality. He deemed (Russian) Orthodoxy to be the ideal form of Christianity.\nFor all that, to place Dostoevsky politically is not that simple, but: as a Christian, he rejected the atheistic socialism; as a traditionalist, he rejected the destruction of the institutions; and, as a pacifist, he rejected any violent method or upheaval led by both progressives or reactionaries. He supported private property and business rights, and did not agree with many criticisms of the free market from the socialist utopians of his time.\nDuring the Russo-Turkish War, Dostoevsky asserted that war might be necessary if salvation were to be granted. He wanted the Muslim Ottoman Empire eliminated and the Christian Byzantine Empire restored, and he hoped for the liberation of Balkan Slavs and their unification with the Russian Empire.\nRacial beliefs.\nJewish characters in Dostoevsky's works have been described as displaying negative stereotypes. In a letter to Arkady Kovner from 1877, a Jew who had accused Dostoevsky of antisemitism, he replied with the following:\"I am not an enemy of the Jews at all and never have been. But as you say, its 40-century existence proves that this tribe has exceptional vitality, which would not help, during the course of its history, taking the form of various Status in Statu ... how can they fail to find themselves, even if only partially, at variance with the indigenous population\u00a0\u2013 the Russian tribe?\"\nDostoevsky held negative views of the Ottoman Turks, dedicating multiple pages to them in his \"Writer's Diary\", professing the need to have no pity for Turks at war and no regrets in killing Turks and depopulating Istanbul of the Turkish population and shipping it to Asia.\nReligious beliefs.\nDostoevsky was an Orthodox Christian who was raised in a religious family and knew the Gospel from a very young age. He was influenced by the Russian translation of Johannes H\u00fcbner's \"One Hundred and Four Sacred Stories from the Old and New Testaments Selected for Children\" (partly a German bible for children and partly a catechism). He attended Sunday liturgies from an early age and took part in annual pilgrimages to the St. Sergius Trinity Monastery. A deacon at the hospital gave him religious instruction. Among his most cherished childhood memories were reciting prayers in front of guests and reading passages from the Book of Job that impressed him while \"still almost a child.\"\nAccording to an officer at the military academy, Dostoevsky was profoundly religious, followed Orthodox practice, and regularly read the Gospels and Heinrich Zschokke's \"Die Stunden der Andacht\" (\"Hours of Devotion\"), which \"preached a sentimental version of Christianity entirely free from dogmatic content and with a strong emphasis on giving Christian love a social application.\" This book may have prompted his later interest in Christian socialism. Through the literature of Hoffmann, Balzac, Eug\u00e8ne Sue, and Goethe, Dostoevsky created his own belief system, similar to Russian sectarianism and the Old Belief. After his arrest, aborted execution, and subsequent imprisonment, he focused intensely on the figure of Christ and on the New Testament: the only book allowed in prison. In a January 1854 letter to the woman who had sent him the New Testament, Dostoevsky wrote that he was a \"child of unbelief and doubt up to this moment, and I am certain that I shall remain so to the grave.\" He also wrote that \"even if someone were to prove to me that the truth lay outside Christ, I should choose to remain with Christ rather than with the truth.\"\nIn Semipalatinsk, Dostoevsky revived his faith by looking frequently at the stars. Wrangel said that he was \"rather pious, but did not often go to church, and disliked priests, especially the Siberian ones. But he spoke about Christ ecstatically.\" Both planned to translate Hegel's works and Carus' \"Psyche\". Two pilgrimages and two works by Dmitri Rostovsky, an archbishop who influenced Ukrainian and Russian literature by composing groundbreaking religious plays, strengthened his beliefs. Through his visits to western Europe and discussions with Herzen, Grigoriev, and Strakhov, Dostoevsky discovered the \"Pochvennichestvo\" movement and the theory that the Catholic Church had adopted the principles of rationalism, legalism, materialism, and individualism from ancient Rome and had passed on its philosophy to Protestantism and consequently to atheistic socialism.\nThemes and style.\nDostoevsky's canon includes novels, novellas, novelettes, short stories, essays, pamphlets, limericks, epigrams and poems. He wrote more than 700 letters, a dozen of which are lost.\nDostoevsky expressed religious, psychological, and philosophical ideas in his writings. His works explore such themes as suicide, poverty, human manipulation, and morality. Psychological themes include dreaming, first seen in \"White Nights\", and the father-son relationship, beginning in \"The Adolescent\". Most of his works demonstrate a vision of the chaotic sociopolitical structure of contemporary Russia. His early works viewed society (for example, the differences between poor and rich) through the lens of literary realism and naturalism. The influences of other writers, particularly evident in his early works, led to accusations of plagiarism, but his style gradually became more individual. After his release from prison, Dostoevsky incorporated religious themes, especially those of Russian Orthodoxy, into his writing. Elements of gothic fiction, romanticism, and satire are observable in some of his books. He frequently used autobiographical or semi-autobiographical details.\nAn important stylistic element in Dostoevsky's writing is polyphony, the simultaneous presence of multiple narrative voices and perspectives. Polyphony is a literary concept, analogous with musical polyphony, developed by Mikhail Bakhtin on the basis of his analyses of Dostoevsky's works. Kornelije Kvas wrote that Bakhtin's theory of \"the polyphonic novel and Dostoevsky\u2019s dialogicness of narration postulates the non-existence of the 'final' word, which is why the thoughts, emotions and experiences of the world of the narrator and his/her characters are reflected through the words of another, with which they can never fully blend.\"\nLegacy.\nReception and influence.\nDostoevsky is regarded as one of the greatest and most influential novelists of the Golden Age of Russian literature. Leo Tolstoy admired Dostoevsky's works and considered his novels magnificent (correspondingly, Dostoevsky admired Tolstoy as well). Albert Einstein put him above the mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss, calling him a \"great religious writer\" who explores \"the mystery of spiritual existence\". Friedrich Nietzsche at one point called Dostoevsky \"the only psychologist\u00a0... from whom I had something to learn; he ranks among the most beautiful strokes of fortune in my life.\" Hermann Hesse enjoyed Dostoevsky's work and cautioned that to read him is like a \"glimpse into the havoc\". The Norwegian novelist Knut Hamsun wrote that \"no one has analyzed the complicated human structure as Dostoyevsky. His psychologic sense is overwhelming and visionary.\" The Russian literary theorist Mikhail Bakhtin's analysis of Dostoevsky came to be at the foundation of his theory of the novel. Bakhtin argued that Dostoevsky's use of multiple voices was a major advancement in the development of the novel as a genre.\nIn his posthumous collection of sketches \"A Moveable Feast\", Ernest Hemingway stated that in Dostoevsky \"there were things believable and not to be believed, but some so true that they changed you as you read them; frailty and madness, wickedness and saintliness, and the insanity of gambling were there to know\". James Joyce praised Dostoevsky's prose: \"...\u00a0he is the man more than any other who has created modern prose, and intensified it to its present-day pitch. It was his explosive power which shattered the Victorian novel with its simpering maidens and ordered commonplaces; books which were without imagination or violence.\" In her essay \"The Russian Point of View\", Virginia Woolf said, \"Out of Shakespeare there is no more exciting reading\". Franz Kafka called Dostoevsky his \"blood-relative\" and was heavily influenced by his works, particularly \"The Brothers Karamazov\" and \"Crime and Punishment\", both of which profoundly influenced \"The Trial\". Sigmund Freud called \"The Brothers Karamazov\" \"the most magnificent novel ever written\". Modern cultural movements such as the surrealists, the existentialists and the Beats cite Dostoevsky as an influence, and he is cited as the forerunner of Russian symbolism, existentialism, expressionism and psychoanalysis. In her essay \"What Is Romanticism?,\" Russian-American author Ayn Rand wrote that Dostoevsky was one of the two greatest novelists (the other being Victor Hugo). Argentinian writer Julio Cort\u00e1zar also mentions Dostoevsky in his novel \"Hopscotch\".\nHonours.\nIn 1956 an olive-green postage stamp dedicated to Dostoevsky was released in the Soviet Union, with a print run of 1,000 copies. A Dostoevsky Museum was opened on 12 November 1971 in the apartment where he wrote his first and final novels. A crater on Mercury was named after him in 1979, and a minor planet discovered in 1981 by Lyudmila Karachkina was named 3453 Dostoevsky. Music critic and broadcaster Artemy Troitsky has hosted the radio show \"FM \u0414\u043e\u0441\u0442\u043e\u0435\u0432\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439\" (FM Dostoevsky) since 1997. J.M. Coetzee featured Dostoevsky as the protagonist in his 1997 novel \"The Master of Petersburg\". The famous Malayalam novel \"Oru Sankeerthanam Pole\" by Perumbadavam Sreedharan deals with the life of Dostoevsky and his love affair with Anna. Viewers of the TV show \"Name of Russia\" voted him the ninth greatest Russian of all time, behind chemist Dmitry Mendeleev and ahead of ruler Ivan IV. An Eagle Award-winning TV series directed by Vladimir Khotinenko about Dostoevsky's life was screened in 2011.\nNumerous memorials were inaugurated in cities and regions such as Moscow, Saint Petersburg, Novosibirsk, Omsk, Semipalatinsk, Kusnetsk, Darovoye, Staraya Russa, Lyublino, Tallinn, Dresden, Baden-Baden and Wiesbaden. The Dostoyevskaya metro station in Saint Petersburg was opened on 30 December 1991, and the station of the same name in Moscow was opened on 19 June 2010, the 75th anniversary of the Moscow Metro. The Moscow station is decorated with murals by artist Ivan Nikolaev depicting scenes from Dostoevsky's works, such as controversial suicides.\nCriticism.\nDostoevsky's work did not always gain a positive reception. Some critics, such as Nikolay Dobrolyubov, Ivan Bunin and Vladimir Nabokov, viewed his writing as excessively psychological and philosophical rather than artistic. Others found fault with chaotic and disorganised plots, and others, like Turgenev, objected to \"excessive psychologising\" and too-detailed naturalism. His style was deemed \"prolix, repetitious and lacking in polish, balance, restraint and good taste\". Saltykov-Shchedrin, Nikolay Mikhaylovsky and others criticised his puppet-like characters, most prominently in \"The Idiot\", \"Demons\" (\"The Possessed\", \"The Devils\") and \"The Brothers Karamazov\". These characters were compared to those of Hoffmann, an author whom Dostoevsky admired.\nBasing his estimation on stated criteria of enduring art and individual genius, Nabokov judges Dostoevsky \"not a great writer, but rather a mediocre one\u2014with flashes of excellent humour but, alas, with wastelands of literary platitudes in between\". Nabokov complains that the novels are peopled by \"neurotics and lunatics\" and states that Dostoevsky's characters do not develop: \"We get them all complete at the beginning of the tale and so they remain.\" He finds the novels full of contrived \"surprises and complications of plot\", which are effective when first read, but on second reading, without the shock and benefit of these surprises, appear loaded with \"glorified clich\u00e9\". The Scottish poet and critic Edwin Muir, however, addressed this criticism, noting that \"regarding the 'oddness' of Dostoevsky's characters, it has been pointed out that they perhaps only seem 'pathological', whereas in reality they are 'only visualized more clearly than any figures in imaginative literature'.\nReputation.\nDostoevsky's books have been translated into more than 170 languages. The German translator Wilhelm Wolfsohn published one of the first translations, parts of \"Poor Folk\", in an 1846\u20131847 magazine, and a French translation followed. French, German and Italian translations usually came directly from the original, while English translations were second-hand and of poor quality. The first English translations were by Marie von Thilo in 1881, but the first highly regarded ones were produced between 1912 and 1920 by Constance Garnett. Her flowing and easy translations helped popularise Dostoevsky's novels in anglophone countries, and Bakthin's \"Problems of Dostoevsky's Creative Art\" (1929) (republished and revised as \"Problems of Dostoevsky's Poetics\" in 1963) provided further understanding of his style.\nDostoevsky's works were interpreted in film and on stage in many different countries. Princess Varvara Dmitrevna Obolenskaya was among the first to propose staging \"Crime and Punishment\". Dostoevsky did not refuse permission, but he advised against it, as he believed that \"each art corresponds to a series of poetic thoughts, so that one idea cannot be expressed in another non-corresponding form\". His extensive explanations in opposition to the transposition of his works into other media were groundbreaking in fidelity criticism. He thought that just one episode should be dramatised, or an idea should be taken and incorporated into a separate plot. According to critic Alexander Burry, some of the most effective adaptions are Sergei Prokofiev's opera \"The Gambler\", Leo\u0161 Jan\u00e1\u010dek's opera \"From the House of the Dead\", Akira Kurosawa's film \"The Idiot\" and Andrzej Wajda's film \"The Possessed\".\nAfter the 1917 Russian Revolution, passages of Dostoevsky books were sometimes shortened, although only two books were censored: \"Demons\" and \"Diary of a Writer\". His philosophy, particularly in \"Demons\", was deemed anti-capitalist but also anti-Communist and reactionary. According to historian Boris Ilizarov, Stalin read Dostoevsky's \"The Brothers Karamazov\" several times.\nWorks.\nDostoevsky's works of fiction include 15 novels and novellas, 17 short stories, and 5 translations. Many of his longer novels were first published in serialised form in literary magazines and journals. The years given below indicate the year in which the novel's final part or first complete book edition was published. In English many of his novels and stories are known by different titles.\nMajor works.\n\"Poor Folk\".\n\"Poor Folk\" is an epistolary novel that describes the relationship between the small, elderly official Makar Devushkin and the young seamstress Varvara Dobroselova, remote relatives who write letters to each other. Makar's tender, sentimental adoration for Varvara and her confident, warm friendship for him explain their evident preference for a simple life, although it keeps them in humiliating poverty. An unscrupulous merchant finds the inexperienced girl and hires her as his housewife and guarantor. He sends her to a manor somewhere on a steppe, while Makar alleviates his misery and pain with alcohol.\nThe story focuses on poor people who struggle with their lack of self-esteem. Their misery leads to the loss of their inner freedom, to dependence on the social authorities, and to the extinction of their individuality. Dostoevsky shows how poverty and dependence are indissolubly aligned with deflection and deformation of self-esteem, combining inward and outerward suffering.\n\"Notes from Underground\".\n\"Notes from Underground\" is split into two stylistically different parts, the first essay-like, the second in narrative style. The protagonist and first-person narrator is an unnamed 40-year-old civil servant known as The Underground Man. The only known facts about his situation are that he has quit the service, lives in a basement flat on the outskirts of Saint Petersburg and finances his livelihood from a modest inheritance.\nThe first part is a record of his thoughts about society and his character. He describes himself as vicious, squalid and ugly; the chief focuses of his polemic are the \"modern human\" and his vision of the world, which he attacks severely and cynically, and towards which he develops aggression and vengefulness. He considers his own decline natural and necessary. Although he emphasises that he does not intend to publish his notes for the public, the narrator appeals repeatedly to an ill-described audience, whose questions he tries to address.\nIn the second part he describes scenes from his life that are responsible for his failure in personal and professional life and in his love life. He tells of meeting old school friends, who are in secure positions and treat him with condescension. His aggression turns inward on to himself and he tries to humiliate himself further. He presents himself as a possible saviour to the poor prostitute Lisa, advising her to reject self-reproach when she looks to him for hope. Dostoevsky added a short commentary saying that although the storyline and characters are fictional, such things were inevitable in contemporary society.\nThe Underground Man was very influential on philosophers. His alienated existence from the mainstream influenced modernist literature.\n\"Crime and Punishment\".\nThe novel \"Crime and Punishment\" has received both critical and popular acclaim, and is often cited as Dostoevsky's magnum opus. To this date, \"Crime and Punishment\" remains one of the most influential and widely read novels in Russian literature.\nThe novel describes the fictional Rodion Raskolnikov's life, from the murder of a pawnbroker and her sister, through spiritual regeneration with the help and love of Sonya (a \"hooker with a heart of gold\"), to his sentence in Siberia. Strakhov liked the novel, remarking that \"Only \"Crime and Punishment\" was read in 1866\" and that Dostoevsky had managed to portray a Russian person aptly and realistically. On the other hand, Grigory Eliseev of the radical magazine \"The Contemporary\" called the novel a \"fantasy according to which the entire student body is accused without exception of attempting murder and robbery\". Richard Louire, writing for the New York Times, praised the book and stated that the novel changed his life. In an article for the Encyclopaedia Britannica, Patricia Bauer argued that \"Crime and Punishment\" is both \"a masterpiece\" and \"one of the finest studies of the psychopathology of guilt written in any language.\"\n\"The Idiot\".\nThe novel's protagonist, the 26-year-old Prince Myshkin, returns to Russia after several years at a Swiss sanatorium. Scorned by Saint Petersburg society for his trusting nature and naivety, he finds himself at the center of a struggle between a beautiful kept woman, Nastasya, and a jealous but pretty young girl, Aglaya, both of whom win his affection. Unfortunately, Myshkin's goodness precipitates disaster, leaving the impression that, in a world obsessed with money, power and sexual conquest, a sanatorium may be the only place for a saint. Myshkin is the personification of a \"relatively beautiful man\", namely Christ. Coming \"from above\" (the Swiss mountains), he physically resembles common depictions of Jesus Christ: slightly larger than average, with thick, blond hair, sunken cheeks and a thin, almost entirely white goatee. Like Christ, Myshkin is a teacher, confessor and mysterious outsider. Passions such as greed and jealousy are alien to him. In contrast to those around him, he puts no value on money and power. He feels compassion and love, sincerely, without judgment. His relationship with the immoral Nastasya is obviously inspired by Christ's relationship with Mary Magdalene. He is called \"Idiot\" because of such differences.\n\"Demons\".\nThe story of \"Demons\" (sometimes also titled \"The Possessed\" or \"The Devils\") is based largely on the murder of Ivan Ivanov by \"People's Vengeance\" members in 1869. It was influenced by the Book of Revelation. The secondary characters, Pyotr and Stepan Verkhovensky, are based on Sergei Nechayev and Timofey Granovsky respectively. The novel takes place in a provincial Russian setting, primarily on the estates of Stepan Verkhovensky and Varvara Stavrogina. Stepan's son Pyotr is an aspiring revolutionary conspirator who attempts to organise revolutionaries in the area. He considers Varvara's son Nikolai central to his plot, because he thinks that Nikolai lacks sympathy for mankind. Pyotr gathers conspirators such as the philosophising Shigalyov, the suicidal Kirillov and the former military man Virginsky. He schemes to consolidate their loyalty to him and each other by murdering Ivan Shatov, a fellow conspirator. Pyotr plans to have Kirillov, who is committed to killing himself, take credit for the murder in his suicide note. Kirillov complies and Pyotr murders Shatov, but his scheme goes awry. Pyotr escapes, but the remainder of his aspiring revolutionary crew is arrested. In the denouement, Nikolai kills himself, tortured by his own misdeeds.\n\"The Brothers Karamazov\".\nAt nearly 800 pages, \"The Brothers Karamazov\" is Dostoevsky's largest work. It received both critical and popular acclaim and is often cited as his \"magnum opus\". Composed of 12 \"books\", the novel tells the story of the novice Alyosha Karamazov, the non-believer Ivan Karamazov and the soldier Dmitri Karamazov. The first books introduce the Karamazovs. The main plot is the death of their father Fyodor, while other parts are philosophical and religious arguments by Father Zosima to Alyosha.\nThe most famous chapter is \"The Grand Inquisitor\", a parable told by Ivan to Alyosha about Christ's Second Coming in Seville, Spain, in which Christ is imprisoned by a ninety-year-old Catholic Grand Inquisitor. Instead of answering him, Christ gives him a kiss, and the Inquisitor subsequently releases him, telling him not to return. The tale was misunderstood as a defence of the Inquisitor, but some, such as Romano Guardini, have argued that the Christ of the parable was Ivan's own interpretation of Christ, \"the idealistic product of the unbelief\". Ivan, however, has stated that he is against Christ. Most contemporary critics and scholars agree that Dostoevsky is attacking Roman Catholicism and socialist atheism, both represented by the Inquisitor. He warns the readers against a terrible revelation in the future, referring to the Donation of Pepin around 750 and the Spanish Inquisition in the 16th century, which in his view corrupted true Christianity."}
{"id": "11627", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11627", "title": "Faith healing", "text": "Faith healing is the practice of prayer and gestures (such as laying on of hands) that are believed by some to elicit divine intervention in spiritual and physical healing, especially the Christian practice. Believers assert that the healing of disease and disability can be brought about by religious faith through prayer or other rituals that, according to adherents, can stimulate a divine presence and power. Religious belief in divine intervention does not depend on empirical evidence of an evidence-based outcome achieved via faith healing. Virtually all scientists and philosophers dismiss faith healing as pseudoscience.\nClaims that \"a myriad of techniques\" such as prayer, divine intervention, or the ministrations of an individual healer can cure illness have been popular throughout history. There have been claims that faith can cure blindness, deafness, cancer, HIV/AIDS, developmental disorders, anemia, arthritis, corns, defective speech, multiple sclerosis, skin rashes, total body paralysis, and various injuries. Recoveries have been attributed to many techniques commonly classified as faith healing. It can involve prayer, a visit to a religious shrine, or simply a strong belief in a supreme being.\nMany people interpret the Bible, especially the New Testament, as teaching belief in, and the practice of, faith healing. According to a 2004 \"Newsweek\" poll, 72 percent of Americans said they believe that praying to God can cure someone, even if science says the person has an incurable disease. Unlike faith healing, advocates of spiritual healing make no attempt to seek divine intervention, instead believing in divine energy. The increased interest in alternative medicine at the end of the 20th century has given rise to a parallel interest among sociologists in the relationship of religion to health.\nFaith healing can be classified as a spiritual, supernatural, or paranormal topic, and, in some cases, belief in faith healing can be classified as magical thinking. The American Cancer Society states \"available scientific evidence does not support claims that faith healing can actually cure physical ailments\". \"Death, disability, and other unwanted outcomes have occurred when faith healing was elected instead of medical care for serious injuries or illnesses.\" When parents have practiced faith healing rather than medical care, many children have died that otherwise would have been expected to live. Similar results are found in adults.\nIn various belief systems.\nChristianity.\nOverview.\nRegarded as a Christian belief that God heals people through the power of the Holy Spirit, faith healing often involves the laying on of hands. It is also called supernatural healing, divine healing, and miracle healing, among other things. Healing in the Bible is often associated with the ministry of specific individuals including Elijah, Jesus and Paul.\nChristian physician Reginald B. Cherry views faith healing as a pathway of healing in which God uses both the natural and the supernatural to heal. Being healed has been described as a privilege of accepting Christ's redemption on the cross. Pentecostal writer Wilfred Graves Jr. views the healing of the body as a physical expression of salvation. , after describing Jesus exorcising at sunset and healing all of the sick who were brought to him, quotes these miracles as a fulfillment of the prophecy in : \"He took up our infirmities and carried our diseases\".\nEven those Christian writers who believe in faith healing do not all believe that one's faith presently brings about the desired healing. \"[Y]our faith does not effect your healing now. When you are healed rests entirely on what the sovereign purposes of the Healer are.\" Larry Keefauver cautions against allowing enthusiasm for faith healing to stir up false hopes. \"Just believing hard enough, long enough or strong enough will not strengthen you or prompt your healing. Doing mental gymnastics to 'hold on to your miracle' will not cause your healing to manifest now.\" Those who actively lay hands on others and pray with them to be healed are usually aware that healing may not always follow immediately. Proponents of faith healing say it may come later, and it may not come in this life. \"The truth is that your healing may manifest in eternity, not in time\".\nNew Testament.\nParts of the four gospels in the New Testament say that Jesus cured physical ailments well outside the capacity of first-century medicine. Jesus\u2019 healing acts are considered miraculous and spectacular due to the results being impossible or statistically improbable. One example is the case of \"a woman who had had a discharge of blood for twelve years, and who had suffered much under many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was not better but rather grew worse\". After healing her, Jesus tells her \"Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace! Be cured from your illness\". At least two other times Jesus credited the sufferer's faith as the means of being healed: and .\nJesus endorsed the use of the medical assistance of the time (medicines of oil and wine) when he told the parable of the Good Samaritan (Luke 10:25\u201337), who \"bound up [an injured man's] wounds, pouring on oil and wine\" (verse 34) as a physician would. Jesus then told the doubting teacher of the law (who had elicited this parable by his self-justifying question, \"And who is my neighbor?\" in verse 29) to \"go, and do likewise\" in loving others with whom he would never ordinarily associate (verse 37).\nThe healing in the gospels is referred to as a \"sign\" to prove Jesus' divinity and to foster belief in him as the Christ. However, when asked for other types of miracles, Jesus refused some but granted others in consideration of the motive of the request. Some theologians' understanding is that Jesus healed \"all\" who were present every single time. Sometimes he determines whether they had faith that he would heal them. Four of the seven miraculous signs performed in the Fourth Gospel that indicated he was sent from God were acts of healing or resurrection. He heals the Capernaum official's son, heals a paralytic by the pool in Bethsaida, healing a man born blind, and resurrecting Lazarus of Bethany.\nJesus told his followers to heal the sick and stated that signs such as healing are evidence of faith. Jesus also told his followers to \"cure sick people, raise up dead persons, make lepers clean, expel demons. You received free, give free\".\nJesus sternly ordered many who received healing from him: \"Do not tell anyone!\" Jesus did not approve of anyone asking for a sign just for the spectacle of it, describing such as coming from a \"wicked and adulterous generation\".\nThe apostle Paul believed healing is one of the special gifts of the Holy Spirit, and that the possibility exists that certain persons may possess this gift to an extraordinarily high degree.\nIn the New Testament Epistle of James, the faithful are told that to be healed, those who are sick should call upon the elders of the church to pray over [them] and anoint [them] with oil in the name of the Lord.\nThe New Testament says that during Jesus' ministry and after his Resurrection, the apostles healed the sick and cast out demons, made lame men walk, raised the dead and performed other miracles. Apostles were holy men who had direct access to God and could channel his power to help and heal people. For example, Saint Peter healed a crippled man.\nJesus used miracles to convince people that he was inaugurating the Messianic Age, as in Mt 12.28. Scholars have described Jesus' miracles as establishing the kingdom during his lifetime.\nEarly Christian church.\nAccounts or references to healing appear in the writings of many Ante Nicene Fathers, although many of these mentions are very general and do not include specifics.\nCatholicism.\nThe Roman Catholic Church recognizes two \"not mutually exclusive\" kinds of healing, one justified by science and one justified by faith:\nIn 2000, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith issued \"Instruction on prayers for healing\" with specific norms about prayer meetings for obtaining healing, which presents the Catholic Church's doctrines of sickness and healing.\nIt accepts \"that there may be means of natural healing that have not yet been understood or recognized by science\", but it rejects superstitious practices which are neither compatible with Christian teaching nor compatible with scientific evidence.\nFaith healing is reported by Catholics as the result of intercessory prayer to a saint or to a person with the gift of healing. According to \"U.S. Catholic\" magazine, \"Even in this skeptical, postmodern, scientific agemiracles really are possible.\" According to a \"Newsweek\" poll, three-fourths of American Catholics say they pray for \"miracles\" of some sort.\nAccording to John Cavadini, when healing is granted, \"The miracle is not primarily for the person healed, but for all people, as a sign of God's work in the ultimate healing called 'salvation', or a sign of the kingdom that is coming.\" Some might view their own healing as a sign they are particularly worthy or holy, while others do not deserve it.\nThe Catholic Church has a special Congregation dedicated to the careful investigation of the validity of alleged miracles attributed to prospective saints. Pope Francis tightened the rules on money and miracles in the canonization process. Since Catholic Christians believe the lives of canonized saints in the Church will reflect Christ's, many have come to expect healing miracles. While the popular conception of a miracle can be wide-ranging, the Catholic Church has a specific definition for the kind of miracle formally recognized in a canonization process.\nAccording to \"Catholic Encyclopedia\", it is often said that cures at shrines and during Christian pilgrimages are mainly due to psychotherapypartly to confident trust in Divine providence, and partly to the strong expectancy of cure that comes over suggestible persons at these times and places.\nAmong the best-known accounts by Catholics of faith healings are those attributed to the miraculous intercession of the apparition of the Blessed Virgin Mary known as Our Lady of Lourdes at the Sanctuary of Our Lady of Lourdes in France and the remissions of life-threatening disease claimed by those who have applied for aid to Saint Jude, who is known as the \"patron saint of lost causes\".\n, Catholic medics have asserted that there have been 67 miracles and 7,000 unexplainable medical cures at Lourdes since 1858. In a 1908 book, it says these cures were subjected to intense medical scrutiny and were only recognized as authentic spiritual cures after a commission of doctors and scientists, called the Lourdes Medical Bureau, had ruled out any physical mechanism for the patient's recovery.\nEvangelicalism.\nIn some Pentecostal and Charismatic Evangelical churches, a special place is thus reserved for faith healings with laying on of hands during worship services or for campaigns evangelization. Faith healing or divine healing is considered to be an inheritance of Jesus acquired by his death and resurrection. Biblicism ensures that the miracles and healings described in the Bible are still relevant and may be present in the life of the believer.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, the new Pentecostal movement drew participants from the Holiness movement and other movements in America that already believed in divine healing. By the 1930s, several faith healers drew large crowds and established worldwide followings.\nThe first Pentecostals in the modern sense appeared in Topeka, Kansas, in a Bible school conducted by Charles Fox Parham, a holiness teacher and former Methodist pastor. Pentecostalism achieved worldwide attention in 1906 through the Azusa Street Revival in Los Angeles led by William Joseph Seymour.\nSmith Wigglesworth was also a well-known figure in the early part of the 20th century. A former English plumber turned evangelist who lived simply and read nothing but the Bible from the time his wife taught him to read, Wigglesworth traveled around the world preaching about Jesus and performing faith healings. Wigglesworth claimed to raise several people from the dead in Jesus' name in his meetings.\nDuring the 1920s and 1930s, Aimee Semple McPherson was a controversial faith healer of growing popularity during the Great Depression. Subsequently, William M. Branham has been credited as the initiator of the post-World War II healing revivals. The healing revival he began led many to emulate his style and spawned a generation of faith healers. Because of this, Branham has been recognized as the \"father of modern faith healers\". According to writer and researcher Patsy Sims, \"the power of a Branham service and his stage presence remains a legend unparalleled in the history of the Charismatic movement\". By the late 1940s, Oral Roberts, who was associated with and promoted by Branham's Voice of Healing magazine also became well known, and he continued with faith healing until the 1980s. Roberts discounted faith healing in the late 1950s, stating, \"I never was a faith healer and I was never raised that way. My parents believed very strongly in medical science and we have a doctor who takes care of our children when they get sick. I cannot heal anyone \u2013 God does that.\" A friend of Roberts was Kathryn Kuhlman, another popular faith healer, who gained fame in the 1950s and had a television program on CBS. Also in this era, Jack Coe and A. A. Allen were faith healers who traveled with large tents for large open-air crusades.\nOral Roberts's successful use of television as a medium to gain a wider audience led others to follow suit. His former pilot, Kenneth Copeland, started a healing ministry. Pat Robertson, Benny Hinn, and Peter Popoff became well-known televangelists who claimed to heal the sick. Richard Rossi is known for advertising his healing clinics through secular television and radio. Kuhlman influenced Benny Hinn, who adopted some of her techniques and wrote a book about her.\nChristian Science.\nChristian Science claims that healing is possible through prayer based on an understanding of God and the underlying spiritual perfection of God's creation. The material world as humanly perceived is believed to not be the spiritual reality. Christian Scientists believe that healing through prayer is possible insofar as it succeeds in bringing the spiritual reality of health into human experience. Christian Scientists believe that prayer does not change the spiritual creation but gives a clearer view of it, and the result appears in the human scene as healing: the human picture adjusts to coincide more nearly with the divine reality. Christian Scientists do not consider themselves to be faith healers since faith or belief in Christian Science is not required on the part of the patient, and because they consider it reliable and provable rather than random.\nAlthough there is no hierarchy in Christian Science, Christian Science practitioners devote full time to prayer for others on a professional basis, and advertise in an online directory published by the church. Christian Scientists sometimes tell their stories of healing at weekly testimony meetings at local Christian Science churches, or publish them in the church's magazines including \"The Christian Science Journal\" printed monthly since 1883, the \"Christian Science Sentinel\" printed weekly since 1898, and \"The Herald of Christian Science\" a foreign language magazine beginning with a German edition in 1903 and later expanding to Spanish, French, and Portuguese editions. Christian Science Reading Rooms often have archives of such healing accounts.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS) has had a long history of faith healings. Many members of the LDS Church have told their stories of healing within the LDS publication, the \"Ensign\". The church believes healings come most often as a result of priesthood blessings given by the laying on of hands; however, prayer often accompanied with fasting is also thought to cause healings. Healing is always attributed to be God's power. Latter-day Saints believe that the Priesthood of God, held by prophets (such as Moses) and worthy disciples of the Savior, was restored via heavenly messengers to the first prophet of this dispensation, Joseph Smith.\nAccording to LDS doctrine, even though members may have the restored priesthood authority to heal in the name of Jesus Christ, all efforts should be made to seek the appropriate medical help. Brigham Young stated this effectively, while also noting that the ultimate outcome is still dependent on the will of God.\nIslam.\nKonkhogin Haokip has claimed some Muslims believe that the Quran was sent not only as a revelation, but as a medicine, and that they believe the Quran heals any physical and spiritual ailments through such practices as\nA number of healing traditions exist among Muslims. Some healers are particularly focused on diagnosing cases of possession by jinn or demons.\nScientology.\nSome critics of Scientology have referred to some of its practices as being similar to faith healing, based on claims made by L. Ron Hubbard in \"\" and other writings.\nScientific investigation.\nNearly all scientists dismiss faith healing as pseudoscience. Some opponents of the pseudoscience label assert that faith healing makes no scientific claims and thus should be treated as a matter of faith that is not testable by science. Critics reply that claims of medical cures should be tested scientifically because, although faith in the supernatural is not in itself usually considered to be the purview of science, claims of reproducible effects are nevertheless subject to scientific investigation.\nScientists and doctors generally find that faith healing lacks biological plausibility or epistemic warrant, which is one of the criteria used to judge whether clinical research is ethical and financially justified. A Cochrane review of intercessory prayer found \"although some of the results of individual studies suggest a positive effect of intercessory prayer, the majority do not\". The authors concluded: \"We are not convinced that further trials of this intervention should be undertaken and would prefer to see any resources available for such a trial used to investigate other questions in health care\".\nA review in 1954 investigated spiritual healing, therapeutic touch and faith healing. Of the hundred cases reviewed, none revealed that the healer's intervention alone resulted in any improvement or cure of a measurable organic disability.\nIn addition, at least one study has suggested that adult Christian Scientists, who generally use prayer rather than medical care, have a higher death rate than other people of the same age.\nThe Global Medical Research Institute (GMRI) was created in 2012 to start collecting medical records of patients who claim to have received a supernatural healing miracle as a result of Christian Spiritual Healing practices. The organization has a panel of medical doctors who review the patient's records looking at entries prior to the claimed miracles and entries after the miracle was claimed to have taken place. \u201cThe overall goal of GMRI is to promote an empirically grounded understanding of the physiological, emotional, and sociological effects of Christian Spiritual Healing practices\u201d. This is accomplished by applying the same rigorous standards used in other forms of medical and scientific research.\nA 2011 article in the New Scientist magazine cited positive physical results from meditation, positive thinking and spiritual faith \nCriticism.\nSkeptics of faith healing offer primarily two explanations for anecdotes of cures or improvements, relieving any need to appeal to the supernatural. The first is \"post hoc ergo propter hoc\", meaning that a genuine improvement or spontaneous remission may have been experienced coincidental with but independent from anything the faith healer or patient did or said. These patients would have improved just as well even had they done nothing. The second is the placebo effect, through which a person may experience genuine pain relief and other symptomatic alleviation. In this case, the patient genuinely has been helped by the faith healer or faith-based remedy, not through any mysterious or numinous function, but by the power of their own belief that they would be healed. In both cases the patient may experience a real reduction in symptoms, though in neither case has anything miraculous or inexplicable occurred. Both cases, however, are strictly limited to the body's natural abilities.\nAccording to the American Cancer Society:\nThe American Medical Association considers that prayer as therapy should not be a medically reimbursable or deductible expense.\nBelgian philosopher and skeptic Etienne Vermeersch coined the term Lourdes effect as a criticism of the magical thinking and placebo effect possibilities for the claimed miraculous cures as there are no documented events where a severed arm has been reattached through faith healing at Lourdes. Vermeersch identifies ambiguity and equivocal nature of the miraculous cures as a key feature of miraculous events.\nNegative impact on public health.\nReliance on faith healing to the exclusion of other forms of treatment can have a public health impact when it reduces or eliminates access to modern medical techniques. This is evident in both higher mortality rates for children and in reduced life expectancy for adults. Critics have also made note of serious injury that has resulted from falsely labelled \"healings\", where patients erroneously consider themselves cured and cease or withdraw from treatment. For example, at least six people have died after faith healing by their church and being told they had been healed of HIV and could stop taking their medications. It is the stated position of the AMA that \"prayer as therapy should not delay access to traditional medical care\". Choosing faith healing while rejecting modern medicine can and does cause people to die needlessly.\nChristian theological criticism of faith healing.\nChristian theological criticism of faith healing broadly falls into two distinct levels of disagreement.\nThe first is widely termed the \"open-but-cautious\" view of the miraculous in the church today. This term is deliberately used by Robert L. Saucy in the book \"Are Miraculous Gifts for Today?\". Don Carson is another example of a Christian teacher who has put forward what has been described as an \"open-but-cautious\" view. In dealing with the claims of Warfield, particularly \"Warfield's insistence that miracles ceased\", Carson asserts, \"But this argument stands up only if such miraculous gifts are theologically tied exclusively to a role of attestation; and that is demonstrably not so.\" However, while affirming that he does not expect healing to happen today, Carson is critical of aspects of the faith healing movement, \"Another issue is that of immense abuses in healing practises... The most common form of abuse is the view that since all illness is directly or indirectly attributable to the devil and his works, and since Christ by his cross has defeated the devil, and by his Spirit has given us the power to overcome him, healing is the inheritance right of all true Christians who call upon the Lord with genuine faith.\"\nThe second level of theological disagreement with Christian faith healing goes further. Commonly referred to as cessationism, its adherents either claim that faith healing will not happen today at all, or may happen today, but it would be unusual. Richard Gaffin argues for a form of cessationism in an essay alongside Saucy's in the book \"Are Miraculous Gifts for Today\"? In his book \"Perspectives on Pentecost\" Gaffin states of healing and related gifts that \"the conclusion to be drawn is that as listed in 1 Corinthians 12(vv. 9f., 29f.) and encountered throughout the narrative in Acts, these gifts, particularly when exercised regularly by a given individual, are part of the foundational structure of the church... and so have passed out of the life of the church.\" Gaffin qualifies this, however, by saying \"At the same time, however, the sovereign will and power of God today to heal the sick, particularly in response to prayer (see e.g. James 5:14,15), ought to be acknowledged and insisted on.\"\nFraud.\nSkeptics of faith healers point to fraudulent practices either in the healings themselves (such as plants in the audience with fake illnesses), or concurrent with the healing work supposedly taking place and claim that faith healing is a quack practice in which the \"healers\" use well known non-supernatural illusions to exploit credulous people in order to obtain their gratitude, confidence and money. James Randi's \"The Faith Healers\" investigates Christian evangelists such as Peter Popoff, who claimed to heal sick people on stage in front of an audience. Popoff pretended to know private details about participants' lives by receiving radio transmissions from his wife who was off-stage and had gathered information from audience members prior to the show. According to this book, many of the leading modern evangelistic healers have engaged in deception and fraud. The book also questioned how faith healers use funds that were sent to them for specific purposes. Physicist Robert L. Park and doctor and consumer advocate Stephen Barrett have called into question the ethics of some exorbitant fees.\nThere have also been legal controversies. For example, in 1955 at a Jack Coe revival service in Miami, Florida, Coe told the parents of a three-year-old boy that he healed their son who had polio. Coe then told the parents to remove the boy's leg braces. However, their son was not cured of polio and removing the braces left the boy in constant pain. As a result, through the efforts of Joseph L. Lewis, Coe was arrested and charged on February 6, 1956 with practicing medicine without a license, a felony in the state of Florida. A Florida Justice of the Peace dismissed the case on grounds that Florida exempts divine healing from the law. Later that year Coe was diagnosed with bulbar polio, and died a few weeks later at Dallas' Parkland Hospital on December 17, 1956.\nMiracles for sale.\nTV personality Derren Brown produced a show on faith healing entitled \"Miracles for sale\" which arguably exposed the art of faith healing as a scam. In this show, Derren trained a scuba diver trainer picked from the general public to be a faith healer and took him to Texas to successfully deliver a faith healing session to a congregation.\nUnited States law.\nThe 1974 Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (CAPTA) required states to grant religious exemptions to child neglect and child abuse laws in order to receive federal money. The CAPTA amendments of 1996 state:\nThirty-one states have child-abuse religious exemptions. These are Alabama, Alaska, California, Colorado, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Vermont, Virginia, and Wyoming. In six of these states, Arkansas, Idaho, Iowa, Louisiana, Ohio and Virginia, the exemptions extend to murder and manslaughter. Of these, Idaho is the only state accused of having a large number of deaths due to the legislation in recent times. In February 2015, controversy was sparked in Idaho over a bill believed to further reinforce parental rights to deny their children medical care.\nReckless homicide convictions.\nParents have been convicted of child abuse and felony reckless negligent homicide and found responsible for killing their children when they withheld lifesaving medical care and chose only prayers."}
{"id": "11629", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11629", "title": "Furry", "text": "Furry may refer to:"}
{"id": "11631", "revid": "5984052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11631", "title": "Fritz Lang", "text": "Friedrich Christian Anton \"Fritz\" Lang (December 5, 1890 \u2013 August 2, 1976) was an Austrian-German-American filmmaker, screenwriter, and occasional film producer and actor. One of the best-known \"\u00e9migr\u00e9s\" from Germany's school of Expressionism, he was dubbed the \"Master of Darkness\" by the British Film Institute.\nLang's most celebrated films include the groundbreaking futuristic \"Metropolis\" (1927) and the influential \"M\" (1931), a film noir precursor that he made before he moved to the United States. His other major films include \"Dr. Mabuse the Gambler\" (1922), \"Die Nibelungen\" (1924), \"Fury\" (1936), \"You Only Live Once\" (1937), \"Hangmen Also Die!\" (1943), \"The Woman in the Window\" (1944), \"Scarlet Street\" (1945) and \"The Big Heat\" (1953).\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nLang was born in Vienna, as the second son of Anton Lang (1860\u20131940), an architect and construction company manager, and his wife Pauline \"Paula\" Lang ( Schlesinger; 1864\u20131920). He was baptized on December 28, 1890, at the Schottenkirche in Vienna.\nLang's parents were of Moravian descent and practising Catholics. His parents (his mother, born Jewish, converted to Roman Catholicism before Fritz's birth) took their religion seriously and were dedicated to raising Fritz as a Catholic. Lang frequently had Catholic-influenced themes in his films. Late in life, he described himself as \"a born Catholic and very puritan\". Although an atheist, Lang believed that religion was important for teaching ethics.\nAfter finishing school, Lang briefly attended the Technical University of Vienna, where he studied civil engineering and eventually switched to art. He left Vienna in 1910 in order to see the world, traveling throughout Europe and Africa, and later Asia and the Pacific area. In 1913, he studied painting in Paris.\nAt the outbreak of World War I, Lang returned to Vienna and volunteered for military service in the Austrian army and fought in Russia and Romania, where he was wounded four times and lost sight in his right eye, the first of many vision issues he would face in his lifetime. While recovering from his injuries and shell shock in 1916, he wrote some scenarios and ideas for films. He was discharged from the army with the rank of lieutenant in 1918 and did some acting in the Viennese theater circuit for a short time before being hired as a writer at Decla Film, Erich Pommer's Berlin-based production company. In 1919, he married for the first time to Lisa Rosenthal, a Jewish girl; in 1921, she died under mysterious circumstances, dying of a single gunshot wound deemed to have been fired by a sidearm weapon from World War I. \nExpressionist films: the Weimar years (1918\u20131933).\nLang's writing stint was brief, as he soon started to work as a director at the German film studio UFA, and later Nero-Film, just as the Expressionist movement was building. In this first phase of his career, Lang alternated between films such as \"Der M\u00fcde Tod\" (\"The Weary Death\") and popular thrillers such as \"Die Spinnen\" (\"The Spiders\"), combining popular genres with Expressionist techniques to create an unprecedented synthesis of popular entertainment with art cinema.\nIn 1920, Lang met his future wife, the writer Thea von Harbou. She and Lang co-wrote all of his movies from 1921 through 1933, including \"Dr. Mabuse, der Spieler\" (\"Dr. Mabuse the Gambler\"; 1922), which ran for over four hours in two parts in the original version and was the first in the Dr. Mabuse trilogy, the five-hour \"\" (1924), the dystopian film \"Metropolis\" (1927), and the science fiction film \"Woman in the Moon\" (1929). \"Metropolis\" went far over budget and nearly destroyed UFA, which was bought by right-wing businessman and politician Alfred Hugenberg. It was a financial flop, as were his last silent films \"Spies\" (1928) and \"Woman in the Moon\", produced by Lang's own company.\nIn 1931, independent producer Seymour Nebenzahl hired Lang to direct \"M\" for Nero-Film. His first \"talking\" picture, considered by many film scholars to be a masterpiece of the early sound era, \"M\" is a disturbing story of a child murderer (Peter Lorre in his first starring role) who is hunted down and brought to rough justice by Berlin's criminal underworld. \"M\" remains a powerful work; it was remade in 1951 by Joseph Losey, but this version had little impact on audiences, and has become harder to see than the original film.\nDuring the climactic final scene in \"M\", Lang allegedly threw Peter Lorre down a flight of stairs in order to give more authenticity to Lorre's battered look. Lang, who was known for being hard to work with, epitomized the stereotype of the tyrannical Germanic film director, a type embodied also by Erich von Stroheim and Otto Preminger; Lang wore a monocle adding to the stereotype.\nIn the films of his German period, Lang produced a coherent oeuvre that established the characteristics later attributed to film noir, with its recurring themes of psychological conflict, paranoia, fate and moral ambiguity.\nAt the end of 1932, Lang started filming \"The Testament of Dr. Mabuse\". Adolf Hitler came to power in January 1933, and by March 30, the new regime banned it as an incitement to public disorder. \"Testament\" is sometimes deemed an anti-Nazi film, as Lang had put phrases used by the Nazis into the mouth of the title character. A screening of the film was cancelled by Joseph Goebbels, and it was later banned by the Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda. In banning the film, Goebbels stated that the film \"showed that an extremely dedicated group of people are perfectly capable of overthrowing any state with violence\", and that the film posed a threat to public health and safety.\nLang was worried about the advent of the Nazi regime, partly because of his Jewish heritage, whereas his wife and co-screenwriter Thea von Harbou had started to sympathize with the Nazis in the early 1930s and, in 1940, joined the NSDAP. They soon divorced. Lang's fears would be realized following his departure from Austria, as under the Nuremberg Laws he would be identified as a part-Jew even though his mother was a converted Roman Catholic, and he was raised as such.\nEmigration.\nAccording to Lang, propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels called Lang to his offices to inform him \u2013 apologetically \u2013 that \"The Testament of Dr Mabuse\" was being banned but, nevertheless, he was so impressed by Lang's abilities as a filmmaker (especially \"Metropolis\"), that he offered Lang the position of head of German film studio UFA. Lang said it was during that meeting he had decided to leave for Paris \u2013 but that the banks had closed by the time the meeting was over. Lang claimed that, after selling his wife's jewelry, he fled by train to Paris that very evening, leaving most of his money and personal possessions behind. However, his passport of the time showed that he traveled to and from Germany a few times during 1933.\nLang left Berlin for good on July 31, 1933, four months after his meeting with Goebbels and his initial departure. He moved to Paris, and divorced Thea von Harbou, who stayed behind, late in 1933.\nIn Paris, Lang filmed a version of Ferenc Moln\u00e1r's \"Liliom\", starring Charles Boyer. That was Lang's only film in French (excluding the French version of \"Testament\"). He then moved to the United States.\nHollywood career (1936\u20131957).\nLang made twenty-three features in his 20-year American career, working in a variety of genres at every major studio in Hollywood, and occasionally producing his films as an independent. He became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1939.\nSigning first with MGM Studios, Lang's crime drama \"Fury\" (1936) saw Spencer Tracy cast as a man who is wrongly accused of a crime and nearly killed when a lynch mob sets fire to the jail where he is awaiting trial. However, in \"Fury\", he was not allowed to represent black victims in a lynching scenario or to criticize racism. By the time \"Fury\" was released, Lang had been involved in the creation of the Hollywood Anti-Nazi League, working with Otto Katz, a Czech who was a Comintern spy. He made four films with an explicitly anti-Nazi theme, \"Man Hunt\" (1941), \"Hangmen Also Die!\" (1943), \"Ministry of Fear\" (1944) and \"Cloak and Dagger\" (1946). \"Man Hunt\", wrote Dave Kehr in 2009, \"may be the best\" of the \"many interventionist films produced by the Hollywood studios before Pearl Harbor\" as it is \"clean and concentrated, elegant and precise, pointed without being preachy.\"\nHis American films were often compared unfavorably to his earlier works by contemporary critics, although the restrained Expressionism of these films is now seen as integral to the emergence and evolution of American genre cinema, film noir in particular. \"Scarlet Street\" (1945), one of his films featuring Edward G. Robinson and Joan Bennett, is considered a central film in the genre.\nOne of Lang's most praised \"films noir\" is the police drama \"The Big Heat\" (1953), known for its uncompromising brutality, especially for a scene in which Lee Marvin throws scalding coffee on Gloria Grahame's face. As Lang's visual style simplified, in part due to the constraints of the Hollywood studio system, his worldview became increasingly pessimistic, culminating in the cold, geometric style of his last American films, \"While the City Sleeps\" (1956) and \"Beyond a Reasonable Doubt\" (1956).\nLast films (1959\u20131963).\nFinding it difficult to find congenial production conditions and backers in Hollywood, particularly as his health declined with age, Lang contemplated retirement. The German producer Artur Brauner had expressed interest in remaking \"The Indian Tomb\" (from an original story by Thea von Harbou, that Lang had developed in the 1920s which had ultimately been directed by Joe May), so Lang returned to Germany to make his \"Indian Epic\" (consisting of \"The Tiger of Eschnapur\" and \"The Indian Tomb\").\nFollowing the production, Brauner was preparing for a remake of \"The Testament of Dr. Mabuse\" when Lang approached him with the idea of adding a new original film to the series. The result was \"The Thousand Eyes of Dr. Mabuse\" (1960), whose success led to a series of new Mabuse films, which were produced by Brauner (including the remake of \"The Testament of Dr. Mabuse\"), though Lang did not direct any of the sequels. Lang was approaching blindness during the production, and it was his final project as director.\nIn 1963, he appeared as himself in Jean-Luc Godard's film \"Contempt\".\nDeath and legacy.\nOn February 8, 1960, Lang received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions to the motion picture industry, located at 1600 Vine Street.\nLang died from a stroke in 1976 and was interred in the Forest Lawn \u2013 Hollywood Hills Cemetery in the Hollywood Hills of Los Angeles.\nWhile his career had ended without fanfare, Lang's American and later German works were championed by the critics of the \"Cahiers du cin\u00e9ma\", such as Fran\u00e7ois Truffaut and Jacques Rivette. Truffaut wrote that Lang, especially in his American career, was greatly underappreciated by \"cinema historians and critics\" who \"deny him any genius when he 'signs' spy movies ... war movies ... or simple thrillers.\" Filmmakers that were influenced by his work include Jacques Rivette, William Friedkin, Steven Spielberg, Christopher Nolan, Luis Bu\u00f1uel, Osamu Tezuka, Alfred Hitchcock, Jean-Luc Godard and Stanley Kubrick.\nLang is credited with launching or developing many different genres of film. Phillip French of \"The Observer\" believed that Lang helped craft the \"entertainment war flick\" and that his interpretation of the story of Bonnie and Clyde \"helped launch the Hollywood film noir\". Geoff Andrew of the British Film Institute believed he set the \"blueprint for the serial killer movie\" through \"M\".\nPreservation.\nThe Academy Film Archive has preserved a number of Lang's films, including \"Human Desire\" and \"Man Hunt\"."}
{"id": "11632", "revid": "41212489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11632", "title": "Food and Drug Administration", "text": "The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA or USFDA) is a federal agency of the Department of Health and Human Services. The FDA is responsible for protecting and promoting public health through the control and supervision of food safety, tobacco products, dietary supplements, prescription and over-the-counter pharmaceutical drugs (medications), vaccines, biopharmaceuticals, blood transfusions, medical devices, electromagnetic radiation emitting devices (ERED), cosmetics, animal foods &amp; feed and veterinary products.\nThe FDA's primary focus is enforcement of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&amp;C), but the agency also enforces other laws, notably Section 361 of the Public Health Service Act, as well as associated regulations. Much of this regulatory-enforcement work is not directly related to food or drugs, but involves such things as regulating lasers, cellular phones, and condoms, as well as control of disease in contexts varying from household pets to human sperm donated for use in assisted reproduction.\nThe FDA is led by the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate. The Commissioner reports to the Secretary of Health and Human Services. Janet Woodcock is the acting commissioner, .\nThe FDA has its headquarters in unincorporated White Oak, Maryland. The agency also has 223 field offices and 13 laboratories located throughout the 50 states, the United States Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico. In 2008, the FDA began to post employees to foreign countries, including China, India, Costa Rica, Chile, Belgium, and the United Kingdom.\nLocation.\nHeadquarters.\nFDA headquarters facilities are currently located in Montgomery County and Prince George's County, Maryland.\nWhite Oak Federal Research Center.\nSince 1990, the FDA has had employees and facilities on of the White Oak Federal Research Center in the White Oak area of Silver Spring, Maryland. In 2001, the General Services Administration (GSA) began new construction on the campus to consolidate the FDA's 25 existing operations in the Washington metropolitan area, its headquarters in Rockville, and several fragmented office buildings. The first building, the Life Sciences Laboratory, was dedicated and opened with 104 employees in December 2003. As of December 2018, the FDA campus has a population of 10,987 employees housed in approximately of space, divided into ten office and four laboratory buildings. The campus houses the Office of the Commissioner (OC), the Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA),\u00a0 the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH), the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) and offices for the Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM).\nWith the passing of the FDA Reauthorization Act of 2017, the FDA is projecting a 64% increase in employees to 18,000 over the next 15 years, and would like to add approximately of office and special use space to their existing facilities. The National Capital Planning Commission approved a new master plan for this expansion in December 2018, and construction is expected to be completed by 2035, dependent on GSA appropriations.\nField locations.\nOffice of Regulatory Affairs.\nThe Office of Regulatory Affairs is considered the agency's \"eyes and ears,\" conducting the vast majority of the FDA's work in the field. Its employees, known as Consumer Safety Officers, or more commonly known simply as investigators, inspect production and warehousing facilities, investigate complaints, illnesses, or outbreaks, and review documentation in the case of medical devices, drugs, biological products, and other items where it may be difficult to conduct a physical examination or take a physical sample of the product. The Office of Regulatory Affairs is divided into five regions, which are further divided into 20 districts. Districts are based roughly on the geographic divisions of the Federal court system. Each district comprises a main district office and a number of Resident Posts, which are FDA remote offices that serve a particular geographic area. ORA also includes the Agency's network of regulatory laboratories, which analyze any physical samples taken. Though samples are usually food-related, some laboratories are equipped to analyze drugs, cosmetics, and radiation-emitting devices.\nOffice of Criminal Investigations.\nThe Office of Criminal Investigations was established in 1991 to investigate criminal cases. To do so, OCI employs approximately 200 Special Agents nationwide who, unlike ORA Investigators, are armed, have badges, and do not focus on technical aspects of the regulated industries. Rather, OCI agents pursue and develop cases when individuals and companies commit criminal actions, such as fraudulent claims or knowingly and willfully shipping known adulterated goods in interstate commerce. In many cases, OCI pursues cases involving violations of Title 18 of the United States Code (e.g., conspiracy, false statements, wire fraud, mail fraud), in addition to prohibited acts as defined in Chapter III of the FD&amp;C Act. OCI Special Agents often come from other criminal investigations backgrounds, and frequently work closely with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Assistant Attorney General, and even Interpol. OCI receives cases from a variety of sources\u2014including ORA, local agencies, and the FBI, and works with ORA Investigators to help develop the technical and science-based aspects of a case.\nOther locations.\nThe FDA has a number of field offices across the United States, in addition to international locations in China, India, Europe, the Middle East, and Latin America.\nScope and funding.\nThe FDA regulates more than US$ worth of consumer goods, about 25% of consumer expenditures in the United States. This includes $466 billion in food sales, $275 billion in drugs, $60 billion in cosmetics and $18 billion in vitamin supplements. Much of these expenditures are for goods imported into the United States; the FDA is responsible for monitoring imports.\nThe FDA's federal budget request for fiscal year (FY) 2012 totaled $4.36 billion, while the proposed 2014 budget is $4.7 billion. About $2 billion of this budget is generated by user fees. Pharmaceutical firms pay the majority of these fees, which are used to expedite drug reviews. The FDA's federal budget request for fiscal year (FY) 2008 (October 2007 through September 2008) totaled $2.1 billion, a $105.8 million increase from what it received for fiscal year 2007.\nIn February 2008, the FDA announced that the Bush Administration's FY 2009 budget request for the agency was just under $2.4 billion: $1.77 billion in budget authority (federal funding) and $628 million in user fees. The requested budget authority was an increase of $50.7 million more than the FY 2008 funding \u2013 about a three percent increase. In June 2008, Congress gave the agency an emergency appropriation of $150 million for FY 2008 and another $150 million.\nRegulatory programs.\nEmergency approvals (EUA).\nEmergency Use Authorization (EUA) is a mechanism that was created to facilitate the availability and use of medical countermeasures, including vaccines, during public health emergencies such as the current COVID-19 pandemic.\nRegulations.\nThe programs for safety regulation vary widely by the type of product, its potential risks, and the regulatory powers granted to the agency. For example, the FDA regulates almost every facet of prescription drugs, including testing, manufacturing, labeling, advertising, marketing, efficacy, and safety\u2014yet FDA regulation of cosmetics focuses primarily on labeling and safety. The FDA regulates most products with a set of published standards enforced by a modest number of facility inspections. Inspection observations are documented on Form 483.\nIn June 2018, the FDA released a statement regarding new guidelines to help food and drug manufacturers \"implement protections against potential attacks on the U.S. food supply\". One of the new guidelines includes the Intentional Adulteration (IA) rule, which requires strategies and procedures by the food industry to reduce the risk of compromise in facilities and processes that are significantly vulnerable.\nThe FDA also uses tactics of regulatory shaming, mainly through online publication of non-compliance, warning letters, and \"shaming lists.\" Regulation by shaming harnesses firms' sensitivity to reputational damage. For example, in 2018, the agency published an online \"black list,\" in which it named dozens of branded drug companies that are supposedly using unlawful or unethical means to attempt to impede competition from generic drug companies.\nThe FDA frequently works with other federal agencies, including the Department of Agriculture, the Drug Enforcement Administration, Customs and Border Protection, and the Consumer Product Safety Commission. They also often work with local and state government agencies in performing regulatory inspections and enforcement actions.\nFood and dietary supplements.\nThe regulation of food and dietary supplements by the Food and Drug Administration is governed by various statutes enacted by the United States Congress and interpreted by the FDA. Pursuant to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and accompanying legislation, the FDA has authority to oversee the quality of substances sold as food in the United States, and to monitor claims made in the labeling of both the composition and the health benefits of foods.\nThe FDA subdivides substances that it regulates as food into various categories\u2014including foods, food additives, added substances (man-made substances that are not intentionally introduced into food, but nevertheless end up in it), and dietary supplements. Dietary supplements or dietary ingredients include vitamins, minerals, herbs, amino acids, and. enzymes. Specific standards the FDA exercises differ from one category to the next. Furthermore, legislation had granted the FDA a variety of means to address violations of standards for a given substance category.\nUnder the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994 (DSHEA), the FDA is responsible for ensuring that manufacturers and distributors of dietary supplements and dietary ingredients meet the current requirements. These manufacturers and distributors are not allowed to advertise their products in an adulterated way, and they are responsible for evaluating the safety and labeling of their product.\nThe FDA has a \u201cDietary Supplement Ingredient Advisory List\u201d that includes ingredients that sometimes appear on dietary supplements but need further evaluation further. An ingredient is added to this list when it is excluded from use in a dietary supplement, does not appear to be an approved food additive or recognized as safe, and/or is subjected to the requirement for pre-market notification without having a satisfied requirement.\n\"FDA-Approved\" vs. \"FDA-Accepted in Food Processing\".\nThe FDA does not approve applied coatings used in the food processing industry. There is no review process to approve the composition of nonstick coatings; nor does the FDA inspect or test these materials. Through their governing of processes, however, the FDA does have a set of regulations that cover the formulation, manufacturing, and use of nonstick coatings. Hence, materials like Polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon) are not, and cannot be, considered as FDA Approved, rather, they are \"FDA Compliant\" or \"FDA Acceptable\".\nMedical countermeasures (MCMs).\nMedical countermeasures (MCMs) are products such as biologics and pharmaceutical drugs that can protect from or treat the health effects of a chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear (CBRN) attack. MCMs can also be used for prevention and diagnosis of symptoms associated with CBRN attacks or threats. The FDA runs a program called the \"FDA Medical Countermeasures Initiative\" (MCMi), with programs funded by the federal government. It helps support \"partner\" agencies and organisations prepare for public health emergencies that could require MCMs.\nMedications.\nThe Center for Drug Evaluation and Research uses different requirements for the three main drug product types: new drugs, generic drugs, and over-the-counter drugs. A drug is considered \"new\" if it is made by a different manufacturer, uses different excipients or inactive ingredients, is used for a different purpose, or undergoes any substantial change. The most rigorous requirements apply to \"new molecular entities\": drugs that are not based on existing medications.\nNew medications.\nNew drugs receive extensive scrutiny before FDA approval in a process called a new drug application (NDA). Under the Trump administration, the agency has worked to make the drug-approval process go faster. Critics, however, argue that the FDA standards are not sufficiently rigorous, allowing unsafe or ineffective drugs to be approved. New drugs are available only by prescription by default. A change to over-the-counter (OTC) status is a separate process, and the drug must be approved through an NDA first. A drug that is approved is said to be \"safe and effective when used as directed\".\nVery rare limited exceptions to this multi-step process involving animal testing and controlled clinical trials can be granted out of compassionate use protocols. This was the case during the 2015 Ebola epidemic with the use, by prescription and authorization, of ZMapp and other experimental treatments, and for new drugs that can be used to treat debilitating and/or very rare conditions for which no existing remedies or drugs are satisfactory, or where there has not been an advance in a long period of time. The studies are progressively longer, gradually adding more individuals as they progress from stage I to stage III, normally over a period of years, and normally involve drug companies, the government and its laboratories, and often medical schools and hospitals and clinics. However, any exceptions to the aforementioned process are subject to strict review and scrutiny and conditions, and are only given if a substantial amount of research and at least some preliminary human testing has shown that they are believed to be somewhat safe and possibly effective.\nAdvertising and promotion.\nThe FDA's Office of Prescription Drug Promotion reviews and regulates prescription drug advertising and promotion through surveillance activities and issuance of enforcement letters to pharmaceutical manufacturers. Advertising and promotion for over-the-counter drugs is regulated by the Federal Trade Commission. The FDA also empowers third-party enforcer-firms to engage in some regulatory oversight, e.g. the FDA expects pharmaceutical companies to make sure that third-party suppliers and labs abide by the agency's health and safety guidelines.\nThe drug advertising regulation contains two broad requirements: (1) a company may advertise or promote a drug only for the specific indication or medical use for which it was approved by FDA. Also, an advertisement must contain a \"fair balance\" between the benefits and the risks (side effects) of a drug.\nThe term off-label refers to drug usage for indications other than those approved by the FDA.\nPost-market safety surveillance.\nAfter NDA approval, the sponsor must then review and report to the FDA every single patient adverse drug experience it learns of. They must report unexpected serious and fatal adverse drug events within 15 days, and other events on a quarterly basis. The FDA also receives directly adverse drug event reports through its MedWatch program. These reports are called \"spontaneous reports\" because reporting by consumers and health professionals is voluntary.\nWhile this remains the primary tool of post-market safety surveillance, FDA requirements for post-marketing risk management are increasing. As a condition of approval, a sponsor may be required to conduct additional clinical trials, called Phase IV trials. In some cases, the FDA requires risk management plans called Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies (REMS) for some drugs that require actions to be taken to ensure that the drug is used safely. For example, thalidomide can cause birth defects, but has uses that outweigh the risks if men and women taking the drugs do not conceive a child; a REMS program for thalidomide mandates an auditable process to ensure that people taking the drug take action to avoid pregnancy; many opioid drugs have REMS programs to avoid addiction and diversion of drugs. The drug isotretinoin has a REMS program called iPLEDGE.\nGeneric drugs.\nGeneric drugs are chemical and therapeutic equivalents of name-brand drugs whose patents have expired. Approved generic drugs should have the same dosage, safety, effectiveness, strength, stability, and quality, as well as route of administration. In general, they are less expensive than their name brand counterparts, are manufactured and marketed by rival companies and, in the 1990s, accounted for about a third of all prescriptions written in the United States. For a pharmaceutical company to gain approval to produce a generic drug, the FDA requires scientific evidence that the generic drug is interchangeable with or therapeutically equivalent to the originally approved drug. This is called an Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA). As of 2012, 80% of all FDA approved drugs are available in generic form.\nGeneric drug scandal.\nIn 1989, a major scandal erupted involving the procedures used by the FDA to approve generic drugs for sale to the public. Charges of corruption in generic drug approval first emerged in 1988 during the course of an extensive congressional investigation into the FDA. The oversight subcommittee of the United States House Energy and Commerce Committee resulted from a complaint brought against the FDA by Mylan Laboratories Inc. of Pittsburgh. When its application to manufacture generics were subjected to repeated delays by the FDA, Mylan, convinced that it was being discriminated against, soon began its own private investigation of the agency in 1987. Mylan eventually filed suit against two former FDA employees and four drug-manufacturing companies, charging that corruption within the federal agency resulted in racketeering and in violations of antitrust law. \"The order in which new generic drugs were approved was set by the FDA employees even before drug manufacturers submitted applications\" and, according to Mylan, this illegal procedure was followed to give preferential treatment to certain companies. During the summer of 1989, three FDA officials (Charles Y. Chang, David J. Brancato, Walter Kletch) pleaded guilty to criminal charges of accepting bribes from generic drugs makers, and two companies (Par Pharmaceutical and its subsidiary Quad Pharmaceuticals) pleaded guilty to giving bribes.\nFurthermore, it was discovered that several manufacturers had falsified data submitted in seeking FDA authorization to market certain generic drugs. Vitarine Pharmaceuticals of New York, which sought approval of a generic version of the drug Dyazide, a medication for high blood pressure, submitted Dyazide, rather than its generic version, for the FDA tests. In April 1989, the FDA investigated 11 manufacturers for irregularities; and later brought that number up to 13. Dozens of drugs were eventually suspended or recalled by manufacturers. In the early 1990s, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission filed securities fraud charges against the Bolar Pharmaceutical Company, a major generic manufacturer based in Long Island, New York.\nOver-the-counter drugs.\nOver-the-counter (OTC) are drugs like aspirin that do not require a doctor's prescription. The FDA has a list of approximately 800 such approved ingredients that are combined in various ways to create more than 100,000 OTC drug products. Many OTC drug ingredients had been previously approved prescription drugs now deemed safe enough for use without a medical practitioner's supervision like ibuprofen.\nEbola treatment.\nIn 2014, the FDA added an Ebola treatment being developed by Canadian pharmaceutical company Tekmira to the Fast Track program, but halted the phase 1 trials in July pending the receipt of more information about how the drug works. This was widely viewed as increasingly important in the face of a major outbreak of the disease in West Africa that began in late March 2014 and ended in June 2016.\nCoronavirus (COVID-19) testing.\nDuring the coronavirus pandemic, FDA granted emergency use authorization for personal protective equipment (PPE), in vitro diagnostic equipment, ventilators and other medical devices.\nOn March 18, FDA inspectors postponed most foreign facility inspections and all domestic routine surveillance facility inspections. In contrast, the USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) continued inspections of meatpacking plants, which resulted in 145 FSIS field employees who tested positive for COVID-19, and three who died.\nVaccines, blood and tissue products, and biotechnology.\nThe Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research is the branch of the FDA responsible for ensuring the safety and efficacy of biological therapeutic agents. These include blood and blood products, vaccines, allergenics, cell and tissue-based products, and gene therapy products. New biologics are required to go through a premarket approval process called a Biologics License Application (BLA), similar to that for drugs.\nThe original authority for government regulation of biological products was established by the 1902 Biologics Control Act, with additional authority established by the 1944 Public Health Service Act. Along with these Acts, the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act applies to all biologic products, as well. Originally, the entity responsible for regulation of biological products resided under the National Institutes of Health; this authority was transferred to the FDA in 1972.\nMedical and radiation-emitting devices.\nThe Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) is the branch of the FDA responsible for the premarket approval of all medical devices, as well as overseeing the manufacturing, performance and safety of these devices. The definition of a medical device is given in the FD&amp;C Act, and it includes products from the simple toothbrush to complex devices such as implantable neurostimulators. CDRH also oversees the safety performance of non-medical devices that emit certain types of electromagnetic radiation. Examples of CDRH-regulated devices include cellular phones, airport baggage screening equipment, television receivers, microwave ovens, tanning booths, and laser products.\nCDRH regulatory powers include the authority to require certain technical reports from the manufacturers or importers of regulated products, to require that radiation-emitting products meet mandatory safety performance standards, to declare regulated products defective, and to order the recall of defective or noncompliant products. CDRH also conducts limited amounts of direct product testing.\n\"FDA-Cleared\" vs \"FDA-Approved\".\nClearance requests are required for medical devices that prove they are \"substantially equivalent\" to the predicate devices already on the market. Approved requests are for items that are new or substantially different and need to demonstrate \"safety and efficacy\", for example they may be inspected for safety in case of new toxic hazards. Both aspects need to be proved or provided by the submitter to ensure proper procedures are followed.\nCosmetics.\nCosmetics are regulated by the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, the same branch of the FDA that regulates food. Cosmetic products are not, in general, subject to premarket approval by the FDA unless they make \"structure or function claims\" that make them into drugs (see Cosmeceutical). However, all color additives must be specifically FDA approved before manufacturers can include them in cosmetic products sold in the U.S. The FDA regulates cosmetics labeling, and cosmetics that have not been safety tested must bear a warning to that effect.\nAccording to the industry advocacy group the American Council on Science and Health, though the cosmetic industry is predominantly responsible in ensuring the safety of its products, the FDA also has the power to intervene when necessary to protect the public but in general does not require pre-market approval or testing. The ACSH says that companies are required to place a warning note on their products if they have not been tested and that experts in cosmetic ingredient reviews also play a role in monitoring safety through influence on the use of ingredients, but also lack legal authority. According to the ACSH, overall the organization has reviewed about 1,200 ingredients and has suggested that several hundred be restricted, but there is no standard or systemic method for reviewing chemicals for safety and a clear definition of what is meant by 'safety' so that all chemicals are tested on the same basis.\nVeterinary products.\nThe Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM) is a center of the FDA that regulates food additives and drugs that are given to animals. CVM regulates animal drugs, animal food including pet animal, and animal medical devices. The FDA's requirements to prevent the spread of bovine spongiform encephalopathy are also administered by CVM through inspections of feed manufacturers. CVM does not regulate vaccines for animals; these are handled by the United States Department of Agriculture.\nTobacco products.\nThe FDA regulates tobacco products with authority established by the 2009 Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act. This Act requires color warnings on cigarette packages and printed advertising, and text warnings from the U.S. Surgeon General.\nThe nine new graphic warning labels were announced by the FDA in June 2011 and were scheduled to be required to appear on packaging by September 2012. The implementation date is uncertain, due to ongoing proceedings in the case of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. v. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. R.J. Reynolds, Lorillard, Commonwealth Brands, Liggett Group and Santa Fe Natural Tobacco Company have filed suit in Washington, D.C. federal court claiming that the graphic labels are an unconstitutional way of forcing tobacco companies to engage in anti-smoking advocacy on the government's behalf.\nA First Amendment lawyer, Floyd Abrams, is representing the tobacco companies in the case, contending requiring graphic warning labels on a lawful product cannot withstand constitutional scrutiny. The Association of National Advertisers and the American Advertising Federation have also filed a brief in the suit, arguing that the labels infringe on commercial free speech and could lead to further government intrusion if left unchallenged. In November 2011, Federal judge Richard Leon of the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia temporarily halted the new labels, likely delaying the requirement that tobacco companies display the labels. The U.S. Supreme Court ultimately could decide the matter.\nIn July 2017, the FDA announced a plan that would reduce the current levels of nicotine permitted in tobacco cigarettes.\nRegulation of living organisms.\nWith acceptance of premarket notification 510(k) k033391 in January 2004, the FDA granted Dr. Ronald Sherman permission to produce and market medical maggots for use in humans or other animals as a prescription medical device. Medical maggots represent the first living organism allowed by the Food and Drug Administration for production and marketing as a prescription medical device.\nIn June 2004, the FDA cleared \"Hirudo medicinalis\" (medicinal leeches) as the second living organism to be used as a medical device.\nThe FDA also requires milk to be pasteurized to remove bacteria.\nInternational Cooperation.\nIn February 2011, President Barack Obama and Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper issued a \"Declaration on a Shared Vision for Perimeter Security and Economic Competitiveness\" and announced the creation of the Canada-United States Regulatory Cooperation Council (RCC) \"to increase regulatory transparency and coordination between the two countries.\u201d\nUnder the RCC mandate, the FDA and Health Canada undertook a \"first of its kind\" initiative by selecting \"as its first area of alignment common cold indications for certain over-the-counter antihistamine ingredients (GC 2013-01-10).\"\nA more recent example of the FDA's international work is their 2018 cooperation with regulatory and law-enforcement agencies worldwide through Interpol as part of Operation Pangea XI. The FDA targeted 465 websites that illegally sold potentially dangerous, unapproved versions of opioid, oncology, and antiviral prescription drugs to U.S. consumers. The agency focused on transaction laundering schemes in order to uncover the complex online drug network.\nScience and research programs.\nThe FDA carries out research and development activities to develop technology and standards that support its regulatory role, with the objective of resolving scientific and technical challenges before they become impediments. The FDA's research efforts include the areas of biologics, medical devices, drugs, women's health, toxicology, food safety and applied nutrition, and veterinary medicine.\nData management.\nThe FDA has collected a large amount of data through the decades. The OpenFDA project was created to enable easy access of the data for the public and was officially launched in June 2014.\nHistory.\nUp until the 20th century, there were few federal laws regulating the contents and sale of domestically produced food and pharmaceuticals, with one exception being the short-lived Vaccine Act of 1813. The history of the FDA can be traced to the latter part of the 19th century and the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Division of Chemistry, later its Bureau of Chemistry. Under Harvey Washington Wiley, appointed chief chemist in 1883, the Division began conducting research into the adulteration and misbranding of food and drugs on the American market. Wiley's advocacy came at a time when the public had become aroused to hazards in the marketplace by muckraking journalists like Upton Sinclair, and became part of a general trend for increased federal regulations in matters pertinent to public safety during the Progressive Era. The Biologics Control Act of 1902 was put in place after a diphtheria antitoxin\u2014derived from tetanus-contaminated serum\u2014was used to produce a vaccine that caused the deaths of thirteen children in St. Louis, Missouri. The serum was originally collected from a horse name Jim who had contracted tetanus.\nIn June 1906, President Theodore Roosevelt signed into law the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906, also known as the \"Wiley Act\" after its chief advocate. The Act prohibited, under penalty of seizure of goods, the interstate transport of food that had been \"adulterated\". The Act applied similar penalties to the interstate marketing of \"adulterated\" drugs, in which the \"standard of strength, quality, or purity\" of the active ingredient was not either stated clearly on the label or listed in the \"United States Pharmacopeia\" or the \"National Formulary\".\nThe responsibility for examining food and drugs for such \"adulteration\" or \"misbranding\" was given to Wiley's USDA Bureau of Chemistry. Wiley used these new regulatory powers to pursue an aggressive campaign against the manufacturers of foods with chemical additives, but the Chemistry Bureau's authority was soon checked by judicial decisions, which narrowly defined the bureau's powers and set high standards for proof of fraudulent intent. In 1927, the Bureau of Chemistry's regulatory powers were reorganized under a new USDA body, the Food, Drug, and Insecticide Administration. This name was shortened to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) three years later.\nBy the 1930s, muckraking journalists, consumer protection organizations, and federal regulators began mounting a campaign for stronger regulatory authority by publicizing a list of injurious products that had been ruled permissible under the 1906 law, including radioactive beverages, the mascara Lash lure which caused blindness, and worthless \"cures\" for diabetes and tuberculosis. The resulting proposed law was unable to get through the Congress of the United States for five years, but was rapidly enacted into law following the public outcry over the 1937 Elixir Sulfanilamide tragedy, in which over 100 people died after using a drug formulated with a toxic, untested solvent.\nPresident Franklin Delano Roosevelt signed the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act into law on June 24, 1938. The new law significantly increased federal regulatory authority over drugs by mandating a pre-market review of the safety of all new drugs, as well as banning false therapeutic claims in drug labeling without requiring that the FDA prove fraudulent intent. Soon after passage of the 1938 Act, the FDA began to designate certain drugs as safe for use only under the supervision of a medical professional, and the category of \"prescription-only\" drugs was securely codified into law by the Durham-Humphrey Amendment in 1951. These developments confirmed extensive powers for the FDA to enforce post-marketing recalls of ineffective drugs.\nOutside of the US, the drug thalidomide was marketed for the relief of general nausea and morning sickness, but caused birth defects and even the death of thousands of babies when taken during pregnancy. American mothers were largely unaffected as Dr. Frances Oldham Kelsey of the FDA refused to authorize the medication for market. In 1962, the Kefauver-Harris Amendment to the FD&amp;C Act was passed, which represented a \"revolution\" in FDA regulatory authority. The most important change was the requirement that all new drug applications demonstrate \"substantial evidence\" of the drug's efficacy for a marketed indication, in addition to the existing requirement for pre-marketing demonstration of safety. This marked the start of the FDA approval process in its modern form.\nThese reforms had the effect of increasing the time, and the difficulty, required to bring a drug to market. One of the most important statutes in establishing the modern American pharmaceutical market was the 1984 Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act, more commonly known as the \"Hatch-Waxman Act\" after its chief sponsors. The act extended the patent exclusivity terms of new drugs, and tied those extensions, in part, to the length of the FDA approval process for each individual drug. For generic manufacturers, the Act created a new approval mechanism, the Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA), in which the generic drug manufacturer need only demonstrate that their generic formulation has the same active ingredient, route of administration, dosage form, strength, and pharmacokinetic properties (\"bioequivalence\") as the corresponding brand-name drug. This Act has been credited with, in essence, creating the modern generic drug industry.\nConcerns about the length of the drug approval process were brought to the fore early in the AIDS epidemic. In the mid- and late 1980s, ACT-UP and other HIV activist organizations accused the FDA of unnecessarily delaying the approval of medications to fight HIV and opportunistic infections. Partly in response to these criticisms, the FDA issued new rules to expedite approval of drugs for life-threatening diseases, and expanded pre-approval access to drugs for patients with limited treatment options. All of the initial drugs approved for the treatment of HIV/AIDS were approved through these accelerated approval mechanisms. Frank Young, then commissioner of the FDA, was behind the Action Plan Phase II, established in August 1987 for quicker approval of AIDS medication.\nIn two instances, state governments have sought to legalize drugs that the FDA has not approved. Under the theory that federal law, passed pursuant to Constitutional authority, overrules conflicting state laws, federal authorities still claim the authority to seize, arrest, and prosecute for possession and sales of these substances, even in states where they are legal under state law. The first wave was the legalization by 27 states of laetrile in the late 1970s. This drug was used as a treatment for cancer, but scientific studies both before and after this legislative trend found it to be ineffective. The second wave concerned medical marijuana in the 1990s and 2000s. Though Virginia passed legislation allowing doctors to recommend cannabis for glaucoma or the side effects of chemotherapy, a more widespread trend began in California with the Compassionate Use Act of 1996.\nHistorical first: FDA and Endo Pharmaceutical's Opana ER (2017).\nWhen the FDA requested Endo Pharmaceuticals on June 8, 2017, to remove \"oxymorphone hydrochloride\" from the market, it was the first such request in FDA history.\n21st century reforms.\nCritical Path Initiative.\nThe Critical Path Initiative is the FDA's effort to stimulate and facilitate a national effort to modernize the sciences through which FDA-regulated products are developed, evaluated, and manufactured. The Initiative was launched in March 2004, with the release of a report entitled Innovation/Stagnation: Challenge and Opportunity on the Critical Path to New Medical Products.\nPatients' rights to access unapproved drugs.\nThe Compassionate Investigational New Drug program was created after \"Randall v. U.S.\" ruled in favor of Robert C. Randall in 1978, creating a program for medical marijuana.\nA 2006 court case, \"Abigail Alliance v. von Eschenbach\", would have forced radical changes in FDA regulation of unapproved drugs. The Abigail Alliance argued that the FDA must license drugs for use by terminally ill patients with \"desperate diagnoses,\" after they have completed Phase I testing. The case won an initial appeal in May 2006, but that decision was reversed by a March 2007 rehearing. The US Supreme Court declined to hear the case, and the final decision denied the existence of a right to unapproved medications.\nCritics of the FDA's regulatory power argue that the FDA takes too long to approve drugs that might ease pain and human suffering faster if brought to market sooner. The AIDS crisis created some political efforts to streamline the approval process. However, these limited reforms were targeted for AIDS drugs, not for the broader market. This has led to the call for more robust and enduring reforms that would allow patients, under the care of their doctors, access to drugs that have passed the first round of clinical trials.\nPost-marketing drug safety monitoring.\nThe widely publicized recall of Vioxx, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) now estimated to have contributed to fatal heart attacks in thousands of Americans, played a strong role in driving a new wave of safety reforms at both the FDA rulemaking and statutory levels. Vioxx was approved by the FDA in 1999 and was initially hoped to be safer than previous NSAIDs, due to its reduced risk of intestinal tract bleeding. However, a number of pre- and post-marketing studies suggested that Vioxx might increase the risk of myocardial infarction, and this was conclusively demonstrated by results from the APPROVe trial in 2004.\nFaced with numerous lawsuits, the manufacturer voluntarily withdrew it from the market. The example of Vioxx has been prominent in an ongoing debate over whether new drugs should be evaluated on the basis of their absolute safety, or their safety relative to existing treatments for a given condition. In the wake of the Vioxx recall, there were widespread calls by major newspapers, medical journals, consumer advocacy organizations, lawmakers, and FDA officials for reforms in the FDA's procedures for pre- and post-market drug safety regulation.\nIn 2006, a Congressional committee was appointed by the Institute of Medicine to review pharmaceutical safety regulation in the U.S. and to issue recommendations for improvements. The committee was composed of 16 experts, including leaders in clinical medicine medical research, economics, biostatistics, law, public policy, public health, and the allied health professions, as well as current and former executives from the pharmaceutical, hospital, and health insurance industries. The authors found major deficiencies in the current FDA system for ensuring the safety of drugs on the American market. Overall, the authors called for an increase in the regulatory powers, funding, and independence of the FDA. Some of the committee's recommendations were incorporated into drafts of the PDUFA IV amendment, which was signed into law as the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007.\nAs of 2011, Risk Minimization Action Plans (RiskMAPS) have been created to ensure risks of a drug never outweigh the benefits of that drug within the post-marketing period. This program requires that manufacturers design and implement periodic assessments of their programs' effectiveness. The Risk Minimization Action Plans are set in place depending on the overall level of risk a prescription drug is likely to pose to the public.\nPediatric drug testing.\nPrior to the 1990s, only 20% of all drugs prescribed for children in the United States were tested for safety or efficacy in a pediatric population. This became a major concern of pediatricians as evidence accumulated that the physiological response of children to many drugs differed significantly from those drugs' effects on adults. Children react differently to the drugs because of many reasons, including size, weight, etc. There were several reasons that few medical trials were done with children. For many drugs, children represented such a small proportion of the potential market, that drug manufacturers did not see such testing as cost-effective.\nAlso, because children were thought to be ethically restricted in their ability to give informed consent, there were increased governmental and institutional hurdles to approval of these clinical trials, as well as greater concerns about legal liability. Thus, for decades, most medicines prescribed to children in the U.S. were done so in a non-FDA-approved, \"off-label\" manner, with dosages \"extrapolated\" from adult data through body weight and body-surface-area calculations.\nAn initial attempt by the FDA to address this issue was the 1994 FDA Final Rule on Pediatric Labeling and Extrapolation, which allowed manufacturers to add pediatric labeling information, but required drugs that had not been tested for pediatric safety and efficacy to bear a disclaimer to that effect. However, this rule failed to motivate many drug companies to conduct additional pediatric drug trials. In 1997, the FDA proposed a rule to require pediatric drug trials from the sponsors of New Drug Applications. However, this new rule was successfully preempted in federal court as exceeding the FDA's statutory authority.\nWhile this debate was unfolding, Congress used the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997 to pass incentives that gave pharmaceutical manufacturers a six-month patent term extension on new drugs submitted with pediatric trial data. The Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act of 2007 reauthorized these provisions and allowed the FDA to request NIH-sponsored testing for pediatric drug testing, although these requests are subject to NIH funding constraints. In the Pediatric Research Equity Act of 2003, Congress codified the FDA's authority to mandate manufacturer-sponsored pediatric drug trials for certain drugs as a \"last resort\" if incentives and publicly funded mechanisms proved inadequate.\nPriority review voucher (PRV).\nThe priority review voucher is a provision of the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007, which awards a transferable \"priority review voucher\" to any company that obtains approval for a treatment for a neglected tropical diseases. The system was first proposed by Duke University faculty David Ridley, Henry Grabowski, and Jeffrey Moe in their 2006 \"Health Affairs\" paper: \"Developing Drugs for Developing Countries\". President Obama signed into law the Food and Drug Administration Safety and Innovation Act of 2012 which extended the authorization until 2017.\nRules for generic biologics.\nSince the 1990s, many successful new drugs for the treatment of cancer, autoimmune diseases, and other conditions have been protein-based biotechnology drugs, regulated by the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research. Many of these drugs are extremely expensive; for example, the anti-cancer drug Avastin costs $55,000 for a year of treatment, while the enzyme replacement therapy drug Cerezyme costs $200,000 per year, and must be taken by Gaucher's Disease patients for life.\nBiotechnology drugs do not have the simple, readily verifiable chemical structures of conventional drugs, and are produced through complex, often proprietary, techniques, such as transgenic mammalian cell cultures. Because of these complexities, the 1984 Hatch-Waxman Act did not include biologics in the Abbreviated New Drug Application (ANDA) process. This precluded the possibility of generic drug competition for biotechnology drugs. In February 2007, identical bills were introduced into the House to create an ANDA process for the approval of generic biologics, but were not passed.\nMobile medical applications.\nIn 2013, a guidance was issued to regulate mobile medical applications and protect users from their unintended use. This guidance distinguishes the apps subjected to regulation based on the marketing claims of the apps. Incorporation of the guidelines during the development phase of these apps has been proposed for expedited market entry and clearance.\nCriticisms.\nThe FDA has regulatory oversight over a large array of products that affect the health and life of American citizens. As a result, the FDA's powers and decisions are carefully monitored by several governmental and non-governmental organizations. A $1.8million 2006 Institute of Medicine report on pharmaceutical regulation in the U.S. found major deficiencies in the current FDA system for ensuring the safety of drugs on the American market. Overall, the authors called for an increase in the regulatory powers, funding, and independence of the FDA.\nNine FDA scientists appealed to then president-elect Barack Obama over pressures from management, experienced during the George W. Bush presidency, to manipulate data, including in relation to the review process for medical devices. Characterized as \"corrupted and distorted by current FDA managers, thereby placing the American people at risk,\" these concerns were also highlighted in the 2006 report on the agency as well.\nThe FDA has also been criticized from the opposite viewpoint, as being too tough on industry. According to an analysis published on the website of the libertarian Mercatus Center, many feel the FDA oversteps its regulatory powers, and undermines small business and small farms in favor of large corporations. Three of the FDA restrictions under their analysis are the permitting of new drugs and devices, the control of manufacturer speech, and the imposition of prescription requirements. The authors argue that in the increasingly complex and diverse food marketplace, the FDA is not equipped to adequately regulate or inspect food.\nHowever, in an indicator that the FDA may be too lax in their approval process, in particular for medical devices, a 2011 study by Dr. Diana Zuckerman and Paul Brown of the National Research Center for Women and Families, and Dr. Steven Nissen of the Cleveland Clinic, published in the Archives of Internal Medicine, showed that most medical devices recalled in the last five years for \"serious health problems or death\" had been previously approved by the FDA using the less stringent, and cheaper, 510(k) process. In a few cases, the devices had been deemed so low-risk that they did not need FDA regulation. Of the 113 devices recalled, 35 were for cardiovascular health purposes.\nSee also.\nInternational:"}
{"id": "11634", "revid": "13220696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11634", "title": "Field extension", "text": "In mathematics, particularly in algebra, a field extension is a pair of fields formula_1 such that the operations of \"E\" are those of \"F\" restricted to \"E\". In this case, \"F\" is an extension field of \"E\" and \"E\" is a subfield of \"F\". For example, under the usual notions of addition and multiplication, the complex numbers are an extension field of the real numbers; the real numbers are a subfield of the complex numbers.\nField extensions are fundamental in algebraic number theory, and in the study of polynomial roots through Galois theory, and are widely used in algebraic geometry.\nSubfield.\nA subfield of a field \"L\" is a subset \"K\" of \"L\" that is a field with respect to the field operations inherited from \"L\". Equivalently, a subfield is a subset that contains 1, and is closed under the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and taking the inverse of a nonzero element of \"K\".\nAs , the latter definition implies \"K\" and \"L\" have the same zero element.\nFor example, the field of rational numbers is a subfield of the real numbers, which is itself a subfield of the complex numbers. More generally, the field of rational numbers is (or is isomorphic to) a subfield of any field of characteristic 0.\nThe characteristic of a subfield is the same as the characteristic of the larger field.\nExtension field.\nIf \"K\" is a subfield of \"L\", then \"L\" is an extension field or simply extension of \"K\", and this pair of fields is a field extension. Such a field extension is denoted \"L\" / \"K\" (read as \"\"L\" over \"K\"\").\nIf \"L\" is an extension of \"F\", which is in turn an extension of \"K\", then \"F\" is said to be an intermediate field (or intermediate extension or subextension) of \"L\" / \"K\".\nGiven a field extension , the larger field \"L\" is a \"K\"-vector space. The dimension of this vector space is called the degree of the extension and is denoted by [\"L\"\u00a0:\u00a0\"K\"]. \nThe degree of an extension is 1 if and only if the two fields are equal. In this case, the extension is a trivial extension. Extensions of degree 2 and 3 are called quadratic extensions and cubic extensions, respectively. A finite extension is an extension that has a finite degree.\nGiven two extensions and , the extension is finite if and only if both and are finite. In this case, one has\nGiven a field extension \"L\" / \"K\" and a subset \"S\" of \"L\", there is a smallest subfield of \"L\" that contains \"K\" and \"S\". It is the intersection of all subfields of \"L\" that contain \"K\" and \"S\", and is denoted by \"K\"(\"S\"). One says that \"K\"(\"S\") is the field \"generated\" by \"S\" over \"K\", and that \"S\" is a generating set of \"K\"(\"S\") over \"K\". When formula_3 is finite, one writes formula_4 instead of formula_5 and one says that \"K\"(\"S\") is finitely generated over \"K\". If \"S\" consists of a single element \"s\", the extension is called a simple extension and \"s\" is called a primitive element of the extension.\nAn extension field of the form is often said to result from the \"\" of \"S\" to \"K\".\nIn characteristic 0, every finite extension is a simple extension. This is the primitive element theorem, which does not hold true for fields of non-zero characteristic.\nIf a simple extension is not finite, the field \"K\"(\"s\") is isomorphic to the field of rational fractions in \"s\" over \"K\".\nCaveats.\nThe notation \"L\" / \"K\" is purely formal and does not imply the formation of a quotient ring or quotient group or any other kind of division. Instead the slash expresses the word \"over\". In some literature the notation \"L\":\"K\" is used.\nIt is often desirable to talk about field extensions in situations where the small field is not actually contained in the larger one, but is naturally embedded. For this purpose, one abstractly defines a field extension as an injective ring homomorphism between two fields.\n\"Every\" non-zero ring homomorphism between fields is injective because fields do not possess nontrivial proper ideals, so field extensions are precisely the morphisms in the category of fields.\nHenceforth, we will suppress the injective homomorphism and assume that we are dealing with actual subfields.\nExamples.\nThe field of complex numbers formula_6 is an extension field of the field of real numbers formula_7, and formula_7 in turn is an extension field of the field of rational numbers formula_9. Clearly then, formula_10 is also a field extension. We have formula_11 because formula_12 is a basis, so the extension formula_13 is finite. This is a simple extension because formula_14 formula_15 (the cardinality of the continuum), so this extension is infinite.\nThe field \nis an extension field of formula_17 also clearly a simple extension. The degree is 2 because formula_18 can serve as a basis. \nThe field\nis an extension field of both formula_20 and formula_17 of degree 2 and 4 respectively. It is also a simple extension, as one can show that \nFinite extensions of formula_9 are also called algebraic number fields and are important in number theory. Another extension field of the rationals, which is also important in number theory, although not a finite extension, is the field of p-adic numbers formula_24 for a prime number \"p\".\nIt is common to construct an extension field of a given field \"K\" as a quotient ring of the polynomial ring \"K\"[\"X\"] in order to \"create\" a root for a given polynomial \"f\"(\"X\"). Suppose for instance that \"K\" does not contain any element \"x\" with \"x\"2 = \u22121. Then the polynomial formula_25 is irreducible in \"K\"[\"X\"], consequently the ideal generated by this polynomial is maximal, and formula_26 is an extension field of \"K\" which \"does\" contain an element whose square is \u22121 (namely the residue class of \"X\").\nBy iterating the above construction, one can construct a splitting field of any polynomial from \"K\"[\"X\"]. This is an extension field \"L\" of \"K\" in which the given polynomial splits into a product of linear factors.\nIf \"p\" is any prime number and \"n\" is a positive integer, we have a finite field GF(\"pn\") with \"pn\" elements; this is an extension field of the finite field formula_27 with \"p\" elements.\nGiven a field \"K\", we can consider the field \"K\"(\"X\") of all rational functions in the variable \"X\" with coefficients in \"K\"; the elements of \"K\"(\"X\") are fractions of two polynomials over \"K\", and indeed \"K\"(\"X\") is the field of fractions of the polynomial ring \"K\"[\"X\"]. This field of rational functions is an extension field of \"K\". This extension is infinite.\nGiven a Riemann surface \"M\", the set of all meromorphic functions defined on \"M\" is a field, denoted by formula_28 It is a transcendental extension field of formula_6 if we identify every complex number with the corresponding constant function defined on \"M\". More generally, given an algebraic variety \"V\" over some field \"K\", then the function field of \"V\", consisting of the rational functions defined on \"V\" and denoted by \"K\"(\"V\"), is an extension field of \"K\".\nAlgebraic extension.\nAn element \"x\" of a field extension is algebraic over \"K\" if it is a root of a nonzero polynomial with coefficients in \"K\". For example, formula_30 is algebraic over the rational numbers, because it is a root of formula_31 If an element \"x\" of \"L\" is algebraic over \"K\", the monic polynomial of lowest degree that has \"x\" as a root is called the minimal polynomial of \"x\". This minimal polynomial is irreducible over \"K\".\nAn element \"s\" of \"L\" is algebraic over \"K\" if and only if the simple extension is a finite extension. In this case the degree of the extension equals the degree of the minimal polynomial, and a basis of the \"K\"-vector space \"K\"(\"s\") consists of formula_32 where \"d\" is the degree of the minimal polynomial.\nThe set of the elements of \"L\" that are algebraic over \"K\" form a subextension, which is called the algebraic closure of \"K\" in \"L\". This results from the preceding characterization: if \"s\" and \"t\" are algebraic, the extensions and are finite. Thus is also finite, as well as the sub extensions , and (if ). It follows that , \"st\" and 1/\"s\" are all algebraic.\nAn \"algebraic extension\" is an extension such that every element of \"L\" is algebraic over \"K\". Equivalently, an algebraic extension is an extension that is generated by algebraic elements. For example, formula_33 is an algebraic extension of formula_9, because formula_30 and formula_36 are algebraic over formula_37\nA simple extension is algebraic if and only if it is finite. This implies that an extension is algebraic if and only if it is the union of its finite subextensions, and that every finite extension is algebraic. \nEvery field \"K\" has an algebraic closure, which is up to an isomorphism the largest extension field of \"K\" which is algebraic over \"K\", and also the smallest extension field such that every polynomial with coefficients in \"K\" has a root in it. For example, formula_6 is an algebraic closure of formula_7, but not an algebraic closure of formula_9, as it is not algebraic over formula_9 (for example is not algebraic over formula_9).\nTranscendental extension.\nGiven a field extension , a subset \"S\" of \"L\" is called algebraically independent over \"K\" if no non-trivial polynomial relation with coefficients in \"K\" exists among the elements of \"S\". The largest cardinality of an algebraically independent set is called the transcendence degree of \"L\"/\"K\". It is always possible to find a set \"S\", algebraically independent over \"K\", such that \"L\"/\"K\"(\"S\") is algebraic. Such a set \"S\" is called a transcendence basis of \"L\"/\"K\". All transcendence bases have the same cardinality, equal to the transcendence degree of the extension. An extension \"L\"/\"K\" is said to be if and only if there exists a transcendence basis \"S\" of \"L\"/\"K\" such that \"L\" = \"K\"(\"S\"). Such an extension has the property that all elements of \"L\" except those of \"K\" are transcendental over \"K\", but, however, there are extensions with this property which are not purely transcendental\u2014a class of such extensions take the form \"L\"/\"K\" where both \"L\" and \"K\" are algebraically closed. In addition, if \"L\"/\"K\" is purely transcendental and \"S\" is a transcendence basis of the extension, it doesn't necessarily follow that \"L\" = \"K\"(\"S\"). For example, consider the extension formula_43 where \"x\" is transcendental over formula_37 The set formula_45 is algebraically independent since \"x\" is transcendental. Obviously, the extension formula_46 is algebraic, hence formula_45 is a transcendence basis. It doesn't generate the whole extension because there is no polynomial expression in formula_48 for formula_49. But it is easy to see that formula_50 is a transcendence basis that generates formula_51 so this extension is indeed purely transcendental.)\nNormal, separable and Galois extensions.\nAn algebraic extension \"L\"/\"K\" is called normal if every irreducible polynomial in \"K\"[\"X\"] that has a root in \"L\" completely factors into linear factors over \"L\". Every algebraic extension \"F\"/\"K\" admits a normal closure \"L\", which is an extension field of \"F\" such that \"L\"/\"K\" is normal and which is minimal with this property.\nAn algebraic extension \"L\"/\"K\" is called separable if the minimal polynomial of every element of \"L\" over \"K\" is separable, i.e., has no repeated roots in an algebraic closure over \"K\". A Galois extension is a field extension that is both normal and separable.\nA consequence of the primitive element theorem states that every finite separable extension has a primitive element (i.e. is simple).\nGiven any field extension \"L\"/\"K\", we can consider its automorphism group Aut(\"L\"/\"K\"), consisting of all field automorphisms \"\u03b1\": \"L\" \u2192 \"L\" with \"\u03b1\"(\"x\") = \"x\" for all \"x\" in \"K\". When the extension is Galois this automorphism group is called the Galois group of the extension. Extensions whose Galois group is abelian are called abelian extensions.\nFor a given field extension \"L\"/\"K\", one is often interested in the intermediate fields \"F\" (subfields of \"L\" that contain \"K\"). The significance of Galois extensions and Galois groups is that they allow a complete description of the intermediate fields: there is a bijection between the intermediate fields and the subgroups of the Galois group, described by the fundamental theorem of Galois theory.\nGeneralizations.\nField extensions can be generalized to ring extensions which consist of a ring and one of its subrings. A closer non-commutative analog are central simple algebras (CSAs) \u2013 ring extensions over a field, which are simple algebra (no non-trivial 2-sided ideals, just as for a field) and where the center of the ring is exactly the field. For example, the only finite field extension of the real numbers is the complex numbers, while the quaternions are a central simple algebra over the reals, and all CSAs over the reals are Brauer equivalent to the reals or the quaternions. CSAs can be further generalized to Azumaya algebras, where the base field is replaced by a commutative local ring.\nExtension of scalars.\nGiven a field extension, one can \"extend scalars\" on associated algebraic objects. For example, given a real vector space, one can produce a complex vector space via complexification. In addition to vector spaces, one can perform extension of scalars for associative algebras defined over the field, such as polynomials or group algebras and the associated group representations. Extension of scalars of polynomials is often used implicitly, by just considering the coefficients as being elements of a larger field, but may also be considered more formally. Extension of scalars has numerous applications, as discussed in extension of scalars: applications."}
{"id": "11635", "revid": "41735154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11635", "title": "Flood fill", "text": "Flood fill, also called seed fill, is an algorithm that determines and alters the area connected to a given node in a multi-dimensional array with some matching attribute. It is used in the \"bucket\" fill tool of paint programs to fill connected, similarly-colored areas with a different color, and in games such as Go and Minesweeper for determining which pieces are cleared. A variant called boundary fill uses the same algorithms but is defined as the area connected to a given node that does not have a particular attribute.\nNote that flood filling is not suitable for drawing filled polygons, as it will miss some pixels in more acute corners. Instead, see Even-odd rule and Nonzero-rule.\nThe Algorithm Parameters.\nThe traditional flood-fill algorithm takes three parameters: a start node, a target color, and a replacement color. The algorithm looks for all nodes in the array that are connected to the start node by a path of the target color and changes them to the replacement color. For a boundary-fill, in place of the target color, a border color would be supplied.\nIn order to generalize the algorithm in the common way, the following descriptions will instead have two routines available. One called codice_1 which returns true for unfilled points that, by their color, would be inside the filled area, and one called codice_2 which fills a pixel/node. Any node that has codice_2 called on it must then no longer be codice_1.\nDepending on whether we consider nodes touching at the corners connected or not, we have two variations: eight-way and four-way respectively.\nStack-based recursive implementation (four-way).\nThe earliest-known, implicitly stack-based, recursive, four-way flood-fill implementation goes as follows:\n Flood-fill (node):\n 1. If \"node\" is not \"Inside\" return.\n 2. \"Set\" the \"node\"\n 3. Perform Flood-fill one step to the south of \"node\".\n 4. Perform Flood-fill one step to the north of \"node\"\n 5. Perform Flood-fill one step to the west of \"node\"\n 6. Perform Flood-fill one step to the east of \"node\"\n 7. Return.\nThough easy to understand, the implementation of the algorithm used above is impractical in languages and environments where stack space is severely constrained (e.g. Java applets).\nMoving the recursion into a data structure.\nMoving the recursion into a data structure (either a stack or a queue) prevents a stack overflow. It is similar to the simple recursive solution, except that instead of making recursive calls, it pushes the nodes onto a stack or queue for consumption, with the choice of data structure affecting the proliferation pattern:\n Flood-fill (node):\n 1. Set \"Q\" to the empty queue or stack.\n 2. Add \"node\" to the end of \"Q\".\n 3. While \"Q\" is not empty:\n 4. Set \"n\" equal to the first element of \"Q\".\n 5. Remove first element from \"Q\".\n 6. If \"n\" is \"Inside\":\n \"Set\" the \"n\"\n Add the node to the west of \"n\" to the end of \"Q\".\n Add the node to the east of \"n\" to the end of \"Q\".\n Add the node to the north of \"n\" to the end of \"Q\".\n Add the node to the south of \"n\" to the end of \"Q\".\n 7. Continue looping until \"Q\" is exhausted.\n 8. Return.\nSpan Filling.\nIt's possible to optimize things further by working primarily with spans. The first published complete example works on the following basic principle. Starting with a seed point, you fill left and right and keep track of the edges. Then, you scan the same portion of the line above and the line below, searching for new seed-points to continue with. This algorithm is the most popular, for both citations and implementations , despite testing most filled pixels three times in total. In pseudo-code form:\n fn fill(\"x\", \"y\"):\n if not Inside(\"x\", \"y\") then return\n let \"s\" = new empty stack or queue\n add (\"x\", \"y\") to \"s\"\n while \"s\" is not empty:\n Remove an (\"x\", \"y\") from \"s\"\n let \"lx\" = \"x\"\n while Inside(\"lx\" - 1, \"y\"):\n Set(\"lx\" - 1, \"y\")\n \"lx\" = \"lx\" - 1\n while Inside(\"x\", \"y\"):\n Set(\"x\", \"y\")\n \"x\" = \"x\" + 1\n scan(\"lx\", \"x\" - 1, \"y\" + 1, \"s\")\n scan(\"lx\", \"x\" - 1, \"y\" - 1, \"s\")\n fn scan(\"lx\", \"rx\", \"y\", \"s\"):\n let \"added\" = \"false\"\n for \"x\" in \"lx\" .. \"rx\":\n if not Inside(\"x\", \"y\"):\n \"added\" = \"false\"\n else if not \"added\":\n Add (\"x\", \"y\") to \"s\"\n \"added\" = \"true\"\nOver time, the following optimizations were realized:\nThe final, combined-scan-and-fill span filler was then published in 1990, and proceeds as follows (though the version here corrects some bugs in the original): \n fn fill(\"x\", \"y\"):\n if not Inside(\"x\", \"y\") then return\n let \"s\" = new empty queue or stack\n Add (\"x\", \"x\", \"y\", 1) to \"s\"\n Add (\"x\", \"x\", \"y\" - 1, -1) to \"s\"\n while \"s\" is not empty:\n Remove an (\"x1\", \"x2\", \"y\", \"dy\") from \"s\"\n let \"x\" = \"x1\"\n if Inside(\"x\", \"y\"):\n while Inside(\"x\" - 1, \"y\"):\n Set(\"x\" - 1, \"y\")\n \"x\" = \"x\" - 1\n if \"x\" &lt; \"x1\":\n Add (\"x\", \"x1\"-1, \"y\"-\"dy\", -\"dy\") to \"s\"\n while \"x1\" &lt; \"x2\":\n while Inside(\"x1\", \"y\"):\n Set(\"x1\", \"y\")\n \"x1\" = \"x1\" + 1\n Add (\"x\", \"x1\" - 1, \"y\"+\"dy\", \"dy\") to \"s\"\n if \"x1\" - 1 &gt; \"x2\":\n Add (\"x2\" + 1, \"x1\" - 1, \"y\"-\"dy\", -\"dy\")\n while \"x1\" &lt; \"x2\" and not Inside(\"x1\", \"y\"):\n \"x1\" = \"x1\" + 1\n \"x\" = \"x1\"\nAdding Pattern Filling Support.\nTwo common ways to make the span and pixel-based algorithms support pattern filling are either to use a unique color as a plain fill and then replace that with a pattern or to keep track (in a 2d boolean array or as regions) of which pixels have been visited, using it to indicate pixels are no longer fillable. \"Inside\" must then return \"false\" for such visited pixels. \nGraph-theoretic Filling.\nSome theorists applied explicit graph theory to the problem, treating spans of pixels, or aggregates of such, as nodes and studying their connectivity. The first published graph theory algorithm worked similarly to the span filling, above, but had a way to detect when it would duplicate filling of spans. Unfortunately, it had bugs that made it not complete some fills. A corrected algorithm was later published with a similar basis in graph theory; however, it alters the image as it goes along, to temporarily block off potential loops, complicating the programmatic interface. A later published algorithm depended on the boundary being distinct from everything else in the image and so isn't suitable for most uses; it also requires an extra bit per pixel for bookkeeping. \nWalk-based filling (Fixed-memory method).\nA method exists that uses essentially no memory for four-connected regions by pretending to be a painter trying to paint the region without painting themselves into a corner. This is also a method for solving mazes. The four pixels making the primary boundary are examined to see what action should be taken. The painter could find themselves in one of several conditions:\nWhere a path or boundary is to be followed, the right-hand rule is used. The painter follows the region by placing their right-hand on the wall (the boundary of the region) and progressing around the edge of the region without removing their hand.\nFor case #1, the painter paints (fills) the pixel the painter is standing upon and stops the algorithm.\nFor case #2, a path leading out of the area exists. Paint the pixel the painter is standing upon and move in the direction of the open path.\nFor case #3, the two boundary pixels define a path which, if we painted the current pixel, may block us from ever getting back to the other side of the path. We need a \"mark\" to define where we are and which direction we are heading to see if we ever get back to exactly the same pixel. If we already created such a \"mark\", then we preserve our previous mark and move to the next pixel following the right-hand rule.\nA mark is used for the first 2-pixel boundary that is encountered to remember where the passage started and in what direction the painter was moving. If the mark is encountered again and the painter is traveling in the same direction, then the painter knows that it is safe to paint the square with the mark and to continue in the same direction. This is because (through some unknown path) the pixels on the other side of the mark can be reached and painted in the future. The mark is removed for future use.\nIf the painter encounters the mark but is going in a different direction, then some sort of loop has occurred, which caused the painter to return to the mark. This loop must be eliminated. The mark is picked up, and the painter then proceeds in the direction indicated previously by the mark using a left-hand rule for the boundary (similar to the right-hand rule but using the painter's left hand). This continues until an intersection is found (with three or more open boundary pixels). Still using the left-hand rule the painter now searches for a simple passage (made by two boundary pixels). Upon finding this two-pixel boundary path, that pixel is painted. This breaks the loop and allows the algorithm to continue.\nFor case #4, we need to check the opposite 8-connected corners to see whether they are filled or not. If either or both are filled, then this creates a many-path intersection and cannot be filled. If both are empty, then the current pixel can be painted and the painter can move following the right-hand rule.\nThe algorithm trades time for memory. For simple shapes it is very efficient. However, if the shape is complex with many features, the algorithm spends a large amount of time tracing the edges of the region trying to ensure that all can be painted.\nThis algorithm was first available commercially in 1981 on a Vicom Image Processing system manufactured by Vicom Systems, Inc. A walking algorithm was published in 1994. The classic recursive flood fill algorithm was available on the Vicom system as well.\nPseudocode.\nThis is a pseudocode implementation of an optimal fixed-memory flood-fill algorithm written in structured English:\n set cur to starting pixel\n set cur-dir to default direction\n clear mark and mark2 (set values to null)\n set backtrack and findloop to false\n while front-pixel is empty do\n move forward\n end while\n jump to START\n MAIN LOOP:\n move forward\n if right-pixel is inside then\n if backtrack is true and findloop is false and either front-pixel or left-pixel is inside then\n set findloop to true\n end if\n turn right\n PAINT:\n move forward\n end if\n START:\n set \"count\" to number of non-diagonally adjacent pixels filled (front/back/left/right ONLY)\n if \"count\" is not 4 then\n do\n turn right\n while front-pixel is inside\n do\n turn left\n while front-pixel is not inside\n end if\n switch \"count\"\n case 1\n if backtrack is true then\n set findloop to true\n else if findloop is true then\n if mark is null then\n restore mark\n end if\n else if front-left-pixel and back-left-pixel are both inside then\n clear mark\n set cur\n jump to PAINT\n end if\n end case\n case 2\n if back-pixel is not inside then\n if front-left-pixel is inside then\n clear mark\n set cur\n jump to PAINT\n end if\n else if mark is not set then\n set mark to cur\n set mark-dir to cur-dir\n clear mark2\n set findloop and backtrack to false\n else\n if mark2 is not set then\n if cur is at mark then\n if cur-dir is the same as mark-dir then\n clear mark\n turn around\n set cur\n jump to PAINT\n else\n set backtrack to true\n set findloop to false\n set cur-dir to mark-dir\n end if\n else if findloop is true then\n set mark2 to cur\n set mark2-dir to cur-dir\n end if\n else\n if cur is at mark then\n set cur to mark2\n set cur-dir to mark2-dir\n clear mark and mark2\n set backtrack to false\n turn around\n set cur\n jump to PAINT\n else if cur at mark2 then\n set mark to cur\n set cur-dir and mark-dir to mark2-dir\n clear mark2\n end if\n end if\n end if\n end case\n case 3\n clear mark\n set cur\n jump to PAINT\n end case\n case 4\n set cur\n done\n end case\n end switch\n end MAIN LOOP\nVector implementations.\nVersion 0.46 of Inkscape includes a bucket fill tool, giving output similar to ordinary bitmap operations and indeed using one: the canvas is rendered, a flood fill operation is performed on the selected area and the result is then traced back to a path. It uses the concept of a boundary condition."}
{"id": "11638", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11638", "title": "Francis of Assisi", "text": "Francis of Assisi (born Giovanni di Pietro di Bernardone; ; ; 1181 or 1182 \u2013 3 October 1226), venerated as Saint Francis of Assisi, also known in his ministry as Francesco, was an Italian Catholic friar, deacon, mystic, and preacher. He founded the men's Order of Friars Minor, the women's Order of St. Clare, the Third Order of St. Francis and the Custody of the Holy Land. Francis is one of the most venerated religious figures in Christianity.\nPope Gregory IX canonized Francis on 16 July 1228. Along with Catherine of Siena, he was designated patron saint of Italy. He later became associated with patronage of animals and the natural environment, and it became customary for churches to hold ceremonies blessing animals on or near his feast day of 4 October. In 1219, he went to Egypt in an attempt to convert the Sultan to put an end to the conflict of the Crusades. By this point, the Franciscan Order had grown to such an extent that its primitive organizational structure was no longer sufficient. He returned to Italy to organize the order. Once his community was authorized by the Pope, he withdrew increasingly from external affairs.\nFrancis is known for his love of the Eucharist. In 1223, Francis arranged for the first Christmas live nativity scene. According to Christian tradition, in 1224 he received the stigmata during the apparition of a Seraphic angel in a religious ecstasy, which would make him the first person in Christian tradition to bear the wounds of Christ's Passion. He died during the evening hours of 3 October 1226, while listening to a reading he had requested of Psalm 142 (141).\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nFrancis of Assisi was born in late 1181 or early 1182, one of several children of an Italian father, Pietro di Bernardone dei Moriconi, a prosperous silk merchant, and a French mother, Pica de Bourlemont, about whom little is known except that she was a noblewoman originally from Provence. Pietro was in France on business when Francis was born in Assisi, and Pica had him baptized as Giovanni. Upon his return to Assisi, Pietro took to calling his son Francesco (\"the Frenchman\"), possibly in honor of his commercial success and enthusiasm for all things French. Since the child was renamed in infancy, the change can hardly have had anything to do with his aptitude for learning French, as some have thought.\nIndulged by his parents, Francis lived the high-spirited life typical of a wealthy young man. As a youth, Francesco became a devotee of troubadours and was fascinated with all things Transalpine. He was handsome, witty, gallant, and delighted in fine clothes. He spent money lavishly. Although many hagiographers remark about his bright clothing, rich friends, and love of pleasures, his displays of disillusionment toward the world that surrounded him came fairly early in his life, as is shown in the \"story of the beggar\". In this account, he was selling cloth and velvet in the marketplace on behalf of his father when a beggar came to him and asked for alms. At the conclusion of his business deal, Francis abandoned his wares and ran after the beggar. When he found him, Francis gave the man everything he had in his pockets. His friends mocked him for his charity; his father scolded him in rage.\nAround 1202, he joined a military expedition against Perugia and was taken as a prisoner at Collestrada, spending a year as a captive. An illness caused him to re-evaluate his life. Upon his return to Assisi in 1203, Francis returned to his carefree life. In 1205, Francis left for Apulia to enlist in the army of Walter III, Count of Brienne. A strange vision made him return to Assisi and lose interest in the worldly life. According to hagiographic accounts, thereafter he began to avoid the sports and the feasts of his former companions. A friend asked him whether he was thinking of marrying, to which he answered: \"Yes, a fairer bride than any of you have ever seen\", meaning his \"Lady Poverty\".\nOn a pilgrimage to Rome, he joined the poor in begging at St. Peter's Basilica. He spent some time in lonely places, asking God for spiritual enlightenment. He said he had a mystical vision of Jesus Christ in the forsaken country chapel of San Damiano, just outside Assisi, in which the Icon of Christ Crucified said to him, \"Francis, Francis, go and repair My house which, as you can see, is falling into ruins.\" He took this to mean the ruined church in which he was presently praying, and so he sold some cloth from his father's store to assist the priest there for this purpose. When the priest refused to accept the ill-gotten gains, an indignant Francis threw the coins on the floor.\nIn order to avoid his father's wrath, Francis hid in a cave near San Damiano for about a month. When he returned to town, hungry and dirty, he was dragged home by his father, beaten, bound, and locked in a small storeroom. Freed by his mother during Bernardone's absence, Francis returned at once to San Damiano, where he found shelter with the officiating priest, but he was soon cited before the city consuls by his father. The latter, not content with having recovered the scattered gold from San Damiano, sought also to force his son to forego his inheritance by way of restitution. In the midst of legal proceedings before the Bishop of Assisi, Francis renounced his father and his patrimony. Some accounts report that he stripped himself naked in token of this renunciation, and the bishop covered him with his own cloak.\nFor the next couple of months, Francis wandered as a beggar in the hills behind Assisi. He spent some time at a neighbouring monastery working as a scullion. He then went to Gubbio, where a friend gave him, as an alms, the cloak, girdle, and staff of a pilgrim. Returning to Assisi, he traversed the city begging stones for the restoration of St. Damiano's. These he carried to the old chapel, set in place himself, and so at length rebuilt it. Over the course of two years, he embraced the life of a penitent, during which he restored several ruined chapels in the countryside around Assisi, among them San Pietro in Spina (in the area of San Petrignano in the valley about a kilometer from Rivotorto, today on private property and once again in ruin); and the Porziuncola, the little chapel of St. Mary of the Angels in the plain just below the town. This later became his favorite abode. By degrees he took to nursing lepers, in the lazar houses near Assisi.\nFounding of the Franciscan Orders.\nThe Friars Minor.\nOne morning in February 1208, Francis was taking part in a Mass in the chapel of St. Mary of the Angels, near which he had by then built himself a hut. The Gospel of the day was the \"Commissioning of the Twelve\" from the Book of Matthew. The disciples are to go and proclaim that the Kingdom of God is at hand. Francis was inspired to devote himself to a life of poverty. Having obtained a coarse woolen tunic, the dress then worn by the poorest Umbrian peasants, he tied it around himself with a knotted rope and went about exhorting the people of the countryside to penance, brotherly love, and peace. Francis's preaching to ordinary people was unusual as he had no license to do so.\nHis example attracted others. Within a year Francis had eleven followers. The brothers lived a simple life in the deserted lazar house of Rivo Torto near Assisi; but they spent much of their time wandering through the mountainous districts of Umbria, making a deep impression upon their hearers by their earnest exhortations.\nIn 1209 he composed a simple rule for his followers (\"friars\"), the \"Regula primitiva\" or \"Primitive Rule\", which came from verses in the Bible. The rule was \"To follow the teachings of our Lord Jesus Christ and to walk in his footsteps\". He then led his first eleven followers to Rome to seek permission from Pope Innocent III to found a new religious order. Upon entry to Rome, the brothers encountered Bishop Guido of Assisi, who had in his company Giovanni di San Paolo, the Cardinal Bishop of Sabina. The Cardinal, who was the confessor of Pope Innocent\u00a0III, was immediately sympathetic to Francis and agreed to represent Francis to the pope. Reluctantly, Pope Innocent agreed to meet with Francis and the brothers the next day. After several days, the pope agreed to admit the group informally, adding that when God increased the group in grace and number, they could return for an official admittance. The group was tonsured. This was important in part because it recognized Church authority and prevented his following from accusations of heresy, as had happened to the Waldensians decades earlier. Though a number of the pope's counselors considered the mode of life proposed by Francis as unsafe and impractical, following a dream in which he saw Francis holding up the Lateran Basilica (the cathedral of Rome, thus the 'home church' of all Christendom), he decided to endorse Francis's order. This occurred, according to tradition, on 16 April 1210, and constituted the official founding of the Franciscan Order. The group, then the \"Lesser Brothers\" (\"Order of Friars Minor\" also known as the \"Franciscan Order\" or the \"Seraphic Order\"), were centered in the Porziuncola and preached first in Umbria, before expanding throughout Italy. Francis chose never to be ordained a priest, although he was later ordained a deacon.\nThe Poor Clares and the Third Order.\nFrom then on, the new order grew quickly with new vocations. Hearing Francis preaching in the church of San Rufino in Assisi in 1211, the young noblewoman Clare of Assisi sought to live like Francis. Her cousin Rufino also sought to join him. On the night of Palm Sunday, 28 March 1212, Clare clandestinely left her family's palace. Francis received her at the Porziuncola and thereby established the Order of Poor Ladies. He gave Clare a religious habit, a garment similar to his own, before lodging her, her younger sister Caterina, and other young women in a nearby monastery of Benedictine nuns until he could provide a suitable retreat for her, and for who had joined her. Later he transferred them to San Damiano, to a few small huts or cells. This became the first monastery of the Second Franciscan Order, now known as Poor Clares.\nFor those who could not leave their homes, Francis later formed the Third Order of Brothers and Sisters of Penance, a fraternity composed of either laity or clergy whose members neither withdrew from the world nor took religious vows. Instead, they observed the principles of Franciscan life in their daily lives. Before long, this Third Order grew beyond Italy. The Third Order is now titled the Secular Franciscan Order.\nTravels.\nDetermined to bring the Gospel to all peoples and convert them, Francis sought on several occasions to take his message out of Italy. In the late spring of 1212, he set out for Jerusalem, but was shipwrecked by a storm on the Dalmatian coast, forcing him to return to Italy. On 8 May 1213, he was given the use of the mountain of La Verna (Alverna) as a gift from Count Orlando di Chiusi, who described it as \u201ceminently suitable for whoever wishes to do penance in a place remote from mankind\u201d. The mountain would become one of his favourite retreats for prayer.\nIn the same year, Francis sailed for Morocco, but an illness forced him to break off his journey while in Spain.\nIn 1219, accompanied by another friar and hoping to convert the Sultan of Egypt or be martyred in the attempt, Francis went to Egypt during the Fifth Crusade where a Crusader army had been encamped for over a year besieging the walled city of Damietta. The Sultan, al-Kamil, a nephew of Saladin, had succeeded his father as Sultan of Egypt in 1218 and was encamped upstream of Damietta. A bloody and futile attack on the city was launched by the Christians on 29 August 1219, following which both sides agreed to a ceasefire which lasted four weeks. It was most probably during this interlude that Francis and his companion crossed the Muslims' lines and were brought before the Sultan, remaining in his camp for a few days. Reports give no information about what transpired during the encounter beyond noting that the Sultan received Francis graciously and that Francis preached to the Muslims. He returned unharmed. No known Arab sources mention the visit.\nSuch an incident is alluded to in a scene in the late 13th-century fresco cycle, attributed to Giotto, in the upper basilica at Assisi.\nAccording to some late sources, the Sultan gave Francis permission to visit the sacred places in the Holy Land and even to preach there. All that can safely be asserted is that Francis and his companion left the Crusader camp for Acre, from where they embarked for Italy in the latter half of 1220. Drawing on a 1267 sermon by Bonaventure, later sources report that the Sultan secretly converted or accepted a death-bed baptism as a result of meeting Francis.\nDue to these events in Jerusalem, Franciscans have been present in the Holy Land almost uninterruptedly since 1217. They received concessions from the Mameluke Sultan in 1333 with regard to certain Holy Places in Jerusalem and Bethlehem, and (so far as concerns the Catholic Church) jurisdictional privileges from Pope Clement VI in 1342.\nReorganization of the Franciscan Order.\n The growing order of friars was divided into provinces; groups were sent to France, Germany, Hungary, and Spain and to the East. Upon receiving a report of the martyrdom of five brothers in Morocco, Francis returned to Italy via Venice. Cardinal Ugolino di Conti was then nominated by the pope as the protector of the order. Another reason for Francis' return to Italy was that the Franciscan Order had grown at an unprecedented rate compared to previous religious orders, but its organizational sophistication had not kept up with this growth and had little more to govern it than Francis' example and simple rule. To address this problem, Francis prepared a new and more detailed Rule, the \"First Rule\" or \"Rule Without a Papal Bull\" (\"Regula prima\", \"Regula non bullata\"), which again asserted devotion to poverty and the apostolic life. However, it also introduced greater institutional structure, though this was never officially endorsed by the pope.\nOn 29 September 1220, Francis handed over the governance of the order to Brother Peter Catani at the Porziuncola, but Peter died only five months later. \nBrother Peter was succeeded by Brother Elias as Vicar of Francis. Two years later, Francis modified the \"First Rule\", creating the \"Second Rule\" or \"Rule With a Bull\", which was approved by Pope Honorius III on 29 November 1223. As the order's official rule, it called on the friars \"to observe the Holy Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, living in obedience without anything of our own and in chastity\". In addition, it set regulations for discipline, preaching, and entering the order. Once the rule was endorsed by the pope, Francis withdrew increasingly from external affairs. During 1221 and 1222, he crossed Italy, first as far south as Catania in Sicily and afterward as far north as Bologna.\nStigmata, final days, and sainthood.\nWhile he was praying on the mountain of Verna, during a forty-day fast in preparation for Michaelmas (29 September), Francis is said to have had a vision on or about 13 September 1224, the Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross, as a result of which he received the stigmata. Brother Leo, who had been with Francis at the time, left a clear and simple account of the event, the first definite account of the phenomenon of stigmata. \"Suddenly he saw a vision of a seraph, a six-winged angel on a cross. This angel gave him the gift of the five wounds of Christ.\" Suffering from these stigmata and from trachoma, Francis received care in several cities (Siena, Cortona, Nocera) to no avail. In the end, he was brought back to a hut next to the Porziuncola. Here he spent his last days dictating his spiritual testament. He died on the evening of Saturday, 3 October 1226, singing Psalm 141, \"Voce mea ad Dominum\".\nOn 16 July 1228, he was pronounced a saint by Pope Gregory IX (the former cardinal Ugolino di Conti, a friend of Francis and Cardinal Protector of the Order). The next day, the pope laid the foundation stone for the Basilica of St. Francis in Assisi. Francis was buried on 25 May 1230, under the Lower Basilica, but his tomb was soon hidden on orders of Brother Elias to protect it from Saracen invaders. His burial place remained unknown until it was rediscovered in 1818. Pasquale Belli then constructed for the remains a crypt in the Lower Basilica. It was refashioned between 1927 and 1930 into its present form by Ugo Tarchi. In 1978, the remains of Francis were examined and confirmed by a commission of scholars appointed by Pope Paul VI, and put into a glass urn in the ancient stone tomb.\nCharacter and legacy.\nFrancis set out to imitate Christ and literally carry out his work. This is important in understanding Francis' character, his affinity for the Eucharist and respect for the priests who carried out the sacrament. He preached: \"Your God is of your flesh, He lives in your nearest neighbor, in every man.\"\nHe and his followers celebrated and even venerated poverty, which was so central to his character that in his last written work, the Testament, he said that absolute personal and corporate poverty was the essential lifestyle for the members of his order.\nHe believed that nature itself was the mirror of God. He called all creatures his \"brothers\" and \"sisters\", and even preached to the birds and supposedly persuaded a wolf in Gubbio to stop attacking some locals if they agreed to feed the wolf. His deep sense of brotherhood under God embraced others, and he declared that \"he considered himself no friend of Christ if he did not cherish those for whom Christ died\".\nFrancis' visit to Egypt and attempted rapprochement with the Muslim world had far-reaching consequences, long past his own death, since after the fall of the Crusader Kingdom, it would be the Franciscans, of all Catholics, who would be allowed to stay on in the Holy Land and be recognized as \"Custodians of the Holy Land\" on behalf of the Catholic Church.\nAt Greccio near Assisi, around 1220, Francis celebrated Christmas by setting up the first known \"presepio\" or \"cr\u00e8che\" (Nativity scene). His nativity imagery reflected the scene in traditional paintings. He used real animals to create a living scene so that the worshipers could contemplate the birth of the child Jesus in a direct way, making use of the senses, especially sight. Both Thomas of Celano and Bonaventure, biographers of Francis, tell how he used only a straw-filled manger (feeding trough) set between a real ox and donkey. According to Thomas, it was beautiful in its simplicity, with the manger acting as the altar for the Christmas Mass.\nNature and the environment.\nFrancis preached the Christian doctrine that the world was created good and beautiful by God but suffers a need for redemption because of human sin. As someone who saw God reflected in nature, \"St. Francis was a great lover of God's creation ...\" In the Canticle of the Sun he gives God thanks for Brother Sun, Sister Moon, Brother Wind, Water, Fire, and Earth, all of which he sees as rendering praise to God.\nMany of the stories that surround the life of Francis say that he had a great love for animals and the environment. The \"Fioretti\" (\"Little Flowers\"), is a collection of legends and folklore that sprang up after his death. One account describes how one day, while Francis was traveling with some companions, they happened upon a place in the road where birds filled the trees on either side. Francis told his companions to \"wait for me while I go to preach to my sisters the birds.\" The birds surrounded him, intrigued by the power of his voice, and not one of them flew away. He is often portrayed with a bird, typically in his hand.\nAnother legend from the \"Fioretti\" tells that in the city of Gubbio, where Francis lived for some time, was a wolf \"terrifying and ferocious, who devoured men as well as animals\". Francis went up into the hills and when he found the wolf, he made the sign of the cross and commanded the wolf to come to him and hurt no one. Then Francis led the wolf into the town, and surrounded by startled citizens made a pact between them and the wolf. Because the wolf had \u201cdone evil out of hunger, the townsfolk were to feed the wolf regularly. In return, the wolf would no longer prey upon them or their flocks. In this manner Gubbio was freed from the menace of the predator.\nOn 29 November 1979, Pope John Paul II declared Francis the patron saint of ecology. On 28 March 1982, John Paul II said that Francis' love and care for creation was a challenge for contemporary Catholics and a reminder \"not to behave like dissident predators where nature is concerned, but to assume responsibility for it, taking all care so that everything stays healthy and integrated, so as to offer a welcoming and friendly environment even to those who succeed us.\" The same Pope wrote on the occasion of the World Day of Peace, 1 January 1990, that Francis \"invited all of creation \u2013 animals, plants, natural forces, even Brother Sun and Sister Moon \u2013 to give honor and praise to the Lord. The poor man of Assisi gives us striking witness that when we are at peace with God we are better able to devote ourselves to building up that peace with all creation which is inseparable from peace among all peoples.\"\nIt is a popular practice on his feastday, 4 October, for people to bring their pets and other animals to church for a blessing.\nFeast day.\nFrancis' feast day is observed on 4 October. A secondary feast in honor of the stigmata received by Francis, celebrated on 17 September, was inserted in the General Roman Calendar in 1585 (later than the Tridentine Calendar) and suppressed in 1604, but was restored in 1615. In the New Roman Missal of 1969, it was removed again from the General Calendar, as something of a duplication of the main feast on 4 October, and left to the calendars of certain localities and of the Franciscan Order. Wherever the Trindentine Missal is used, however, the feast of the Stigmata remains in the General Calendar.\nFrancis is honored with a Lesser Festival in the Church of England, the Anglican Church of Canada, the Episcopal Church USA, the Old Catholic Churches, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, and other churches and religious communities on 4 October.\nPapal name.\nOn 13 March 2013, upon his election as Pope, Archbishop and Cardinal Jorge Mario Bergoglio of Argentina chose Francis as his papal name in honor of Francis of Assisi, becoming Pope Francis.\nAt his first audience on 16 March 2013, Pope Francis told journalists that he had chosen the name in honor of Francis of Assisi, and had done so because he was especially concerned for the well-being of the poor. The pontiff recounted that Cardinal Cl\u00e1udio Hummes had told him, \"Don't forget the poor\", right after the election; that made Bergoglio think of Francis. It is the first time a pope has taken the name.\nPatronage.\nOn 18 June 1939, Pope Pius XII named Francis a joint Patron Saint of Italy along with Catherine of Siena with the apostolic letter \"Licet Commissa\". Pope Pius also mentioned the two saints in the laudative discourse he pronounced on 5 May 1949, in the Church of Santa Maria Sopra Minerva.\nFrancis is the patron of animals, merchants, and ecology. He is also considered the patron against dying alone; against fire; patron of the Franciscan Order and Catholic Action; of families, peace, and needleworkers. He is the patron of many dioceses and other locations around the world, including: Italy; San Pawl il-Bahar, Malta; Freising, Germany; Lancaster, England; Kottapuram, India; San Francisco de Malabon, Philippines (General Trias City); San Francisco, California; Santa Fe, New Mexico; Colorado; Salina, Kansas; Metuchen, New Jersey; and Quibd\u00f3, Colombia.\nOutside Catholicism.\nProtestantism.\nSeveral Protestant groups have emerged since the 19th century that strive to adhere to the teachings of St. Francis.\nOne of the results of the Oxford Movement in the Anglican Church during the 19th century was the re-establishment of religious orders, including some of Franciscan inspiration. The principal Anglican communities in the Franciscan tradition are the Community of St. Francis (women, founded 1905), the Poor Clares of Reparation (P.C.R.), the Society of St. Francis (men, founded 1934), and the Community of St. Clare (women, enclosed).\nA U.S.-founded order within the Anglican world communion is the Seattle-founded order of Clares in Seattle (Diocese of Olympia), The Little Sisters of St. Clare.\nThere are also some small Franciscan communities within European Protestantism and the Old Catholic Church. There are some Franciscan orders in Lutheran Churches, including the Order of Lutheran Franciscans, the Evangelical Sisterhood of Mary, and the Evangelische Kanaan Franziskus-Bruderschaft (Kanaan Franciscan Brothers).\nThe Anglican church retained the Catholic tradition of blessing animals on or near Francis' feast day of 4 October, and more recently Lutheran and other Protestant churches have adopted the practice.\nOrthodox churches.\nFrancis' feast is celebrated at New Skete, an Orthodox Christian monastic community in Cambridge, New York.\nOther faiths.\nOutside of Christianity, other individuals and movements are influenced by the example and teachings of Francis. These include the popular philosopher Eckhart Tolle, who has made videos on the spirituality of Francis.\nThe interfaith spiritual community of Skanda Vale also takes inspiration from the example of Francis, and models itself as an interfaith Franciscan order.\nMain writings.\nFor a complete list, see \"The Franciscan Experience\".\nFrancis is considered the first Italian poet by some literary critics. He believed commoners should be able to pray to God in their own language, and he wrote often in the dialect of Umbria instead of Latin.\nThe anonymous 20th-century prayer \"Make Me an Instrument of Your Peace\" is widely attributed to Francis, but there is no evidence for it.\nIn art.\nThe Franciscan Order promoted devotion to the life of Francis from his canonization onwards. The order commissioned many works for Franciscan churches, either showing him with sacred figures, or episodes from his life. There are large early fresco cycles in the Basilica of San Francesco d'Assisi, parts of which are shown above.\nMedia.\nBooks about Francis (selection).\nHundreds of books have been written about him. The following suggestions are from Franciscan friar Conrad Harkins (1935-2020), director of the Franciscan Institute at St. Bonaventure University."}
{"id": "11640", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11640", "title": "Francois Marie Arouet", "text": ""}
{"id": "11642", "revid": "1024073582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11642", "title": "General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon", "text": "The General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon is a single-engine multirole fighter aircraft originally developed by General Dynamics for the United States Air Force (USAF). Designed as an air superiority day fighter, it evolved into a successful all-weather multirole aircraft. Over 4,600 aircraft have been built since production was approved in 1976. Although no longer being purchased by the U.S. Air Force, improved versions are being built for export customers. In 1993, General Dynamics sold its aircraft manufacturing business to the Lockheed Corporation, which in turn became part of Lockheed Martin after a 1995 merger with Martin Marietta.\nThe Fighting Falcon's key features include a frameless bubble canopy for better visibility, side-mounted control stick to ease control while maneuvering, an ejection seat reclined 30 degrees from vertical to reduce the effect of g-forces on the pilot, and the first use of a relaxed static stability/fly-by-wire flight control system that helps to make it an agile aircraft. The F-16 has an internal M61 Vulcan cannon and 11 locations for mounting weapons and other mission equipment. The F-16's official name is \"Fighting Falcon\", but \"Viper\" is commonly used by its pilots and crews, due to a perceived resemblance to a viper snake as well as the Colonial Viper starfighter on \"Battlestar Galactica\" which aired at the time the F-16 entered service.\nIn addition to active duty in the U.S. Air Force, Air Force Reserve Command, and Air National Guard units, the aircraft is also used by the U.S. Air Force Thunderbirds aerial demonstration team, and as an adversary/aggressor aircraft by the United States Navy. The F-16 has also been procured to serve in the air forces of 25 other nations. As of 2015, it was the world's most numerous fixed-wing aircraft in military service.\nDevelopment.\nLightweight Fighter program.\nExperiences in the Vietnam War revealed the need for air superiority fighters and better air-to-air training for fighter pilots. Based on his experiences in the Korean War and as a fighter tactics instructor in the early 1960s, Colonel John Boyd with mathematician Thomas Christie developed the energy\u2013maneuverability theory to model a fighter aircraft's performance in combat. Boyd's work called for a small, lightweight aircraft that could maneuver with the minimum possible energy loss and which also incorporated an increased thrust-to-weight ratio. In the late 1960s, Boyd gathered a group of like-minded innovators who became known as the Fighter Mafia, and in 1969, they secured Department of Defense funding for General Dynamics and Northrop to study design concepts based on the theory.\nAir Force F-X proponents remained hostile to the concept because they perceived it as a threat to the F-15 program, but the USAF's leadership understood that its budget would not allow it to purchase enough F-15 aircraft to satisfy all of its missions. The Advanced Day Fighter concept, renamed \"F-XX\", gained civilian political support under the reform-minded Deputy Secretary of Defense David Packard, who favored the idea of competitive prototyping. As a result, in May 1971, the Air Force Prototype Study Group was established, with Boyd a key member, and two of its six proposals would be funded, one being the Lightweight Fighter (LWF). The request for proposals issued on 6 January 1972 called for a class air-to-air day fighter with a good turn rate, acceleration, and range, and optimized for combat at speeds of Mach 0.6\u20131.6 and altitudes of . This was the region where USAF studies predicted most future air combat would occur. The anticipated average flyaway cost of a production version was $3\u00a0million. This production plan, though, was only notional, as the USAF had no firm plans to procure the winner.\nSelection of finalists and flyoff.\nFive companies responded, and in 1972, the Air Staff selected General Dynamics' Model 401 and Northrop's P-600 for the follow-on prototype development and testing phase. GD and Northrop were awarded contracts worth $37.9\u00a0million and $39.8\u00a0million to produce the YF-16 and YF-17, respectively, with the first flights of both prototypes planned for early 1974. To overcome resistance in the Air Force hierarchy, the \"Fighter Mafia\" and other LWF proponents successfully advocated the idea of complementary fighters in a high-cost/low-cost force mix. The \"high/low mix\" would allow the USAF to be able to afford sufficient fighters for its overall fighter force structure requirements. The mix gained broad acceptance by the time of the prototypes' flyoff, defining the relationship of the LWF and the F-15.\nThe YF-16 was developed by a team of General Dynamics engineers led by Robert H. Widmer. The first YF-16 was rolled out on 13 December 1973. Its 90-minute maiden flight was made at the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards AFB, California, on 2 February 1974. Its actual first flight occurred accidentally during a high-speed taxi test on 20 January 1974. While gathering speed, a roll-control oscillation caused a fin of the port-side wingtip-mounted missile and then the starboard stabilator to scrape the ground, and the aircraft then began to veer off the runway. The test pilot, Phil Oestricher, decided to lift off to avoid a potential crash, safely landing six minutes later. The slight damage was quickly repaired and the official first flight occurred on time. The YF-16's first supersonic flight was accomplished on 5 February 1974, and the second YF-16 prototype first flew on 9 May 1974. This was followed by the first flights of Northrop's YF-17 prototypes on 9 June and 21 August 1974, respectively. During the fly off, the YF-16s completed 330 sorties for a total of 417 flight hours; the YF-17s flew 288 sorties, covering 345 hours.\nAir Combat Fighter competition.\nIncreased interest turned the LWF into a serious acquisition program. North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Norway were seeking to replace their F-104G Starfighter fighter-bombers. In early 1974, they reached an agreement with the U.S. that if the USAF ordered the LWF winner, they would consider ordering it as well. The USAF also needed to replace its F-105 Thunderchief and F-4 Phantom II fighter-bombers. The U.S. Congress sought greater commonality in fighter procurements by the Air Force and Navy, and in August 1974 redirected Navy funds to a new Navy Air Combat Fighter program that would be a navalized fighter-bomber variant of the LWF. The four NATO allies had formed the Multinational Fighter Program Group (MFPG) and pressed for a U.S. decision by December 1974; thus, the USAF accelerated testing.\nTo reflect this serious intent to procure a new fighter-bomber, the LWF program was rolled into a new Air Combat Fighter (ACF) competition in an announcement by U.S. Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger in April 1974. The ACF would not be a pure fighter, but multi-role, and Schlesinger made it clear that any ACF order would be in addition to the F-15, which extinguished opposition to the LWF. ACF also raised the stakes for GD and Northrop because it brought in competitors intent on securing what was touted at the time as \"the arms deal of the century\". These were Dassault-Breguet's proposed Mirage F1M-53, the Anglo-French SEPECAT Jaguar, and the proposed Saab 37E \"Eurofighter\". Northrop offered the P-530 Cobra, which was similar to the YF-17. The Jaguar and Cobra were dropped by the MFPG early on, leaving two European and the two U.S. candidates. On 11 September 1974, the U.S. Air Force confirmed plans to order the winning ACF design to equip five tactical fighter wings. Though computer modeling predicted a close contest, the YF-16 proved significantly quicker going from one maneuver to the next and was the unanimous choice of those pilots that flew both aircraft.\nOn 13 January 1975, Secretary of the Air Force John L. McLucas announced the YF-16 as the winner of the ACF competition. The chief reasons given by the secretary were the YF-16's lower operating costs, greater range, and maneuver performance that was \"significantly better\" than that of the YF-17, especially at supersonic speeds. Another advantage of the YF-16 \u2013 unlike the YF-17 \u2013 was its use of the Pratt &amp; Whitney F100 turbofan engine, the same powerplant used by the F-15; such commonality would lower the cost of engines for both programs. Secretary McLucas announced that the USAF planned to order at least 650, possibly up to 1,400 production F-16s. In the Navy Air Combat Fighter competition, on 2 May 1975 the Navy selected the YF-17 as the basis for what would become the McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet.\nCommencement of production.\nThe U.S. Air Force initially ordered 15 full-scale development (FSD) aircraft (11 single-seat and four two-seat models) for its flight test program, but was reduced to eight (six F-16A single-seaters and two F-16B two-seaters). The YF-16 design was altered for the production F-16. The fuselage was lengthened by , a larger nose radome was fitted for the AN/APG-66 radar, wing area was increased from to , the tailfin height was decreased, the ventral fins were enlarged, two more stores stations were added, and a single door replaced the original nosewheel double doors. The F-16's weight was increased by 25% over the YF-16 by these modifications.\nThe FSD F-16s were manufactured by General Dynamics in Fort Worth, Texas at United States Air Force Plant 4 in late 1975; the first F-16A rolled out on 20 October 1976 and first flew on 8 December. The initial two-seat model achieved its first flight on 8 August 1977. The initial production-standard F-16A flew for the first time on 7 August 1978 and its delivery was accepted by the USAF on 6 January 1979. The F-16 was given its name of \"Fighting Falcon\" on 21 July 1980, entering USAF operational service with the 34th Tactical Fighter Squadron, 388th Tactical Fighter Wing at Hill AFB in Utah on 1 October 1980.\nOn 7 June 1975, the four European partners, now known as the European Participation Group, signed up for 348 aircraft at the Paris Air Show. This was split among the European Participation Air Forces (EPAF) as 116 for Belgium, 58 for Denmark, 102 for the Netherlands, and 72 for Norway. Two European production lines, one in the Netherlands at Fokker's Schiphol-Oost facility and the other at SABCA's Gosselies plant in Belgium, would produce 184 and 164 units respectively. Norway's Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk and Denmark's Terma A/S also manufactured parts and subassemblies for EPAF aircraft. European co-production was officially launched on 1 July 1977 at the Fokker factory. Beginning in November 1977, Fokker-produced components were sent to Fort Worth for fuselage assembly, then shipped back to Europe for final assembly of EPAF aircraft at the Belgian plant on 15 February 1978; deliveries to the Belgian Air Force began in January 1979. The first Royal Netherlands Air Force aircraft was delivered in June 1979. In 1980, the first aircraft were delivered to the Royal Norwegian Air Force by SABCA and to the Royal Danish Air Force by Fokker.\nDuring the late 1980s and 1990s, Turkish Aerospace Industries (TAI) produced 232 Block 30/40/50 F-16s on a production line in Ankara under license for the Turkish Air Force. TAI also produced 46 Block 40s for Egypt in the mid-1990s and 30 Block 50 from 2010. Korean Aerospace Industries opened a production line for the KF-16 program, producing 140 Block 52s from the mid-1990s to mid-2000s (decade). If India had selected the F-16IN for its Medium Multi-Role Combat Aircraft procurement, a sixth F-16 production line would have been built in India. In May 2013, Lockheed Martin stated there were currently enough orders to keep producing the F-16 until 2017.\nImprovements and upgrades.\nOne change made during production was augmented pitch control to avoid deep stall conditions at high angles of attack. The stall issue had been raised during development but had originally been discounted. Model tests of the YF-16 conducted by the Langley Research Center revealed a potential problem, but no other laboratory was able to duplicate it. YF-16 flight tests were not sufficient to expose the issue; later flight testing on the FSD aircraft demonstrated a real concern. In response, the area of each horizontal stabilizer was increased by 25% on the Block 15 aircraft in 1981 and later retrofitted to earlier aircraft. In addition, a manual override switch to disable the horizontal stabilizer flight limiter was prominently placed on the control console, allowing the pilot to regain control of the horizontal stabilizers (which the flight limiters otherwise lock in place) and recover. Besides reducing the risk of deep stalls, the larger horizontal tail also improved stability and permitted faster takeoff rotation.\nIn the 1980s, the Multinational Staged Improvement Program (MSIP) was conducted to evolve the F-16's capabilities, mitigate risks during technology development, and ensure the aircraft's worth. The program upgraded the F-16 in three stages. The MSIP process permitted the quick introduction of new capabilities, at lower costs and with reduced risks compared to traditional independent upgrade programs. In 2012, the USAF had allocated $2.8 billion to upgrade 350 F-16s while waiting for the F-35 to enter service. One key upgrade has been an auto-GCAS (Ground collision avoidance system) to reduce instances of controlled flight into terrain. Onboard power and cooling capacities limit the scope of upgrades, which often involve the addition of more power-hungry avionics.\nLockheed won many contracts to upgrade foreign operators' F-16s. BAE Systems also offers various F-16 upgrades, receiving orders from South Korea, Oman, Turkey, and the US Air National Guard; BAE lost the South Korean contract due to a price breach in November 2014. In 2012, the USAF assigned the total upgrade contract to Lockheed Martin. Upgrades include Raytheon's Center Display Unit, which replaces several analog flight instruments with a single digital display.\nIn 2013, sequestration budget cuts cast doubt on the USAF's ability to complete the Combat Avionics Programmed Extension Suite (CAPES), a part of secondary programs such as Taiwan's F-16 upgrade. Air Combat Command's General Mike Hostage stated that if he only had money for a service life extension program (SLEP) or CAPES, he would fund SLEP to keep the aircraft flying. Lockheed Martin responded to talk of CAPES cancellation with a fixed-price upgrade package for foreign users. CAPES was not included in the Pentagon's 2015 budget request. The USAF said that the upgrade package will still be offered to the Republic of China Air Force, and Lockheed said that some common elements with the F-35 will keep the radar's unit costs down. In 2014, the USAF issued a RFI to SLEP 300 F-16 C/Ds.\nProduction relocation.\nTo make more room for assembly of its newer F-35 Lightning II fighter aircraft, Lockheed Martin moved the F-16 production from Fort Worth, Texas to its plant in Greenville, South Carolina. Lockheed delivered the last F-16 from Fort Worth to the Iraqi Air Force on 14 November 2017, ending 40 years of F-16 production there. The company is hoping to finish the Greenville move and restart production in 2019, though engineering and modernization work will remain in Fort Worth. A gap in orders made it possible to stop production during the move; after completing orders for the last Iraqi purchase, the company was negotiating an F-16 sale to Bahrain that would be produced in Greenville. This contract was signed in June 2018.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nThe F-16 is a single-engine, highly maneuverable, supersonic, multi-role tactical fighter aircraft. It is much smaller and lighter than its predecessors but uses advanced aerodynamics and avionics, including the first use of a relaxed static stability/fly-by-wire (RSS/FBW) flight control system, to achieve enhanced maneuver performance. Highly agile, the F-16 was the first fighter aircraft purpose-built to pull 9-\"g\" maneuvers and can reach a maximum speed of over Mach 2. Innovations include a frameless bubble canopy for better visibility, a side-mounted control stick, and a reclined seat to reduce g-force effects on the pilot. It is armed with an internal M61 Vulcan cannon in the left wing root and has multiple locations for mounting various missiles, bombs and pods. It has a thrust-to-weight ratio greater than one, providing power to climb and vertical acceleration.\nThe F-16 was designed to be relatively inexpensive to build and simpler to maintain than earlier-generation fighters. The airframe is built with about 80% aviation-grade aluminum alloys, 8% steel, 3% composites, and 1.5% titanium. The leading-edge flaps, stabilators, and ventral fins make use of bonded aluminum honeycomb structures and graphite epoxy lamination coatings. The number of lubrication points, fuel line connections, and replaceable modules is significantly lower than preceding fighters; 80% of the access panels can be accessed without stands. The air intake was placed so it was rearward of the nose but forward enough to minimize air flow losses and reduce aerodynamic drag.\nAlthough the LWF program called for a structural life of 4,000 flight hours, capable of achieving 7.33\u00a0\"g\" with 80% internal fuel; GD's engineers decided to design the F-16's airframe life for 8,000 hours and for 9-\"g\" maneuvers on full internal fuel. This proved advantageous when the aircraft's mission changed from solely air-to-air combat to multi-role operations. Changes in operational use and additional systems have increased weight, necessitating multiple structural strengthening programs.\nGeneral configuration.\nThe F-16 has a cropped-delta wing incorporating wing-fuselage blending and forebody vortex-control strakes; a fixed-geometry, underslung air intake (with splitter plate) to the single turbofan jet engine; a conventional tri-plane empennage arrangement with all-moving horizontal \"stabilator\" tailplanes; a pair of ventral fins beneath the fuselage aft of the wing's trailing edge; and a tricycle landing gear configuration with the aft-retracting, steerable nose gear deploying a short distance behind the inlet lip. There is a boom-style aerial refueling receptacle located behind the single-piece \"bubble\" canopy of the cockpit. Split-flap speedbrakes are located at the aft end of the wing-body fairing, and a tailhook is mounted underneath the fuselage. A fairing beneath the rudder often houses ECM equipment or a drag chute. Later F-16 models feature a long dorsal fairing along the fuselage's \"spine\", housing additional equipment or fuel.\nAerodynamic studies in the 1960s demonstrated that the \"vortex lift\" phenomenon could be harnessed by highly swept wing configurations to reach higher angles of attack, using leading edge vortex flow off a slender lifting surface. As the F-16 was being optimized for high combat agility, GD's designers chose a slender cropped-delta wing with a leading-edge sweep of 40\u00b0 and a straight trailing edge. To improve maneuverability, a variable-camber wing with a NACA 64A-204 airfoil was selected; the camber is adjusted by leading-edge and trailing edge flaperons linked to a digital flight control system regulating the flight envelope. The F-16 has a moderate wing loading, reduced by fuselage lift. The vortex lift effect is increased by leading-edge extensions, known as strakes. Strakes act as additional short-span, triangular wings running from the wing root (the junction with fuselage) to a point further forward on the fuselage. Blended into the fuselage and along the wing root, the strake generates a high-speed vortex that remains attached to the top of the wing as the angle of attack increases, generating additional lift and allowing greater angles of attack without stalling. Strakes allow a smaller, lower-aspect-ratio wing, which increases roll rates and directional stability while decreasing weight. Deeper wing roots also increase structural strength and internal fuel volume.\nArmament.\nEarly F-16s could be armed with up to six AIM-9 Sidewinder heat-seeking short-range air-to-air missiles (AAM) by employing rail launchers on each wingtip, as well as radar-guided AIM-7 Sparrow medium-range AAMs in a weapons mix. More recent versions support the AIM-120 AMRAAM, and US aircraft often mount that missile on their wingtips to reduce wing flutter. The aircraft can carry various other AAMs, a wide variety of air-to-ground missiles, rockets or bombs; electronic countermeasures (ECM), navigation, targeting or weapons pods; and fuel tanks on 9 hardpoints \u2013 six under the wings, two on wingtips, and one under the fuselage. Two other locations under the fuselage are available for sensor or radar pods. The F-16 carries a 20 mm (0.787 in) M61A1 Vulcan cannon for close range aerial combat and strafing. The 20 mm cannon is mounted inside the fuselage to the left of the cockpit.\nNegative stability and fly-by-wire.\nThe F-16 is the first production fighter aircraft intentionally designed to be slightly aerodynamically unstable, also known as relaxed static stability (RSS), to improve maneuverability. Most aircraft are designed with positive static stability, which induces aircraft to return to straight and level flight attitude if the pilot releases the controls; this reduces maneuverability as the inherent stability has to be overcome. Aircraft with \"negative\" stability are designed to deviate from controlled flight and are thus more maneuverable. At supersonic speeds the F-16 gains stability (eventually positive) due to aerodynamic changes.\nTo counter the tendency to depart from controlled flight and avoid the need for constant trim inputs by the pilot, the F-16 has a quadruplex (four-channel) fly-by-wire (FBW) flight control system (FLCS). The flight control computer (FLCC) accepts pilot input from the stick and rudder controls and manipulates the control surfaces in such a way as to produce the desired result without inducing control loss. The FLCC conducts thousands of measurements per second on the aircraft's flight attitude to automatically counter deviations from the pilot-set flight path; leading to a common aphorism among pilots: \"You don't fly an F-16; it flies you.\"\nThe FLCC further incorporates limiters governing movement in the three main axes based on attitude, airspeed and angle of attack (AOA); these prevent control surfaces from inducing instability such as slips or skids, or a high AOA inducing a stall. The limiters also prevent maneuvers that would exert more than a 9 \"g\" load. Flight testing has revealed that \"assaulting\" multiple limiters at high AOA and low speed can result in an AOA far exceeding the 25\u00b0 limit, colloquially referred to as \"departing\"; this causes a deep stall; a near-freefall at 50\u00b0 to 60\u00b0 AOA, either upright or inverted. While at a very high AOA, the aircraft's attitude is stable but control surfaces are ineffective. The pitch limiter locks the stabilators at an extreme pitch-up or pitch-down attempting to recover. This can be overridden so the pilot can \"rock\" the nose via pitch control to recover.\nUnlike the YF-17, which had hydromechanical controls serving as a backup to the FBW, General Dynamics took the innovative step of eliminating mechanical linkages from the control stick and rudder pedals to the flight control surfaces. The F-16 is entirely reliant on its electrical systems to relay flight commands, instead of traditional mechanically linked controls, leading to the early moniker of \"the electric jet\". The quadruplex design permits \"graceful degradation\" in flight control response in that the loss of one channel renders the FLCS a \"triplex\" system. The FLCC began as an analog system on the A/B variants but has been supplanted by a digital computer system beginning with the F-16C/D Block 40. The F-16's controls suffered from a sensitivity to static electricity or electrostatic discharge (ESD). Up to 70\u201380% of the C/D models' electronics were vulnerable to ESD.\nCockpit and ergonomics.\nA key feature of the F-16's cockpit is the exceptional field of view. The single-piece, bird-proof polycarbonate bubble canopy provides 360\u00b0 all-round visibility, with a 40\u00b0 look-down angle over the side of the aircraft, and 15\u00b0 down over the nose (compared to the common 12\u201313\u00b0 of preceding aircraft); the pilot's seat is elevated for this purpose. Furthermore, the F-16's canopy lacks the forward bow frame found on many fighters, which is an obstruction to a pilot's forward vision. The F-16's ACES II zero/zero ejection seat is reclined at an unusual tilt-back angle of 30\u00b0; most fighters have a tilted seat at 13\u201315\u00b0. The tilted seat can accommodate taller pilots and increases \"g\"-force tolerance; however, it has been associated with reports of neck ache, possibly caused by incorrect head-rest usage. Subsequent U.S. fighters have adopted more modest tilt-back angles of 20\u00b0. Due to the seat angle and the canopy's thickness, the ejection seat lacks canopy-breakers for emergency egress; instead the entire canopy is jettisoned prior to the seat's rocket firing.\nThe pilot flies primarily by means of an armrest-mounted side-stick controller (instead of a traditional center-mounted stick) and an engine throttle; conventional rudder pedals are also employed. To enhance the pilot's degree of control of the aircraft during high-\"g\" combat maneuvers, various switches and function controls were moved to centralized hands on throttle-and-stick (HOTAS) controls upon both the controllers and the throttle. Hand pressure on the side-stick controller is transmitted by electrical signals via the FBW system to adjust various flight control surfaces to maneuver the F-16. Originally, the side-stick controller was non-moving, but this proved uncomfortable and difficult for pilots to adjust to, sometimes resulting in a tendency to \"over-rotate\" during takeoffs, so the control stick was given a small amount of \"play\". Since the introduction of the F-16, HOTAS controls have become a standard feature on modern fighters.\nThe F-16 has a head-up display (HUD), which projects visual flight and combat information in front of the pilot without obstructing the view; being able to keep their head \"out of the cockpit\" improves the pilot's situation awareness. Further flight and systems information are displayed on multi-function displays (MFD). The left-hand MFD is the primary flight display (PFD), typically showing radar and moving-maps; the right-hand MFD is the system display (SD), presenting information about the engine, landing gear, slat and flap settings, and fuel and weapons status. Initially, the F-16A/B had monochrome cathode ray tube (CRT) displays; replaced by color liquid-crystal displays on the Block 50/52. The MLU introduced compatibility with night-vision goggles (NVG). The Boeing Joint Helmet Mounted Cueing System (JHMCS) is available from Block 40 onwards, for targeting based on where the pilot's head faces, unrestricted by the HUD, using high-off-boresight missiles like the AIM-9X.\nFire-control radar.\nThe F-16A/B was originally equipped with the Westinghouse AN/APG-66 fire-control radar. Its slotted planar array antenna was designed to be compact to fit into the F-16's relatively small nose. In uplook mode, the APG-66 uses a low pulse-repetition frequency (PRF) for medium- and high-altitude target detection in a low-clutter environment, and in look-down/shoot-down employs a medium PRF for heavy clutter environments. It has four operating frequencies within the X band, and provides four air-to-air and seven air-to-ground operating modes for combat, even at night or in bad weather. The Block 15's APG-66(V)2 model added a more powerful signal processing, higher output power, improved reliability and increased range in cluttered or jamming environments. The Mid-Life Update (MLU) program introduced a new model, APG-66(V)2A, which features higher speed and more memory.\nThe AN/APG-68, an evolution of the APG-66, was introduced with the F-16C/D Block 25. The APG-68 has greater range and resolution, as well as 25 operating modes, including ground-mapping, Doppler beam-sharpening, ground moving target indication, sea target, and track while scan (TWS) for up to 10 targets. The Block 40/42's APG-68(V)1 model added full compatibility with Lockheed Martin Low-Altitude Navigation and Targeting Infra-Red for Night (LANTIRN) pods, and a high-PRF pulse-Doppler track mode to provide Interrupted Continuous Wave guidance for semi-active radar-homing (SARH) missiles like the AIM-7 Sparrow. Block 50/52 F-16s initially used the more reliable APG-68(V)5 which has a programmable signal processor employing Very-High-Speed Integrated Circuit (VHSIC) technology. The Advanced Block 50/52 (or 50+/52+) are equipped with the APG-68(V)9 radar, with a 30% greater air-to-air detection range and a synthetic aperture radar (SAR) mode for high-resolution mapping and target detection-recognition. In August 2004, Northrop Grumman was contracted to upgrade the APG-68 radars of Block 40/42/50/52 aircraft to the (V)10 standard, providing all-weather autonomous detection and targeting for Global Positioning System (GPS)-aided precision weapons, SAR mapping and terrain-following radar (TF) modes, as well as interleaving of all modes.\nThe F-16E/F is outfitted with Northrop Grumman's AN/APG-80 active electronically scanned array (AESA) radar. Northrop Grumman developed the latest AESA radar upgrade for the F-16 (selected for USAF and Republic of China Air Force F-16 upgrades), named the Scalable Agile Beam Radar (SABR) APG-83. In July 2007, Raytheon announced that it was developing a Next Generation Radar (RANGR) based on its earlier AN/APG-79 AESA radar as a competitor to Northrop Grumman's AN/APG-68 and AN/APG-80 for the F-16. On February 28, 2020, Northrop Grumman received an order from USAF to extend the service lives of their F-16s to at least 2048 with APG-83 Scalable Agile Beam Radar (SABR) as part of the service-life extension program (SLEP).\nPropulsion.\nThe initial powerplant selected for the single-engined F-16 was the Pratt &amp; Whitney F100-PW-200 afterburning turbofan, a modified version of the F-15's F100-PW-100, rated at 23,830\u00a0lbf (106.0\u00a0kN) thrust. During testing, the engine was found to be prone to compressor stalls and \"rollbacks\", wherein the engine's thrust would spontaneously reduce to idle. Until resolved, the Air Force ordered F-16s to be operated within \"dead-stick landing\" distance of its bases. It was the standard F-16 engine through the Block 25, except for the newly built Block 15s with the Operational Capability Upgrade (OCU). The OCU introduced the 23,770\u00a0lbf (105.7\u00a0kN) F100-PW-220, later installed on Block 32 and 42 aircraft: the main advance being a Digital Electronic Engine Control (DEEC) unit, which improved reliability and reduced stall occurrence. Beginning production in 1988, the \"-220\" also supplanted the F-15's \"-100\", for commonality. Many of the \"-220\" engines on Block 25 and later aircraft were upgraded from 1997 onwards to the \"-220E\" standard, which enhanced reliability and maintainability; unscheduled engine removals were reduced by 35%.\nThe F100-PW-220/220E was the result of the USAF's Alternate Fighter Engine (AFE) program (colloquially known as \"the Great Engine War\"), which also saw the entry of General Electric as an F-16 engine provider. Its F110-GE-100 turbofan was limited by the original inlet to thrust of 25,735\u00a0lbf (114.5\u00a0kN), the Modular Common Inlet Duct allowed the F110 to achieve its maximum thrust of 28,984\u00a0lbf (128.9\u00a0kN). (To distinguish between aircraft equipped with these two engines and inlets, from the Block 30 series on, blocks ending in \"0\" (e.g., Block 30) are powered by GE, and blocks ending in \"2\" (e.g., Block 32) are fitted with Pratt &amp; Whitney engines.)\nThe Increased Performance Engine (IPE) program led to the 29,588\u00a0lbf (131.6\u00a0kN) F110-GE-129 on the Block 50 and 29,160\u00a0lbf (129.4\u00a0kN) F100-PW-229 on the Block 52. F-16s began flying with these IPE engines in the early 1990s. Altogether, of the 1,446 F-16C/Ds ordered by the USAF, 556 were fitted with F100-series engines and 890 with F110s. The United Arab Emirates\u2019 Block 60 is powered by the General Electric F110-GE-132 turbofan with a maximum thrust of 32,500\u00a0lbf (144.6\u00a0kN), the highest thrust engine developed for the F-16.\nOperational history.\nF-16s have participated in numerous conflicts, most of them in the Middle East.\nUnited States.\nThe F-16 is being used by the active duty USAF, Air Force Reserve, and Air National Guard units, the USAF aerial demonstration team, the U.S. Air Force Thunderbirds, and as an adversary-aggressor aircraft by the United States Navy at the Naval Strike and Air Warfare Center.\nThe U.S. Air Force, including the Air Force Reserve and the Air National Guard, flew the F-16 in combat during Operation Desert Storm in 1991 and in the Balkans later in the 1990s. F-16s also patrolled the no-fly zones in Iraq during Operations Northern Watch and Southern Watch and served during the wars in Afghanistan (Operation Enduring Freedom) and Iraq (Operation Iraqi Freedom) from 2001 and 2003 respectively. In 2011, Air Force F-16s took part in the intervention in Libya.\nOn 11 September 2001, two unarmed F-16s were launched in an attempt to ram and down United Airlines Flight 93 before it reached Washington, DC, during the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. But Flight 93 was brought down by the passengers first. So the F-16s patrolled the local airspace and escorted the President's airplane that day.\nThe F-16 had been scheduled to remain in service with the U.S. Air Force until 2025. Its replacement was planned to be the F-35A variant of the Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II, which is expected to gradually begin replacing several multi-role aircraft among the program's member nations. However, due to delays in the F-35 program, all USAF F-16s will receive service life extension upgrades.\nIsrael.\nThe F-16's first air-to-air combat success was achieved by the Israeli Air Force (IAF) over the Bekaa Valley on 28 April 1981, against a Syrian Mi-8 helicopter, which was downed with cannon fire. On 7 June 1981, eight Israeli F-16s, escorted by six F-15s, executed Operation Opera, their first employment in a significant air-to-ground operation. This raid severely damaged Osirak, an Iraqi nuclear reactor under construction near Baghdad, to prevent the regime of Saddam Hussein from using the reactor for the creation of nuclear weapons.\nThe following year, during the 1982 Lebanon War Israeli F-16s engaged Syrian aircraft in one of the largest air battles involving jet aircraft, which began on 9 June and continued for two more days. Israeli Air Force F-16s were credited with 44 air-to-air kills during the conflict.\nIn January 2000, Israel completed a purchase of 102 new F-16I aircraft in a deal totaling $4.5\u00a0billion. F-16s were also used in their ground-attack role for strikes against targets in Lebanon. IAF F-16s participated in the 2006 Lebanon War and the 2008\u201309 Gaza War. During and after the 2006 Lebanon war, IAF F-16s shot down Iranian-made UAVs launched by Hezbollah, using Rafael Python 5 air-to-air missiles.\nOn 10 February 2018, an Israeli Air Force F-16I was shot down in northern Israel when it was hit by a relatively old model S-200 (NATO name SA-5 Gammon) surface-to-air missile of the Syrian Air Defense Force. The pilot and navigator ejected safely in Israeli territory. The F-16I was part of a bombing mission against Syrian and Iranian targets around Damascus after an Iranian drone entered Israeli air space and was shot down. An Israel Air Force investigation determined on 27 February 2018 that the loss was due to pilot error since the IAF determined the air crew did not adequately defend themselves.\nPakistan.\nDuring the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, between May 1986 and January 1989, Pakistan Air Force F-16s shot down at least eight intruders from Afghanistan. The first three of these (two Afghan Su-22s and one An-26) were shot down by two pilots. Pakistani pilots also downed five other intruders (two Su-22s, two MiG-23s, and one Su-25). Most of these kills were by AIM-9 Sidewinder missiles, but at least one, a Su-22, was destroyed by cannon fire. Flight Lieutenant Khalid Mahmoud is credited with three of these kills. One F-16 was lost in these battles during an encounter between two F-16s and six Afghan aircraft on 29 April 1987; the pilot ejected safely. The downed F-16 was likely hit accidentally by a Sidewinder fired by the other F-16.\nOn 7 June 2002, a Pakistan Air Force F-16B Block 15 (S. No. 82-605), flown by Sqn. Leader Zulfiqar, shot down an Indian Air Force unmanned aerial vehicle, an Israeli-made Searcher II, using an AIM-9L Sidewinder missile, during a night interception near Lahore, thus achieving a rare air-to-air kill of a drone at night.\nThe Pakistan Air Force has used its F-16s in various foreign and internal military exercises, such as the \"Indus Vipers\" exercise in 2008 conducted jointly with Turkey.\nBetween May 2009 and , the PAF F-16 fleet flew more than 5,500 sorties in support of the Pakistan Army's operations against the Taliban insurgency in the FATA region of North-West Pakistan. More than 80% of the dropped munitions were laser-guided bombs.\nOn 27 February 2019, two Pakistan Air Force , flown by Wg. Cdr. Nauman Ali Khan, Officer Commanding (OC) No. 29 'Aggressor' Squadron, and , flown by Sqn. Ldr. Hassan Mehmood Siddiqui, both aircraft from No. 11 'Arrows' Squadron, reportedly shot down one Indian Air Force (IAF) MiG-21 Bison (from No. 51 Squadron, flown by Wg. Cdr. Abhinandan Varthaman, the Squadron's OC) over Kashmir.\nIndia claimed that a Pakistani F-16 was also shot down by the Indian MiG-21 that was shot down after a few minutes, but the plane crashed in Pakistan administered Kashmir. India also denied loss of any of its Su-30MKI. Pakistan denied the use or loss of any F-16 during the engagement. On 28 February 2019, India displayed debris of an AMRAAM missile to show use of F-16s in the mission. Foreign Policy magazine reported that the US had completed a physical count of Pakistan's F-16s and found none missing. On 6 April 2019, it was reported that the Pentagon declined to make official statement over any such count. Washington Post reported that the Pentagon and the State Department have yet to issue a public statement on the F-16 count. However, there have been no counter-leaks contradicting the report published by the Foreign Policy. On 8 April 2019, the IAF released two radar images of aerial engagement to reassert its claims of downing an F-16. However, Pakistani officials rejected the radar images released by India. The only confirmed loss from the engagement was the MiG-21. On 5 April 2019, PAF officials released images of all four missile recovered from the downed MiG-21 to disprove that the aircraft downed the F-16 with a missile.\nTurkey.\nThe Turkish Air Force acquired its first F-16s in 1987. F-16s were later produced in Turkey under four phases of \"Peace Onyx\" programs. In 2015, they were upgraded to Block 50/52+ with CCIP by Turkish Aerospace Industries. Turkish F-16s are being fitted with indigenous AESA radars and EW suite called SPEWS-II.\nOn 18 June 1992, a Greek Mirage F-1 crashed during a dogfight with a Turkish F-16. On 8 February 1995, a Turkish F-16 crashed into the Aegean sea after being intercepted by Greek Mirage F1 fighters.\nTurkish F-16s participated in the Bosnia Herzegovina and Kosovo since 1993 in support of United Nations resolutions.\nOn 8 October 1996, seven months after the escalation a Greek Mirage 2000 reportedly fired an R.550 Magic II missile and shot down a Turkish F-16D over the Aegean Sea near Chios island. The Turkish pilot died, while the co-pilot ejected and was rescued by Greek forces. In August 2012, after the downing of a RF-4E on the Syrian Coast, Turkish Defence Minister \u0130smet Y\u0131lmaz confirmed that the Turkish F-16D was shot down by a Greek Mirage 2000 with an R.550 Magic II in 1996 after violating Greek airspace near Chios island. Greece denies that the F-16 was shot down. Both Mirage 2000 pilots reported that the F-16 caught fire and they saw one parachute.\nOn 23 May 2006, two Greek F-16s intercepted a Turkish RF-4 reconnaissance aircraft and two F-16 escorts off the coast of the Greek island of Karpathos, within the Athens FIR. A mock dogfight ensued between the two sides, resulting in a midair collision between a Turkish F-16 and a Greek F-16. The Turkish pilot ejected safely, but the Greek pilot died due to damage caused by the collision. Five days before the incident, a Turkish F-16 pilot was doing dangerous maneuvers, while being intercepted by Greek F-16 fighters, attempting to hit a Greek fighter.\nTurkey used its F-16s extensively in its conflict with Kurdish insurgents in southeastern parts of Turkey and Iraq. Turkey launched its first cross-border raid on 16 December 2007, a prelude to the 2008 Turkish incursion into northern Iraq, involving 50 fighters before Operation Sun. This was the first time Turkey had mounted a night-bombing operation on a massive scale, and also the largest operation conducted by the Turkish Air Force.\nDuring the Syrian Civil War, Turkish F-16s were tasked with airspace protection on the Syrian border. After the RF-4 downing in June 2012 Turkey changed its rules of engagement against Syrian aircraft, resulting in scrambles and downings of Syrian combat aircraft. On 16 September 2013, a Turkish Air Force F-16 shot down a Syrian Arab Air Force Mil Mi-17 helicopter in Latakia province near the Turkish border. On 23 March 2014, a Turkish Air Force F-16 shot down a Syrian Arab Air Force Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-23 when it allegedly entered Turkish air space during a ground attack mission against Al Qaeda-linked insurgents. On 16 May 2015, Two Turkish Air Force F-16s shot down a Syrian Mohajer 4 UAV firing two AIM-9 missiles after it trespassed into Turkish airspace for 5 minutes. A Turkish Air Force F-16 shot down a Russian Air Force Sukhoi Su-24 on the Turkey-Syria border on 24 November 2015.\nOn 1 March 2020, two Syrian Sukhoi Su-24s were shot down by Turkish Air Force F-16s using air-to-air missiles over Syria's Idlib province. All four pilots safely ejected. On 3 March 2020, a Syrian Arab Army Air Force L-39 combat trainer was shot down by a Turkish F-16 over Syria's Idlib province. The pilot died.\nAs a part of Turkish F-16 modernization program new air to air missiles are being developed and tested for the aircraft. G\u00d6KTU\u011e program led by TUBITAK SAGE has presented two types of air to air missiles named as Bozdogan (Merlin) and Gokdogan (Peregrine). While Bozdogan has been categorized as a Within Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile (WVRAAM), Gokdogan is a Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air-Missile (BVRAAM). On April 14, 2021, first live test exercise of Bozdogan have successfully completed and the first batch of missiles are expected to delivered throughout the same year to the Turkish Air Force.\nEgypt.\nOn 16 February 2015, Egyptian F-16s struck jihadi weapons caches and training camps in Libya in retaliation for the murder of 21 Egyptian Coptic Christian construction workers by masked militants affiliated with the Islamic State (ISIS). The air strikes killed 64 ISIS fighters, including three leaders in Derna and Sirte on the coast.\nOthers.\nThe Royal Netherlands Air Force, Belgian Air Force, Royal Danish Air Force, Royal Norwegian Air Force, and Venezuela Air Force have flown the F-16 on combat missions.\nA Yugoslavian MiG-29 was shot down by a Dutch F-16AM during the Kosovo War in 1999. Belgian and Danish F-16s also participated in joint operations over Kosovo during the war. Dutch, Belgian, Danish, and Norwegian F-16s were deployed during the 2011 intervention in Libya and in Afghanistan. In Libya, Norwegian F-16s dropped almost 550 bombs and flew 596 missions, some 17% of the total strike missions including the bombing of Muammar Gaddafi's headquarters.\nThe Royal Moroccan Air Force and the Royal Bahraini Air Force each lost a single F-16C, both shot down by Houthis anti aircraft fire during the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen, respectively on 11 May 2015 and on 30 December 2015.\nIn late March 2018, Croatia announced its intention to purchase 12 used Israeli F-16C/D \"Barak\"/\"Brakeet\" jets, pending U.S. approval. Acquiring these F-16s would allow Croatia to retire its aging MiG-21s.\nOn 11 July 2018, Slovakia's government approved the purchase of 14 F-16s Block 70/72 to replace its aging fleet of Soviet-made MiG-29s. A contract was signed on 12 December 2018 in Bratislava.\nVariants.\nF-16 models are denoted by increasing block numbers to denote upgrades. The blocks cover both single- and two-seat versions. A variety of software, hardware, systems, weapons compatibility, and structural enhancements have been instituted over the years to gradually upgrade production models and retrofit delivered aircraft.\nWhile many F-16s were produced according to these block designs, there have been many other variants with significant changes, usually due to modification programs. Other changes have resulted in role-specialization, such as the close air support and reconnaissance variants. Several models were also developed to test new technology. The F-16 design also inspired the design of other aircraft, which are considered derivatives. Older F-16s are being converted into QF-16 drone targets.\nOperators.\nBy July 2010, there had been 4,500 F-16s delivered.\nNotable accidents and incidents.\nThe F-16 has been involved in over 670 hull-loss accidents as of January 2020."}
{"id": "11643", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11643", "title": "First Council of Constantinople", "text": "The First Council of Constantinople (; ) was a council of Christian bishops convened in Constantinople in AD 381 by the Roman Emperor Theodosius I. This second ecumenical council, an effort to attain consensus in the church through an assembly representing all of Christendom, except for the Western Church, confirmed the Nicene Creed, expanding the doctrine thereof to produce the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed, and dealt with sundry other matters. It met from May to July 381 in the Church of Hagia Irene and was affirmed as ecumenical in 451 at the Council of Chalcedon.\nBackground.\nWhen Theodosius ascended to the imperial throne in 380, he began on a campaign to bring the Eastern Church back to Nicene Christianity. Theodosius wanted to further unify the entire empire behind the orthodox position and decided to convene a church council to resolve matters of faith and discipline. Gregory Nazianzus was of similar mind, wishing to unify Christianity. In the spring of 381 they convened the second ecumenical council in Constantinople.\nTheological context.\nThe Council of Nicaea in 325 had not ended the Arian controversy which it had been called to clarify. Arius and his sympathizers, e.g. Eusebius of Nicomedia were admitted back into the church after ostensibly accepting the Nicene creed. Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, the most vocal opponent of Arianism, was ultimately exiled through the machinations of Eusebius of Nicomedia. After the death of Constantine I in 337 and the accession of his Arian-leaning son Constantius II, open discussion of replacing the Nicene creed itself began. Up until about 360, theological debates mainly dealt with the divinity of the Son, the second person of the Trinity. However, because the Council of Nicaea had not clarified the divinity of the Holy Spirit, the third person of the Trinity, it became a topic of debate. The Macedonians denied the divinity of the Holy Spirit. This was also known as Pneumatomachianism.\nNicene Christianity also had its defenders: apart from Athanasius, the Cappadocian Fathers' Trinitarian discourse was influential in the council at Constantinople. Apollinaris of Laodicea, another pro-Nicene theologian, proved controversial. Possibly in an over-reaction to Arianism and its teaching that Christ was not God, he taught that Christ consisted of a human body and a divine mind, rejecting the belief that Christ had a complete human nature, including a human mind. He was charged with confounding the persons of the Godhead, and with giving in to the heretical ways of Sabellius. Basil of Caesarea accused him of abandoning the literal sense of the scripture, and taking up wholly with the allegorical sense. His views were condemned in a Synod at Alexandria, under Athanasius of Alexandria, in 362, and later subdivided into several different heresies, the main ones of which were the Polemians and the Antidicomarianites.\nGeopolitical context.\nTheodosius' strong commitment to Nicene Christianity involved a calculated risk because Constantinople, the imperial capital of the Eastern Empire, was solidly Arian. To complicate matters, the two leading factions of Nicene Christianity in the East, the Alexandrians and the supporters of Meletius in Antioch, were \"bitterly divided ... almost to the point of complete animosity\".\nThe bishops of Alexandria and Rome had worked over a number of years to keep the see of Constantinople from stabilizing. Thus, when Gregory was selected as a candidate for the bishopric of Constantinople, both Alexandria and Rome opposed him because of his Antiochene background.\nSee of Constantinople.\nThe incumbent bishop of Constantinople was Demophilus, a Homoian Arian. On his accession to the imperial throne, Theodosius offered to confirm Demophilus as bishop of the imperial city on the condition of accepting the Nicene Creed; however, Demophilus refused to abandon his Arian beliefs, and was immediately ordered to give up his churches and leave Constantinople. After forty years under the control of Arian bishops, the churches of Constantinople were now restored to those who subscribed to the Nicene Creed; Arians were also ejected from the churches of other cities in the Eastern Roman Empire thus re-establishing Christian orthodoxy in the East.\nThere ensued a contest to control the newly recovered see. A group led by Maximus the Cynic gained the support of Patriarch Peter of Alexandria by playing on his jealousy of the newly created see of Constantinople. They conceived a plan to install a cleric subservient to Peter as bishop of Constantinople so that Alexandria would retain the leadership of the Eastern Churches. Many commentators characterize Maximus as having been proud, arrogant and ambitious. However, it is not clear the extent to which Maximus sought this position due to his own ambition or if he was merely a pawn in the power struggle. In any event, the plot was set into motion when, on a night when Gregory was confined by illness, the conspirators burst into the cathedral and commenced the consecration of Maximus as bishop of Constantinople. They had seated Maximus on the archiepiscopal throne and had just begun shearing away his long curls when the day dawned. The news of what was transpiring quickly spread and everybody rushed to the church. The magistrates appeared with their officers; Maximus and his consecrators were driven from the cathedral, and ultimately completed the tonsure in the tenement of a flute-player.\nThe news of the brazen attempt to usurp the episcopal throne aroused the anger of the local populace among whom Gregory was popular. Maximus withdrew to Thessalonica to lay his cause before the emperor but met with a cold reception there. Theodosius committed the matter to Ascholius, the much respected bishop of Thessalonica, charging him to seek the counsel of Pope Damasus I.\nDamasus' response repudiated Maximus summarily and advised Theodosius to summon a council of bishops for the purpose of settling various church issues such as the schism in Antioch and the consecration of a proper bishop for the see of Constantinople. Damasus condemned the translation of bishops from one see to another and urged Theodosius to \"take care that a bishop who is above reproach is chosen for that see.\"\nThe proceedings.\nThirty-six Pneumatomachians arrived but were denied admission to the council when they refused to accept the Nicene creed.\nSince Peter, the bishop of Alexandria, was not present, the presidency over the council was given to Meletius as bishop of Antioch. The first order of business before the council was to declare the clandestine consecration of Maximus invalid, and to confirm Theodosius' installation of Gregory Nazianzus as Bishop of Constantinople. When Meletius died shortly after the opening of the council, Gregory was selected to lead the council.\nThe Egyptian and Macedonian bishops who had supported Maximus's ordination arrived late for the council. Once there, they refused to recognise Gregory's position as head of the church of Constantinople, arguing that his transfer from the See of Sasima was canonically illegitimate because one of the canons of the Council of Nicaea had forbidden bishops to transfer from their sees.\nMcGuckin describes Gregory as physically exhausted and worried that he was losing the confidence of the bishops and the emperor. Ayres goes further and asserts that Gregory quickly made himself unpopular among the bishops by supporting the losing candidate for the bishopric of Antioch and vehemently opposing any compromise with the Homoiousians.\nRather than press his case and risk further division, Gregory decided to resign his office: \"Let me be as the Prophet Jonah! I was responsible for the storm, but I would sacrifice myself for the salvation of the ship. Seize me and throw me... I was not happy when I ascended the throne, and gladly would I descend it.\" He shocked the council with his surprise resignation and then delivered a dramatic speech to Theodosius asking to be released from his offices. The emperor, moved by his words, applauded, commended his labor, and granted his resignation. The council asked him to appear once more for a farewell ritual and celebratory orations. Gregory used this occasion to deliver a final address (Or. 42) and then departed.\nNectarius, an unbaptized civil official, was chosen to succeed Gregory as president of the council.\nCanons.\nSeven canons, four of these doctrinal canons and three disciplinary canons, are attributed to the council and accepted by both the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Oriental Orthodox Churches; the Roman Catholic Church accepts only the first four because only the first four appear in the oldest copies and there is evidence that the last three were later additions.\nThe first canon is an important dogmatic condemnation of all shades of Arianism, and also of Macedonianism and Apollinarianism.\nThe second canon renewed the Nicene legislation imposing upon the bishops the observance of diocesan and patriarchal limits.\nThe third canon reads:\nThe fourth canon decreed the consecration of Maximus as Bishop of Constantinople to be invalid, declaring \"that [Maximus] neither was nor is a bishop, nor are they who have been ordained by him in any rank of the clergy\". This canon was directed not only against Maximus, but also against the Egyptian bishops who had conspired to consecrate him clandestinely at Constantinople, and against any subordinate ecclesiastics that he might have ordained in Egypt.\nThe fifth canon might actually have been passed the next year, 382, and is in regard to a \"Tome\" of the Western bishops, perhaps that of Pope Damasus I.\nThe sixth canon might belong to the year 382 as well and was subsequently passed at the Quinisext Council as canon 95. It limits the ability to accuse bishops of wrongdoing.\nThe seventh canon regards procedures for receiving certain heretics into the church.\nDispute concerning the third canon.\nThe third canon was a first step in the rising importance of the new imperial capital, just fifty years old, and was notable in that it demoted the patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria. Jerusalem, as the site of the first church, retained its place of honor.\nBaronius asserted that the third canon was not authentic, not in fact decreed by the council. Some medieval Greeks maintained that it did not declare supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, but the primacy; \"the first among equals\", similar to how they today view the Bishop of Constantinople. Throughout the next several centuries, the Western Church asserted that the Bishop of Rome had supreme authority, and by the time of the Great Schism the Roman Catholic Church based its claim to supremacy on the succession of St. Peter. When the First Council of Constantinople was approved, Rome protested the diminished honor to be afforded the bishops of Antioch and Alexandria. The status of these Eastern patriarchs would be brought up again by the Papal Legates at the Council of Chalcedon. Pope Leo the Great, declared that this canon had never been submitted to Rome and that their lessened honor was a violation of the Nicene council order. At the Fourth Council of Constantinople (869), the Roman legates asserted the place of the bishop of Rome's honor over the bishop of Constantinople's.\nAfter the Great Schism of 1054, in 1215 the Fourth Lateran Council declared, in its fifth canon, that the Roman Church \"by the will of God holds over all others pre-eminence of ordinary power as the mother and mistress of all the faithful\". Roman supremacy over the whole world was formally claimed by the new Latin patriarch. The Roman correctores of Gratian, insert the words: \"canon hic ex iis est quos apostolica Romana sedes a principio et longo post tempore non recipit\" (\"this canon is one of those that the Apostolic See of Rome has not accepted from the beginning and ever since\").\nAftermath.\nIt has been asserted by many that a synod was held by Pope Damasus I in the following year (382) which opposed the disciplinary canons of the Council of Constantinople, especially the third canon which placed Constantinople above Alexandria and Antioch. The synod protested against this raising of the bishop of the new imperial capital, just fifty years old, to a status higher than that of the bishops of Alexandria and Antioch, and stated that the primacy of the Roman see had not been established by a gathering of bishops but rather by Christ himself. Thomas Shahan says that, according to Photius too, Pope Damasus approved the council, but he adds that, if any part of the council were approved by this pope, it could have been only its revision of the Nicene Creed, as was the case also when Gregory the Great recognized it as one of the four general councils, but only in its dogmatic utterances.\nNiceno-Constantinopolitan Creed.\nTraditionally, the Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed has been associated with the Council of Constantinople (381). It is roughly equivalent to the Nicene Creed plus two additional articles: an article on the Holy Spirit\u2014describing Him as \"the Lord, the Giver of Life, Who proceeds from the Father, Who with the Father and the Son is worshipped and glorified, and Who spoke through the prophets\"\u2014and an article about the church, baptism, and the resurrection of the dead. (For the full text of both creeds, see Comparison between Creed of 325 and Creed of 381.)\nHowever, scholars are not agreed on the connection between the Council of Constantinople and the Niceno\u2013Constantinopolitan Creed. Some modern scholars believe that this creed, or something close to it, was stated by the bishops at Constantinople, but not promulgated as an official act of the council. Scholars also dispute whether this creed was simply an expansion of the Creed of Nicaea, or whether it was an expansion of another traditional creed similar but not identical to the one from Nicaea. In 451, the Council of Chalcedon referred to this creed as \"the creed ... of the 150 saintly fathers assembled in Constantinople\", indicating that this creed was associated with Constantinople (381) no later than 451.\nChristology.\nThis council condemned Arianism which began to die out with further condemnations at a council of Aquileia by Ambrose of Milan in 381. With the discussion of Trinitarian doctrine now developed, the focus of discussion changed to Christology, which would be the topic of the Council of Ephesus of 431 and the Council of Chalcedon of 451.\nShift of influence from Rome to Constantinople.\nDavid Eastman cites the First Council of Constantinople as another example of the waning influence of Rome over the East. He notes that all three of the presiding bishops came from the East. Damasus had considered both Meletius and Gregory to be illegitimate bishops of their respective sees and yet, as Eastman and others point out, the Eastern bishops paid no heed to his opinions in this regard.\nThe First Council of Constantinople (381) was the first appearance of the term 'New Rome' in connection to Constantinople. The term was employed as the grounds for giving the relatively young church of Constantinople precedence over Alexandria and Antioch ('because it is the New Rome').\nLiturgical commemorations.\nThe 150 individuals at the council are commemorated in the Calendar of saints of the Armenian Apostolic Church on February 17.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church in some places (e.g. Russia) has a feast day for the Fathers of the First Six Ecumenical Councils on the Sunday nearest to July 13 and on May 22."}
{"id": "11644", "revid": "34989777", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11644", "title": "Fourth Council of Constantinople (Eastern Orthodox)", "text": "The Fourth Council of Constantinople was held in 879\u2013880. It confirmed the reinstatement of Photius I as patriarch of Constantinople.\nThe result of this council is accepted as having the authority of an ecumenical council by Eastern Orthodox Christians, who sometimes call it the Eighth Ecumenical Council.\nBackground.\nThe Council settled the dispute that had broken out after the deposition of Ignatius as Patriarch of Constantinople in 858. Ignatius, himself appointed to his office in an uncanonical manner, opposed Caesar Bardas, who had deposed the regent Theodora. In response, Bardas' nephew, the youthful Emperor Michael III engineered Ignatius's deposition and confinement on the charge of treason. The patriarchal throne was filled with Photius, a renowned scholar and kinsman of Bardas. The deposition of Ignatius without a formal ecclesiastical trial and the sudden promotion of Photios caused scandal in the church. Pope Nicholas I and the western bishops took up the cause of Ignatios and condemned Photios's election as uncanonical. In 863, at a synod in Rome the pope deposed Photios, and reappointed Ignatius as the rightful patriarch. However, Photius enjoined the support of the Emperor and responded by calling a Council and excommunicating the pope.\nThis state of affairs changed when Photius's patrons, Bardas and Emperor Michael III, were murdered in 866 and 867, respectively, by Basil the Macedonian, who now usurped the throne. Photios was deposed as patriarch, not so much because he was a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Bardas and Michael, but because Basil was seeking an alliance with the Pope and the western emperor. Photios was removed from his office and banished about the end of September 867, and Ignatios was reinstated on 23 November. Photios was condemned by a Council held at Constantinople from 5 October 869 to 28 February 870. Photius was deposed and barred from the patriarchal office, while Ignatius was reinstated.\nThe Council of 879\u2013880.\nAfter the death of Ignatius in 877, the Emperor made Photius again Patriarch of Constantinople. Another Council was convened in 879, held at Constantinople, comprising the representatives of all the five patriarchates, including that of Rome (all in all 383 bishops). Anthony Edward Siecienski writes: \"In 879 the emperor called for another council to meet in Constantinople in the hopes that the new pope, John VIII (872-882) would recognize the validity of Photius's claim upon the patriarchate. This council, sometimes called the eighth ecumenical in the East was attended by the papal legates (who had brought with them a gift from the pope\u2014a pallium for Photius) and by over 400 bishops, and who immediately confirmed Photius as rightful patriarch.\" The granting of a pallium is a sign of papal approval and the pope's legates \"immediately\" confirmed Photius without awaiting a decision of the council.\nThe council also implicitly condemned the addition of the Filioque to the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed, an addition rejected at that time in Rome: \"The Creed (without the \"filioque\") was read out and a condemnation pronounced against those who 'impose on it their own invented phrases [\u1f30\u03b4\u03af\u03b1\u03c2 \u03b5\u1f51\u03c1\u03b5\u03c3\u03b9\u03bf\u03bb\u03bf\u03b3\u03af\u03b1\u03b9\u03c2] and put this forth as a common lesson to the faithful or to those who return from some kind of heresy and display the audacity to falsify completely [\u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1\u03ba\u03b9\u03b2\u03b4\u03b7\u03bb\u03b5\u1fe6\u03c3\u03b1\u03b9 \u03ac\u03c0\u03bf\u03b8\u03c1\u03b1\u03c3\u03c5\u03bd\u03b8\u03b5\u03af\u03b7] the antiquity of this sacred and venerable \"Horos\" [Rule] with illegitimate words, or additions, or subtractions'.\" Eastern Orthodox Christians argue that thereby the council condemned not only the addition of the Filioque clause to the creed but also denounced the clause as heretical (a view strongly espoused by Photius in his polemics against Rome), while Roman Catholics separate the two and insist on the theological orthodoxy of the clause. According to non-Catholic Philip Schaff, \"To the Greek acts was afterwards added a (pretended) letter of Pope John VIII. to Photius, declaring the Filioque to be an addition which is rejected by the church of Rome, and a blasphemy which must be abolished calmly and by degrees.\"\nConfirmation and further reception.\nWhether and how far the council was confirmed by Pope John VIII is also a matter of dispute: The council was held in the presence of papal legates, who approved of the proceedings, Roman Catholic historian Fr. Francis Dvornik argues that Pope accepted the acts of the council and annulled those of the Council of 869\u2013870. Other Catholic historians, such as Warren Carroll, dispute this view, arguing that the pope rejected the council. Siecienski says that the Pope gave only a qualified assent to the acts of the council. Philip Schaff opines that the Pope, deceived by his legates about the actual proceedings, first applauded the Emperor but later denounced the council. In any case, the Pope had already accepted the reinstatement of Photius as Patriarch. However, later, in the wake of further conflicts between East and West in the 11th century, the council was repudiated.\nOn 8 March 870, three days after the end of the council, the Papal and Eastern delegates met with the Bulgarian ambassadors led by the kavhan Peter to decide the status of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church. Since the Bulgarians were not satisfied with the positions of the Pope after prolonged negotiations, they reached favorable agreement with the Byzantines and the decision was taken that the Bulgarian Church should become Eastern Orthodox.\nThe Photian Schism (863\u2013867) that led to the councils of 869 and 879 represents a break between East and West. While the previous seven ecumenical councils are recognized as ecumenical and authoritative by both East and West, many Eastern Orthodox Christians recognize the council of 879 as the Eighth Ecumenical Council, arguing that it annulled the earlier one. This council is referred to as Ecumenical in the Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs of 1848. The Roman Catholic Church, however, recognizes the council of 869 as the Eighth Ecumenical Council and does not place the later council among Ecumenical Councils. At the time that these councils were being held, this division was not entirely apparent."}
{"id": "11645", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11645", "title": "F. A. Hayek", "text": ""}
{"id": "11646", "revid": "7583140", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11646", "title": "Friedrich Hayek", "text": "Friedrich August von Hayek ( , ; 8 May 1899 \u2013 23 March 1992), often referred to by his initials F. A. Hayek, was an Austrian-British economist and philosopher who is best known for his defence of classical liberalism. Hayek shared the 1974 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences with Gunnar Myrdal for his work on economics. His account of how changing prices communicate information that helps individuals coordinate their plans is widely regarded as an important achievement in economics, leading to his Nobel Prize.\nHayek served in World War I during his teenage years and said that this experience in the war and his desire to help avoid the mistakes that had led to the war drew him into economics. At the University of Vienna, he studied economics, eventually receiving his doctoral degrees in law in 1921 and in political science in 1923. He subsequently lived and worked in Austria, Great Britain, the United States, and Germany; he became a British subject in 1938. Hayek's academic life was mostly spent at the London School of Economics, and later at the University of Chicago, and the University of Freiburg. Although he is widely considered a leader of the Austrian School of Economics, he also had close connections with the Chicago School of Economics. Hayek was also a major social theorist and political philosopher of the 20th century and as the co-founder of Mont Pelerin Society he contributed to the revival of classical liberalism in the post-war era. His most popular work, \"The Road to Serfdom\", has sold over 2.25\u00a0million copies (as of 2020).\nHayek was appointed a Companion of Honour in 1984 for his academic contributions to economics. He was the first recipient of the Hanns Martin Schleyer Prize in 1984. He also received the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1991 from President George H. W. Bush. In 2011, his article The Use of Knowledge in Society was selected as one of the top 20 articles published in \"The American Economic Review\" during its first 100 years.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nFriedrich August von Hayek was born in Vienna to August von Hayek and Felicitas Hayek (\"n\u00e9e\" von Juraschek). His father, born in 1871 also in Vienna, was a medical doctor employed by the municipal ministry of health. August was a part-time botany lecturer at the University of Vienna. Friedrich was the oldest of three brothers, Heinrich (1900\u20131969) and Erich (1904\u20131986), who were one-and-a-half and five years younger than he was.\nHis father's career as a university professor influenced Hayek's goals later in life. Both of his grandfathers, who lived long enough for Hayek to know them, were scholars. was a leading economist in Austria-Hungary and a close friend of Eugen B\u00f6hm von Bawerk, one of the founders of the Austrian School of Economics. Hayek's paternal grandfather, Gustav Edler von Hayek, taught natural sciences at the Imperial \"Realobergymnasium\" (secondary school) in Vienna. He wrote works in the field of biological systematics, some of which are relatively well known.\nOn his mother's side, Hayek was second cousin to the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein. His mother often played with Wittgenstein's sisters and had known him well. As a result of their family relationship, Hayek became one of the first to read Wittgenstein's \"Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus\" when the book was published in its original German edition in 1921. Although he met Wittgenstein on only a few occasions, Hayek said that Wittgenstein's philosophy and methods of analysis had a profound influence on his own life and thought. In his later years, Hayek recalled a discussion of philosophy with Wittgenstein when both were officers during World War I. After Wittgenstein's death, Hayek had intended to write a biography of Wittgenstein and worked on collecting family materials and later assisted biographers of Wittgenstein. He was related to Wittgenstein on the non-Jewish side of the Wittgenstein family. Since his youth, Hayek frequently socialized with Jewish intellectuals and he mentions that people often speculated whether he was also of Jewish ancestry. That made him curious, so he spent some time researching his ancestors and found out that he has no Jewish ancestors within five generations. The surname Hayek uses the German spelling of the Czech surname H\u00e1jek.\nHayek displayed an intellectual and academic bent from a very young age. He read fluently and frequently before going to school.He was at the bottom of his class in most subjects, and once received three failing grades, in Latin, Greek and mathematics. He was very interested in theater, even attempting to write some tragedies, and biology, regularly helping his father with his botanical work. At his father's suggestion, as a teenager he read the genetic and evolutionary works of Hugo de Vries and August Weismann and the philosophical works of Ludwig Feuerbach. He noted Goethe as the greatest early intellectual influence. In school, Hayek was much taken by one instructor's lectures on Aristotle's ethics. In his unpublished autobiographical notes, Hayek recalled a division between him and his younger brothers who were only a few years younger than him, but he believed that they were somehow of a different generation. He preferred to associate with adults.\nIn 1917, Hayek joined an artillery regiment in the Austro-Hungarian Army and fought on the Italian front. Hayek suffered damage to his hearing in his left ear during the war and was decorated for bravery. During this time, Hayek also survived the 1918 flu pandemic.\nHayek then decided to pursue an academic career, determined to help avoid the mistakes that had led to the war. Hayek said of his experience: \"The decisive influence was really World War I. It's bound to draw your attention to the problems of political organization\". He vowed to work for a better world.\nEducation.\nAt the University of Vienna, Hayek initially studied mostly philosophy, psychology and economics. The University allowed students to choose their subjects freely and there wasn't much obligatory written work, or tests except main exams at the end of the study. By the end of his studies Hayek became more interested in economics, mostly for financial and career reasons; he planned to combine law and economics to start a career in diplomatic service. He earned doctorates in law and political science in 1921 and 1923 respectively.\nFor a short time, when the University of Vienna closed he studied in Constantin von Monakow's Institute of Brain Anatomy, where Hayek spent much of his time staining brain cells. Hayek's time in Monakow's lab and his deep interest in the work of Ernst Mach inspired his first intellectual project, eventually published as \"The Sensory Order\" (1952). It located connective learning at the physical and neurological levels, rejecting the \"sense data\" associationism of the empiricists and logical positivists. Hayek presented his work to the private seminar he had created with Herbert Furth called the Geistkreis.\nDuring Hayek's years at the University of Vienna, Carl Menger's work on the explanatory strategy of social science and Friedrich von Wieser's commanding presence in the classroom left a lasting influence on him. Upon the completion of his examinations, Hayek was hired by Ludwig von Mises on the recommendation of Wieser as a specialist for the Austrian government working on the legal and economic details of the Treaty of Saint Germain. Between 1923 and 1924, Hayek worked as a research assistant to Professor Jeremiah Jenks of New York University, compiling macroeconomic data on the American economy and the operations of the Federal Reserve. He was influenced by Wesley Clair Mitchell and started a doctoral program on problems of monetary stabilization but didn't finish it. His time in America wasn't especially happy. He had very limited social contacts, missed the cultural life of Vienna, and was troubled by his poverty. His family's financial situation deteriorated significantly after the War.\nInitially sympathetic to Wieser's democratic socialism he found Marxism rigid and unattractive, and his mild socialist phase lasted until he was about 23. Hayek's economic thinking shifted away from socialism and toward the classical liberalism of Carl Menger after reading von Mises' book \"Socialism\". It was sometime after reading \"Socialism\" that Hayek began attending von Mises' private seminars, joining several of his university friends, including Fritz Machlup, Alfred Schutz, Felix Kaufmann and Gottfried Haberler, who were also participating in Hayek's own more general and private seminar. It was during this time that he also encountered and befriended noted political philosopher Eric Voegelin, with whom he retained a long-standing relationship.\nLondon.\nWith the help of Mises, in the late 1920s he founded and served as director of the Austrian Institute for Business Cycle Research before joining the faculty of the London School of Economics (LSE) in 1931 at the behest of Lionel Robbins. Upon his arrival in London, Hayek was quickly recognised as one of the leading economic theorists in the world and his development of the economics of processes in time and the co-ordination function of prices inspired the ground-breaking work of John Hicks, Abba P. Lerner and many others in the development of modern microeconomics.\nIn 1932, Hayek suggested that private investment in the public markets was a better road to wealth and economic co-ordination in Britain than government spending programs as argued in an exchange of letters with John Maynard Keynes, co-signed with Lionel Robbins and others in \"The Times.\" The nearly decade long deflationary depression in Britain dating from Winston Churchill's decision in 1925 to return Britain to the gold standard at the old pre-war and pre-inflationary par was the public policy backdrop for Hayek's dissenting engagement with Keynes over British monetary and fiscal policy. Keynes called Hayek's book \"Prices and Production\" \"one of the most frightful muddles I have ever read\", famously adding: \"It is an extraordinary example of how, starting with a mistake, a remorseless logician can end in Bedlam\".\nNotable economists who studied with Hayek at the LSE in the 1930s and 1940s include Arthur Lewis, Ronald Coase, William Baumol, John Kenneth Galbraith, Leonid Hurwicz, Abba Lerner, Nicholas Kaldor, George Shackle, Thomas Balogh, L. K. Jha, Arthur Seldon, Paul Rosenstein-Rodan and Oskar Lange. Some were supportive and some were critical of his ideas. Hayek also taught or tutored many other LSE students, including David Rockefeller.\nUnwilling to return to Austria after the \"Anschluss\" brought it under the control of Nazi Germany in 1938, Hayek remained in Britain. Hayek and his children became British subjects in 1938. He held this status for the remainder of his life, but he did not live in Great Britain after 1950. He lived in the United States from 1950 to 1962 and then mostly in Germany, but also briefly in Austria.\nIn 1947, Hayek was elected a Fellow of the Econometric Society.\n\"The Road to Serfdom\".\nHayek was concerned about the general view in Britain's academia that fascism was a capitalist reaction to socialism and \"The Road to Serfdom\" arose from those concerns. The title was inspired by the French classical liberal thinker Alexis de Tocqueville's writings on the \"road to servitude\". It was first published in Britain by Routledge in March 1944 and was quite popular, leading Hayek to call it \"that unobtainable book\" also due in part to wartime paper rationing. When it was published in the United States by the University of Chicago in September of that year, it achieved greater popularity than in Britain. At the instigation of editor Max Eastman, the American magazine \"Reader's Digest\" also published an abridged version in April 1945, enabling \"The Road to Serfdom\" to reach a far wider audience than academics. The book is widely popular among those advocating individualism and classical liberalism.\nChicago.\nIn 1950, Hayek left the London School of Economics. After spending the 1949\u20131950 academic year as a visiting professor at the University of Arkansas, Hayek was conferred professorship by the University of Chicago, where he became a professor in the Committee on Social Thought. Hayek's salary was funded not by the university, but by an outside foundation, the William Volker Fund.\nHayek had made contact with many at the University of Chicago in the 1940s, with Hayek's \"The Road to Serfdom\" playing a seminal role in transforming how Milton Friedman and others understood how society works. Hayek conducted a number of influential faculty seminars while at the University of Chicago and a number of academics worked on research projects sympathetic to some of Hayek's own, such as Aaron Director, who was active in the Chicago School in helping to fund and establish what became the \"Law and Society\" program in the University of Chicago Law School. Hayek, Frank Knight, Friedman and George Stigler worked together in forming the Mont P\u00e8lerin Society, an international forum for neoliberals. Hayek and Friedman cooperated in support of the Intercollegiate Society of Individualists, later renamed the Intercollegiate Studies Institute, an American student organisation devoted to libertarian ideas.\nAlthough they shared most political beliefs, disagreeing primarily on question of monetary policy, Hayek and Friedman worked in separate university departments with different research interests and never developed a close working relationship. According Alan O. Ebenstein, who wrote biographies of both of them, Hayek probably had a closer friendship with Keynes than with Friedman.\nHayek received a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1954.\nAnother influential political philosopher and German-speaking exile at the University of Chicago at the time was Leo Strauss, but according to his student Joseph Cropsey who also knew Hayek, there was no contact between the two of them.\nAfter editing a book on John Stuart Mill's letters he planned to publish two books on the liberal order, \"The Constitution of Liberty\" and \"The Creative Powers of a Free Civilization\" (eventually the title for the second chapter of \"The Constitution of Liberty\"). He completed \"The Constitution of Liberty\" in May 1959, with publication in February 1960. Hayek was concerned that \"with that condition of men in which coercion of some by others is reduced as much as is possible in society\". Hayek was disappointed that the book did not receive the same enthusiastic general reception as \"The Road to Serfdom\" had sixteen years before.\nHe left Chicago mostly because of financial reasons, being concerned about his pension provisions. His primary source of income was his salary and he received some additional money from book royalties, but avoided other lucrative sources of income for academics such as writing textbooks. He spent a lot on his frequent travels. He regularly spent summers in Austrian Alps, usually in the Tyrolean village Obergurgl where he enjoyed mountain climbing, and also visited Japan four times with additional trips to Tahiti, Fiji, Indonesia, Australia, New Caledonia and Ceylon. After his divorce, his financial situation worsened.\nFreiburg and Salzburg.\nFrom 1962 until his retirement in 1968, he was a professor at the University of Freiburg, West Germany, where he began work on his next book, \"Law, Legislation and Liberty\". Hayek regarded his years at Freiburg as \"very fruitful\". Following his retirement, Hayek spent a year as a visiting professor of philosophy at the University of California, Los Angeles, where he continued work on \"Law, Legislation and Liberty\", teaching a graduate seminar by the same name and another on the philosophy of social science. Preliminary drafts of the book were completed by 1970, but Hayek chose to rework his drafts and finally brought the book to publication in three volumes in 1973, 1976 and 1979.\nHayek became a professor at the University of Salzburg from 1969 to 1977 and then returned to Freiburg. When Hayek left Salzburg in 1977, he wrote: \"I made a mistake in moving to Salzburg\". The economics department was small and the library facilities were inadequate.\nAlthough Hayek's health suffered, and he fell into a depressionary bout, he continued to work on his magnum opus, \"Law, Legislation and Liberty\" in periods when he was feeling better.\nNobel Memorial Prize.\nOn 9 October 1974, it was announced that Hayek would be awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics with Swedish economist Gunnar Myrdal, with the reasons for selection being listed in a press release. He was surprised at being given the award and believed that he was given it with Myrdal to balance the award with someone from the opposite side of the political spectrum. The Sveriges-Riksbank Nobel Prize in Economics was established in 1968, and Hayek was the first non-Keynesian economist to win it.\nDuring the Nobel ceremony in December 1974, Hayek met the Russian dissident Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. Hayek later sent him a Russian translation of \"The Road to Serfdom\". He spoke with apprehension at his award speech about the danger the authority of the prize would lend to an economist, but the prize brought much greater public awareness to the then controversial ideas of Hayek and was described by his biographer as \"the great rejuvenating event in his life\".\nBritish politics.\nIn February 1975, Margaret Thatcher was elected leader of the British Conservative Party. The Institute of Economic Affairs arranged a meeting between Hayek and Thatcher in London soon after. During Thatcher's only visit to the Conservative Research Department in the summer of 1975, a speaker had prepared a paper on why the \"middle way\" was the pragmatic path the Conservative Party should take, avoiding the extremes of left and right. Before he had finished, Thatcher \"reached into her briefcase and took out a book. It was Hayek's \"The Constitution of Liberty\". Interrupting our pragmatist, she held the book up for all of us to see. 'This', she said sternly, 'is what we believe', and banged Hayek down on the table\".\nDespite the media depictions of him as Thatcher's guru and power behind the throne, the communication between him and the Prime Minister was not very regular, they were in contact only once or twice a year. Besides Thatcher, Hayek also made a significant influence on Enoch Powell, Keith Joseph, Nigel Lawson, Geoffrey Howe and John Biffen.\nHayek gained some controversy in 1978 by praising Thatcher's anti-immigration policy proposal in an article which ignited numerous accusations of anti-Semitism and racism because of his reflections on the inability of assimilation of Eastern European Jews in the Vienna of his youth. He defended himself by explaining that he made no racial judgements, only highlighted the problems of acculturation.\nIn 1977, Hayek was critical of the Lib\u2013Lab pact in which the British Liberal Party agreed to keep the British Labour government in office. Writing to \"The Times\", Hayek said: \"May one who has devoted a large part of his life to the study of the history and the principles of liberalism point out that a party that keeps a socialist government in power has lost all title to the name 'Liberal'. Certainly no liberal can in future vote 'Liberal'\". Hayek was criticised by Liberal politicians Gladwyn Jebb and Andrew Phillips, who both claimed that the purpose of the pact was to discourage socialist legislation.\nLord Gladwyn pointed out that the German Free Democrats were in coalition with the German Social Democrats. Hayek was defended by Professor Antony Flew, who stated that\u2014unlike the British Labour Party\u2014the German Social Democrats had since the late 1950s abandoned public ownership of the means of production, distribution and exchange and had instead embraced the social market economy.\nIn 1978, Hayek came into conflict with Liberal Party leader David Steel, who claimed that liberty was possible only with \"social justice and an equitable distribution of wealth and power, which in turn require a degree of active government intervention\" and that the Conservative Party were more concerned with the connection between liberty and private enterprise than between liberty and democracy. Hayek claimed that a limited democracy might be better than other forms of limited government at protecting liberty, but that an unlimited democracy was worse than other forms of unlimited government because \"its government loses the power even to do what it thinks right if any group on which its majority depends thinks otherwise\".\nHayek stated that if the Conservative leader had said \"that free choice is to be exercised more in the market place than in the ballot box, she has merely uttered the truism that the first is indispensable for individual freedom while the second is not: free choice can at least exist under a dictatorship that can limit itself but not under the government of an unlimited democracy which cannot\".\nHayek supported Britain in the Falklands War, writing that it would be justified to attack Argentinian territory instead of just defending the islands, which earned him a lot of criticism in Argentina, a country which he also visited several times. He was also displeased by the weak response of the United States to the Iran hostage crisis, claiming that an ultimatum should be issued and Iran bombed if they do not comply. He supported Ronald Reagan's decision to keep high defence spending, believing that a strong US military is a guarantee of world peace and necessary to keep the Soviet Union under control. President Reagan listed Hayek as among the two or three people who most influenced his philosophy and welcomed him to the White House as a special guest. Senator Barry Goldwater listed Hayek as his favourite political philosopher and congressman Jack Kemp named him an inspiration for his political career.\nRecognition.\nIn 1980, Hayek, a non-practicing Catholic, was one of twelve Nobel laureates to meet with Pope John Paul II \"to dialogue, discuss views in their fields, communicate regarding the relationship between Catholicism and science, and 'bring to the Pontiff's attention the problems which the Nobel Prize Winners, in their respective fields of study, consider to be the most urgent for contemporary man'\"\nHayek was appointed a Companion of Honour (CH) in the 1984 Birthday Honours by Elizabeth II on the advice of British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher for his \"services to the study of economics\". Hayek had hoped to receive a baronetcy and after being awarded the CH sent a letter to his friends requesting that he be called the English version of Friedrich (i.e. Frederick) from now on. After his twenty-minute audience with the Queen, he was \"absolutely besotted\" with her according to his daughter-in-law Esca Hayek. Hayek said a year later that he was \"amazed by her. That ease and skill, as if she'd known me all my life\". The audience with the Queen was followed by a dinner with family and friends at the Institute of Economic Affairs. When later that evening Hayek was dropped off at the Reform Club, he commented: \"I've just had the happiest day of my life\".\nIn 1991, President George H.W. Bush awarded Hayek the Presidential Medal of Freedom, one of the two highest civilian awards in the United States, for a \"lifetime of looking beyond the horizon\".\nDeath.\nHayek died on 23 March 1992 in Freiburg, Germany and was buried on 4 April in the Neustift am Walde cemetery in the northern outskirts of Vienna according to the Catholic rite. In 2011, his article \"The Use of Knowledge in Society\" was selected as one of the top 20 articles published in \"The American Economic Review\" during its first 100 years.\nThe New York University \"Journal of Law and Liberty\" holds an annual lecture in his honor.\nWork.\nBusiness cycle.\nLudwig von Mises had earlier applied the concept of marginal utility to the value of money in his \"Theory of Money and Credit\" (1912) in which he also proposed an explanation for \"industrial fluctuations\" based on the ideas of the old British Currency School and of Swedish economist Knut Wicksell. Hayek used this body of work as a starting point for his own interpretation of the business cycle, elaborating what later became known as the Austrian theory of the business cycle. Hayek spelled out the Austrian approach in more detail in his book, published in 1929, an English translation of which appeared in 1933 as \"Monetary Theory and the Trade Cycle\". There, Hayek argued for a monetary approach to the origins of the cycle. In his \"Prices and Production\" (1931), Hayek argued that the business cycle resulted from the central bank's inflationary credit expansion and its transmission over time, leading to a capital misallocation caused by the artificially low interest rates. Hayek claimed that \"the past instability of the market economy is the consequence of the exclusion of the most important regulator of the market mechanism, money, from itself being regulated by the market process\".\nHayek's analysis was based on Eugen B\u00f6hm von Bawerk's concept of the \"average period of production\" and on the effects that monetary policy could have upon it. In accordance with the reasoning later outlined in his essay \"The Use of Knowledge in Society\" (1945), Hayek argued that a monopolistic governmental agency like a central bank can neither possess the relevant information which should govern supply of money, nor have the ability to use it correctly.\nIn 1929, Lionel Robbins assumed the helm of the London School of Economics (LSE). Eager to promote alternatives to what he regarded as the narrow approach of the school of economic thought that then dominated the English-speaking academic world (centerd at the University of Cambridge and deriving largely from the work of Alfred Marshall), Robbins invited Hayek to join the faculty at LSE, which he did in 1931. According to Nicholas Kaldor, Hayek's theory of the time-structure of capital and of the business cycle initially \"fascinated the academic world\" and appeared to offer a less \"facile and superficial\" understanding of macroeconomics than the Cambridge school's.\nAlso in 1931, Hayek crititicized John Maynard Keynes's \"Treatise on Money\" (1930) in his \"Reflections on the pure theory of Mr. J.M. Keynes\" and published his lectures at the LSE in book form as \"Prices and Production\". For Keynes, unemployment and idle resources are caused by a lack of effective demand, but for Hayek they stem from a previous unsustainable episode of easy money and artificially low interest rates. Keynes asked his friend Piero Sraffa to respond. Sraffa elaborated on the effect of inflation-induced \"forced savings\" on the capital sector and about the definition of a \"natural\" interest rate in a growing economy (see Sraffa\u2013Hayek debate). Others who responded negatively to Hayek's work on the business cycle included John Hicks, Frank Knight and Gunnar Myrdal, who, later on, would share the Sveriges-Riksbank Prize in Economics with him. Kaldor later wrote that Hayek's \"Prices and Production\" had produced \"a remarkable crop of critics\" and that the total number of pages in British and American journals dedicated to the resulting debate \"could rarely have been equalled in the economic controversies of the past\".\nHayek's work, throughout the 1940s, was largely ignored, except for scathing critiques by Nicholas Kaldor. Lionel Robbins himself, who had embraced the Austrian theory of the business cycle in \"The Great Depression\" (1934), later regretted having written the book and accepted many of the Keynesian counter-arguments.\nHayek never produced the book-length treatment of \"the dynamics of capital\" that he had promised in the \"Pure Theory of Capital.\" At the University of Chicago, Hayek was not part of the economics department and did not influence the rebirth of neoclassical theory that took place there (see Chicago school of economics). When in 1974 he shared the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics with Myrdal, the latter complained about being paired with an \"ideologue\". Milton Friedman declared himself \"an enormous admirer of Hayek, but not for his economics. Milton Friedman also commented on some of his writings, saying \"I think \"Prices and Production\" is a very flawed book. I think his [\"Pure Theory of Capital\"] is unreadable. On the other hand, \"The Road to Serfdom\" is one of the great books of our time\".\nEconomic calculation problem.\nBuilding on the earlier work of Mises and others, Hayek also argued that while in centrally planned economies an individual or a select group of individuals must determine the distribution of resources, these planners will never have enough information to carry out this allocation reliably. This argument, first proposed by Max Weber and Ludwig von Mises, says that the efficient exchange and use of resources can be maintained only through the price mechanism in free markets (see economic calculation problem).\nIn 1935, Hayek published \"Collectivist Economic Planning\", a collection of essays from an earlier debate that had been initiated by Mises. Hayek included Mises's essay in which Mises argued that rational planning was impossible under socialism.\nSocialist Oskar Lange responded by invoking general equilibrium theory, which they argued disproved Mises's thesis. They noted that the difference between a planned and a free market system lay in who was responsible for solving the equations. They argued that if some of the prices chosen by socialist managers were wrong, gluts or shortages would appear, signalling them to adjust the prices up or down, just as in a free market. Through such a trial and error, a socialist economy could mimic the efficiency of a free market system while avoiding its many problems.\nHayek challenged this vision in a series of contributions. In \"Economics and Knowledge\" (1937), he pointed out that the standard equilibrium theory assumed that all agents have full and correct information, and how, in his mind, in the real world different individuals have different bits of knowledge and furthermore some of what they believe is wrong.\nIn \"The Use of Knowledge in Society\" (1945), Hayek argued that the price mechanism serves to share and synchronise local and personal knowledge, allowing society's members to achieve diverse and complicated ends through a principle of spontaneous self-organization. He contrasted the use of the price mechanism with central planning, arguing that the former allows for more rapid adaptation to changes in particular circumstances of time and place. Thus, Hayek set the stage for Oliver Williamson's later contrast between markets and hierarchies as alternative co-ordination mechanisms for economic transactions. He used the term catallaxy to describe a \"self-organizing system of voluntary co-operation\". Hayek's research into this argument was specifically cited by the Nobel Committee in its press release awarding Hayek the Nobel prize.\nCriticism of collectivism.\nHayek was one of the leading academic critics of collectivism in the 20th century. In Hayek's view, the central role of the state should be to maintain the rule of law, with as little arbitrary intervention as possible. In his popular book \"The Road to Serfdom\" (1944) and in subsequent academic works, Hayek argued that socialism required central economic planning and that such planning in turn leads towards totalitarianism.\nIn \"The Road to Serfdom\", Hayek wrote:\nHayek posited that a central planning authority would have to be endowed with powers that would impact and ultimately control social life because the knowledge required for centrally planning an economy is inherently decentralised, and would need to be brought under control.\nThough Hayek did argue that the state should provide law centrally, others have pointed out that this contradicts his arguments about the role of judges in \"discovering\" the law, suggesting that Hayek would have supported decentralized provision of legal services.\nHayek also wrote that the state can play a role in the economy, specifically in creating a safety net, saying: There is no reason why, in a society which has reached the general level of wealth ours has, the first kind of security should not be guaranteed to all without endangering general freedom; that is: some minimum of food, shelter and clothing, sufficient to preserve health. Nor is there any reason why the state should not help to organize a comprehensive system of social insurance in providing for those common hazards of life against which few can make adequate provision.\n\"The Denationalization of Money\" is one of his literary works, in which he advocated the establishment of competitions in issuing moneys.\nInvestment and choice.\nHayek made breakthroughs in the choice theory, and examined the inter-relations between non-permanent production goods and \"latent\" or potentially economic permanent resources, building on the choice theoretical insight that \"processes that take more time will evidently not be adopted unless they yield a greater return than those that take less time\".\nPhilosophy of science.\nDuring World War II, Hayek began the Abuse of Reason project. His goal was to show how a number of then-popular doctrines and beliefs had a common origin in some fundamental misconceptions about the social science.\nIdeas were developed in \"The Counter-Revolution of Science\" in 1952 and in some of Hayek's later essays in the philosophy of science such as \"Degrees of Explanation\" (1955) and \"The Theory of Complex Phenomena\" (1964).\nIn \"Counter-Revolution\", for example, Hayek observed that the hard sciences attempt to remove the \"human factor\" to obtain objective and strictly controlled results: \nMeanwhile, the soft sciences are attempting to measure human action itself: \nHe notes that these are mutually exclusive and that social sciences should not attempt to impose positivist methodology, nor to claim objective or definite results:\nPsychology.\nHayek's first academic essay was a psychological work titled 'Contributions to the Theory of the Development of Consciousness' (\"Beitr\u00e4ge zur Theorie der Entwicklung des Bewu\u00dftseins\") In \"The Sensory Order: An Inquiry into the Foundations of Theoretical Psychology\" (1952), Hayek independently developed a \"Hebbian learning\" model of learning and memory\u2014an idea he first conceived in 1920 prior to his study of economics. Hayek's expansion of the \"Hebbian synapse\" construction into a global brain theory received attention in neuroscience, cognitive science, computer science, behavioural science and evolutionary psychology by scientists such as Gerald Edelman and Joaquin Fuster.\n\"The Sensory Order\" can be viewed as a development of his attack on scientism. Hayek posited two orders, namely the sensory order that we experience and the natural order that natural science revealed. Hayek thought that the sensory order actually is a product of the brain. He described the brain as a very complex yet self-ordering hierarchical classification system, a huge network of connections. Because of the nature of the classifier system, richness of our sensory experience can exist. Hayek's description posed problems to behaviorism, whose proponents took the sensory order as fundamental.\nSocial and political philosophy.\nIn the latter half of his career, Hayek made a number of contributions to social and political philosophy which he based on his views on the limits of human knowledge and the idea of spontaneous order in social institutions. He argues in favour of a society organised around a market order in which the apparatus of state is employed almost (though not entirely) exclusively to enforce the legal order (consisting of abstract rules and not particular commands) necessary for a market of free individuals to function. These ideas were informed by a moral philosophy derived from epistemological concerns regarding the inherent limits of human knowledge. Hayek argued that his ideal individualistic and free-market polity would be self-regulating to such a degree that it would be \"a society which does not depend for its functioning on our finding good men for running it\".\nAlthough Hayek believed in a society governed by laws, he disapproved of the notion of \"social justice\". He compared the market to a game in which \"there is no point in calling the outcome just or unjust\" and argued that \"social justice is an empty phrase with no determinable content\". Likewise, \"the results of the individual's efforts are necessarily unpredictable, and the question as to whether the resulting distribution of incomes is just has no meaning\". He generally regarded government redistribution of income or capital as an unacceptable intrusion upon individual freedom, saying that \"the principle of distributive justice, once introduced, would not be fulfilled until the whole of society was organized in accordance with it. This would produce a kind of society which in all essential respects would be the opposite of a free society\".\nSpontaneous order.\nHayek viewed the free price system not as a conscious invention (that which is intentionally designed by man), but as spontaneous order or what Scottish philosopher Adam Ferguson referred to as \"the result of human action but not of human design\". For instance, Hayek put the price mechanism on the same level as language, which he developed in his price signal theory.\nHayek attributed the birth of civilisation to private property in his book \"The Fatal Conceit\" (1988). He explained that price signals are the only means of enabling each economic decision maker to communicate tacit knowledge or dispersed knowledge to each other to solve the economic calculation problem. Alain de Benoist of the \"Nouvelle Droite\" (New Right) produced a highly critical essay on Hayek's work in an issue of \"Telos\", citing the flawed assumptions behind Hayek's idea of \"spontaneous order\" and the authoritarian and totalising implications of his free-market ideology.\nHayek's concept of the market as a spontaneous order was recently applied to ecosystems to defend a broadly non-interventionist policy. Like the market, ecosystems contain complex networks of information, involve an ongoing dynamic process, contain orders within orders and the entire system operates without being directed by a conscious mind. On this analysis, species takes the place of price as a visible element of the system formed by a complex set of largely unknowable elements. Human ignorance about the countless interactions between the organisms of an ecosystem limits our ability to manipulate nature. \nHayek's price signal concept is in relation to how consumers are often unaware of specific events that change market, yet change their decisions, simply because the price goes up. Thus pricing communicates information.\nSocial safety nets.\nWith regard to a social safety net, Hayek advocated \"some provision for those threatened by the extremes of indigence or starvation due to circumstances beyond their control\" and argued that the \"necessity of some such arrangement in an industrial society is unquestioned\u2014be it only in the interest of those who require protection against acts of desperation on the part of the needy\". Summarizing Hayek's views on the topic, journalist Nicholas Wapshott has argued that \"[Hayek] advocated mandatory universal health care and unemployment insurance, enforced, if not directly provided, by the state\". Critical theorist Bernard Harcourt has argued further that \"Hayek was adamant about this\". In 1944, Hayek wrote in \"The Road to Serfdom\": \nIn 1973, Hayek reiterated in \"Law, Legislation and Liberty\": There is no reason why in a free society government should not assure to all, protection against severe deprivation in the form of an assured minimum income, or a floor below which nobody need to descend. To enter into such an insurance against extreme misfortune may well be in the interest of all; or it may be felt to be a clear moral duty of all to assist, within the organised community, those who cannot help themselves. So long as such a uniform minimum income is provided outside the market to all those who, for any reason, are unable to earn in the market an adequate maintenance, this need not lead to a restriction of freedom, or conflict with the Rule of law.\nLiberalism and skepticism.\nArthur M. Diamond argues Hayek's problems arise when he goes beyond claims that can be evaluated within economic science. Diamond argued: The human mind, Hayek says, is not just limited in its ability to synthesize a vast array of concrete facts, it is also limited in its ability to give a deductively sound ground to ethics. Here is where the tension develops, for he also wants to give a reasoned moral defense of the free market. He is an intellectual skeptic who wants to give political philosophy a secure intellectual foundation. It is thus not too surprising that what results is confused and contradictory.\nChandran Kukathas argues that Hayek's defence of liberalism is unsuccessful because it rests on presuppositions that are incompatible. The unresolved dilemma of his political philosophy is how to mount a systematic defence of liberalism if one emphasizes the limited capacity of reason. Norman P. Barry similarly notes that the \"critical rationalism\" in Hayek's writings appears incompatible with \"a certain kind of fatalism, that we must wait for evolution to pronounce its verdict\". Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz argue that the element of paradox exists in the views of Hayek. Noting Hayek's vigorous defense of \"invisible hand\" evolution that Hayek claimed created better economic institutions than could be created by rational design, Friedman pointed out the irony that Hayek was then proposing to replace the monetary system thus created with a deliberate construct of his own design. John N. Gray summarized this view as \"his scheme for an ultra-liberal constitution was a prototypical version of the philosophy he had attacked\". Bruce Caldwell wrote that \"[i]f one is judging his work against the standard of whether he provided a finished political philosophy, Hayek clearly did not succeed\", although he thinks that \"economists may find Hayek's political writings useful\".\nDictatorship and totalitarianism.\nHayek sent Ant\u00f3nio de Oliveira Salazar a copy of \"The Constitution of Liberty\" (1960) in 1962. Hayek hoped that his book\u2014this \"preliminary sketch of new constitutional principles\"\u2014\"may assist\" Salazar \"in his endeavour to design a constitution which is proof against the abuses of democracy\".\nHayek visited Chile in the 1970s and 1980s during the Government Junta of general Augusto Pinochet and accepted being appointed Honorary Chairman of the Centro de Estudios P\u00fablicos, the think tank formed by the economists who transformed Chile into a free market economy.\nAsked about the military dictatorship of Chile by a Chilean interviewer, Hayek is translated from German to Spanish to English as having said the following: As long term institutions, I am totally against dictatorships. But a dictatorship may be a necessary system for a transitional period. [...] Personally I prefer a liberal dictatorship to democratic government devoid of liberalism. My personal impression \u2013 and this is valid for South America \u2013 is that in Chile, for example, we will witness a transition from a dictatorial government to a liberal government.\nIn a letter to the \"London Times\", he defended the Pinochet regime and said that he had \"not been able to find a single person even in much maligned Chile who did not agree that personal freedom was much greater under Pinochet than it had been under Allende\". Hayek admitted that \"it is not very likely that this will succeed, even if, at a particular point in time, it may be the only hope there is\", but he explained that \"[i]t is not certain hope, because it will always depend on the goodwill of an individual, and there are very few individuals one can trust. But if it is the sole opportunity which exists at a particular moment it may be the best solution despite this. And only if and when the dictatorial government is visibly directing its steps towards limited democracy\".\nFor Hayek, the distinction between authoritarianism and totalitarianism has much importance and he was at pains to emphasise his opposition to totalitarianism, noting that the concept of transitional dictatorship which he defended was characterised by authoritarianism, not totalitarianism. For example, when Hayek visited Venezuela in May 1981, he was asked to comment on the prevalence of totalitarian regimes in Latin America. In reply, Hayek warned against confusing \"totalitarianism with authoritarianism\" and said that he was unaware of \"any totalitarian governments in Latin America. The only one was Chile under Allende\". For Hayek, the word \"totalitarian\" signifies something very specific, namely the intention to \"organize the whole of society\" to attain a \"definite social goal\" which is stark in contrast to \"liberalism and individualism\". He claimed that democracy can also be repressive and totalitarian; in \"The Constitution of Liberty\" he often refers to Jacob Talmon's concept of totalitarian democracy.\nImmigration, nationalism and race.\nHayek was skeptical about international immigration and supported Thatcher's anti-immigration policies. In \"Law, Legislation and Liberty\" he elaborated:\nFreedom of migration is one of the widely accepted and wholly admirable principles of liberalism. But should this generally give the stranger a right to settle down in a community in which he is not welcome? Has he a claim to be given a job or be sold a house if no resident is willing to do so? He clearly should be entitled to accept a job or buy a house if offered to him. But have the individual inhabitants a duty to offer either to him? Or ought it to be an offence if they voluntarily agree not to do so? Swiss and Tyrolese villages have a way of keeping out strangers which neither infringe nor rely on any law. Is this anti-liberal or morally justified? For established old communities I have no certain answers to these questions.\nHe was mainly preoccupied with practical problems concerning immigration:\nThere exist, of course, other reasons why such restrictions appear unavoidable so long as certain differences in national or ethnic traditions (especially differences in the rate of propagation) exist-which in turn are not likely to disappear so long as restrictions on migration continue. We must face the fact that we here encounter a limit to the universal application of those liberal principles of policy which the existing facts of the present world make unavoidable.\nHe was not sympathetic to nationalist ideas and was afraid that mass immigration might revive nationalist sentiment among domestic population and ruin the postwar progress that was made among Western nations. He additionally explained:\nHowever far modern man accepts in principle the ideal that the same rules should apply to all men, in fact he does concede it only to those whom he regards as similar to himself, and only slowly learns to extend the range of those he does accept as his likes. There is little legislation can do to speed up this process and much it may do to reverse it by re-awakening sentiments that are already on the wane.\nDespite his opposition to nationalism, Hayek made numerous controversial and inflammatory comments about specific ethnic groups. Answering an interview question about people he cannot deal with he mentioned his dislike of Middle Eastern populations, claiming they were dishonest, and also expressed \"profound dislike\" of Indian students at London School of Economics, saying that were usually \"detestable sons of Bengali moneylenders\". He claimed that his attitude is not based on any racial feeling. During World War II he discussed the possibility of sending his children to the United States, but was concerned that they might be placed with a \"coloured family\". In a later interview, questioned about his attitude towards Black people, he said laconically that he \"did not like dancing Negroes\" and on another occasion he ridiculed the decision to award the Nobel Peace Prize to Martin Luther King Jr.. He also made negative comments about awarding the Prize to Ralph Bunche, Albert Luthuli, and his LSE colleague W. Arthur Lewis who he described as an \"unusually able West Indian negro\". In 1978 Hayek made a month-long visit to South Africa (his third) where he gave numerous lectures, interviews, and met prominent politicians and business leaders, unconcerned about possible propagandistic effect of his tour for Apartheid regime. He expressed his opposition to some of the government policies, believing that publicly funded institutions should treat all citizens equally, but also claimed that private institutions have the right to discriminate. Additionally, he condemned the \"scandalous\" hostility and interference of the international community in South African internal affairs. He further explained his attitude: \nPeople in South Africa have to deal with their own problems, and the idea that you can use external pressure to change people, who after all have built up a civilization of a kind, seems to me morally a very doubtful belief.\nWhile Hayek gave somewhat ambiguous comments on the injustices of Apartheid and proper role of the state, some of his Mont Pelerin colleagues, such as John Davenport and Wilhelm R\u00f6pke, were more ardent supporters of South African government and criticized Hayek for being too soft on the subject.\nInequality and class.\nHayek claimed that the idea that \"all men are born equal\" is untrue because evolution and genetic differences have created \"boundless variety of human nature\". He emphasized the importance of nature, complaining that it became too fashionable to ascribe all human differences to environment. Hayek defended economic inequality, believing that the existence of wealthy class is important not only for economic reasons \u2013 accumulating capital and directing investments \u2013 but also for political, cultural, scientific and conservationist goals which are often financed and promoted by philanthropists. Since the market mechanism cannot provide for all societal needs, some of which are outside of economic calculation, existence of wealthy individuals guarantees the efficiency and pluralism in their development and realization, which could not be guaranteed in the case of state monopoly. Individual wealth offers independence and can create intellectual, moral, political and artistic leaders which are not employed and influenced by the state. According to Hayek the society benefits from having a hereditary wealthy class because individuals born in it don't have to devote their energy to earning a living and can devote themselves to other purposes such as experimenting with different ideas, hobbies and lifestyles which can later be adopted by broader society. In \"The Constitution of Liberty\" he wrote:\nYet is it really so obvious that the tennis or golf professional is a more useful member of society than the wealthy amateurs who devoted their time to perfecting these games? Or that the paid curator of a public museum is more useful than a private collector? Before the reader answers these questions too hastily, I would ask him to consider whether there would ever have been golf or tennis professionals or museum curators if wealthy amateurs had not preceded them. Can we not hope that other new interests will still arise from the playful explorations of those who can indulge in them for the short span of a human life? It is only natural that the development of the art of living and of the non-materialistic values should have profited most from the activities of those who had no material worries.\nHe contrasted individuals who inherited wealth, with upper class values and education, with the \"nouveau riche\" who often use their wealth in more vulgar ways. He decried the disappearance of such leisured aristocratic class, claiming that contemporary Western elites are usually business groups that lack intellectual leadership and coherent \"philosophy of life\" and use their wealth mostly for economic purposes.\nHayek was against high taxes on inheritance, believing that it is natural function of the family to transmit standards, traditions and material goods. Without transmission of property, parents might try to secure the future of their children by placing them in prestigious and high-paying positions, as was customary in socialist countries, which creates even worse injustices. He was also strongly against progressive taxation, noting that in most countries additional taxes paid by the rich amount to insignificantly small amount of total tax revenue and that the only major result of the policy is \"gratification of the envy of the less-well-off\". He also claimed that it is contrary to idea of equality under law and against democratic principle that majority should not impose discriminatory rules against minority.\nInfluence and recognition.\nHayek's influence on the development of economics is widely acknowledged. With regard to the popularity of his Nobel acceptance lecture, Hayek is the second-most frequently cited economist (after Kenneth Arrow) in the Nobel lectures of the prize winners in economics. Hayek wrote critically there of the field of orthodox economics and neo-classical modelisation. A number of Nobel Laureates in economics, such as Vernon Smith and Herbert A. Simon, recognise Hayek as the greatest modern economist. Another Nobel winner, Paul Samuelson, believed that Hayek was worthy of his award, but nevertheless claimed that \"there were good historical reasons for fading memories of Hayek within the mainstream last half of the twentieth century economist fraternity. In 1931, Hayek's \"Prices and Production\" had enjoyed an ultra-short Byronic success. In retrospect hindsight tells us that its mumbo-jumbo about the period of production grossly misdiagnosed the macroeconomics of the 1927\u20131931 (and the 1931\u20132007) historical scene\". Despite this comment, Samuelson spent the last 50 years of his life obsessed with the problems of capital theory identified by Hayek and B\u00f6hm-Bawerk, and Samuelson flatly judged Hayek to have been right and his own teacher Joseph Schumpeter to have been wrong on the central economic question of the 20th century, the feasibility of socialist economic planning in a production goods dominated economy.\nHayek is widely recognised for having introduced the time dimension to the equilibrium construction and for his key role in helping inspire the fields of growth theory, information economics and the theory of spontaneous order. The \"informal\" economics presented in Milton Friedman's massively influential popular work \"Free to Choose\" (1980) is explicitly Hayekian in its account of the price system as a system for transmitting and co-ordinating knowledge. This can be explained by the fact that Friedman taught Hayek's famous paper \"The Use of Knowledge in Society\" (1945) in his graduate seminars.\nIn 1944, he was elected as a Fellow of the British Academy after he was nominated for membership by Keynes.\nHarvard economist and former Harvard University President Lawrence Summers explains Hayek's place in modern economics: \"What's the single most important thing to learn from an economics course today? What I tried to leave my students with is the view that the invisible hand is more powerful than the [un]hidden hand. Things will happen in well-organized efforts without direction, controls, plans. That's the consensus among economists. That's the Hayek legacy\".\nBy 1947, Hayek was an organiser of the Mont Pelerin Society, a group of classical liberals who sought to oppose socialism. Hayek was also instrumental in the founding of the Institute of Economic Affairs, the right-wing libertarian and free-market think tank that inspired Thatcherism. He was in addition a member of the conservative and libertarian Philadelphia Society.\nHayek had a long-standing and close friendship with philosopher of science Karl Popper, who was also from Vienna. In a letter to Hayek in 1944, Popper stated: \"I think I have learnt more from you than from any other living thinker, except perhaps Alfred Tarski\". Popper dedicated his \"Conjectures and Refutations\" to Hayek. For his part, Hayek dedicated a collection of papers, \"Studies in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics\", to Popper and in 1982 said that \"ever since his \"Logik der Forschung\" first came out in 1934, I have been a complete adherent to his general theory of methodology\". Popper also participated in the inaugural meeting of the Mont Pelerin Society. Their friendship and mutual admiration do not change the fact that there are important differences between their ideas.\nHayek also played a central role in Milton Friedman's intellectual development. Friedman wrote: My interest in public policy and political philosophy was rather casual before I joined the faculty of the University of Chicago. Informal discussions with colleagues and friends stimulated a greater interest, which was reinforced by Friedrich Hayek's powerful book The Road to Serfdom, by my attendance at the first meeting of the Mont Pelerin Society in 1947, and by discussions with Hayek after he joined the university faculty in 1950. In addition, Hayek attracted an exceptionally able group of students who were dedicated to a libertarian ideology. They started a student publication, The New Individualist Review, which was the outstanding libertarian journal of opinion for some years. I served as an adviser to the journal and published a number of articles in it...\nWhile Friedman often mentioned Hayek as an important influence, Hayek rarely mentioned Friedman. He deeply disagreed with Chicago School methodology, quantitative and macroeconomic focus, and claimed that Friedman's \"Essays in Positive Economics\" was as dangerous a book as Keynes' \"General Theory\". Friedman also claimed that despite some Popperian influence Hayek always retained basic Misesian praxeological view which he found \"utterly nonsensical\". He also noted that he admired Hayek only for his political works, and disagreed with his technical economics; he called \"Prices and Production\" a \"very flawed book\" and \"The Pure Theory of Capital\" \"unreadable\". There were occasional tensions at the Mont Pelerin meetings between the Hayek's and Friedman's followers that sometimes threatened to split the Society. Although they worked at the same university and shared political beliefs, Hayek and Friedman rarely collaborated professionally and were not close friends.\nHayek's greatest intellectual debt was to Carl Menger, who pioneered an approach to social explanation similar to that developed in Britain by Bernard Mandeville and the Scottish moral philosophers in the Scottish Enlightenment. He had a wide-reaching influence on contemporary economics, politics, philosophy, sociology, psychology and anthropology. For example, Hayek's discussion in \"The Road to Serfdom\" (1944) about truth, falsehood and the use of language influenced some later opponents of postmodernism.\nSome radical libertarians had a negative view of Hayek and his milder form of liberalism. Ayn Rand disliked him, seeing him as a conservative and compromiser. In a letter to Rose Wilder Lane in 1946 she wrote:Now to your question: 'Do those almost with us do more harm than 100% enemies?\u2019 I don\u2019t think this can be answered with a flat 'yes' or 'no,\u2019 because the 'almost' is such a wide term. There is one general rule to observe: those who are with us, but merely do not go far enough are the ones who may do us some good. Those who agree with us in some respects, yet preach contradictory ideas at the same time, are definitely more harmful than 100% enemies. As an example of the kind of 'almost' I would tolerate, I\u2019d name Ludwig von Mises. As an example of our most pernicious enemy, I would name Hayek. That one is real poison.\nHayek made no known written references to Rand.\nHayek and conservatism.\nHayek received new attention in the 1980s and 1990s with the rise of conservative governments in the United States, United Kingdom and Canada. After winning the 1979 United Kingdom general election, Margaret Thatcher appointed Keith Joseph, the director of the Hayekian Centre for Policy Studies, as her secretary of state for industry in an effort to redirect parliament's economic strategies. Likewise, David Stockman, Ronald Reagan's most influential financial official in 1981, was an acknowledged follower of Hayek.\nHayek wrote an essay, \"Why I Am Not a Conservative\" (included as an appendix to \"The Constitution of Liberty\"). In it he disparaged conservatism for its inability to adapt to changing human realities or to offer a positive political program, remarking: \"Conservatism is only as good as what it conserves\". Although he noted that modern day American and British conservatism share many opinions on economics with classical liberals, particularly a belief in the free market, he believed it is because conservatism wants to \"stand still\" whereas liberalism embraces the free market because it \"wants to go somewhere\". He was much more critical of conservativism in continental Europe which he saw as more similar to socialism. European conservatives, according to Hayek, are similar to socialists in their belief that social and political problems can be solved by placing right people in governmental positions and giving them the opportunity to rule without much restrictions. Both are less concerned with limiting state power and more concerned with arbitrarily using that power to promote their own goals and force their values on other people. Hayek also disliked conservative tendency to obscurantism, such as rejection of theory of evolution and naturalistic explanations of life because of supposedly problematic moral consequences that follow from them. He opposed conservatism for \"its hostility to internationalism and its proneness to a strident nationalism\", with its frequent association with imperialism. He also criticized the intolerance and lack of pluralism:\nWhat I mean is that he [conservative] has no political principles which enable him to work with people whose moral values differ from his own for a political order in which both can obey their convictions. It is the recognition of such principles that permits the coexistence of different sets of values that makes it possible to build a peaceful society with a minimum of force. The acceptance of such principles means that we agree to tolerate much that we dislike. There are many values of the conservative which appeal to me more than those of the socialists; yet for a liberal the importance he personally attaches to specific goals is no sufficient justification for forcing others to serve them.\nHayek identified himself as a classical liberal, but noted that in the United States it had become almost impossible to use \"liberal\" in its original definition and the term \"libertarian\" was used instead. He also found libertarianism a term \"singularly unattractive\" and offered the term \"Old Whig\" (a phrase borrowed from Edmund Burke) instead. In his later life, he said: \"I am becoming a Burkean Whig\". Whiggery as a political doctrine had little affinity for classical political economy, the tabernacle of the Manchester School and William Gladstone.\nSamuel Brittan, concluded in 2010 that \"Hayek's book [\"The Constitution of Liberty\"] is still probably the most comprehensive statement of the underlying ideas of the moderate free market philosophy espoused by neoliberals\". Brittan adds that although Raymond Plant (2009) comes out in the end against Hayek's doctrines, Plant gives \"The Constitution of Liberty\" a \"more thorough and fair-minded analysis than it has received even from its professed adherents\". As a neo-liberal, he helped found the Mont Pelerin Society, a prominent neo-liberal think tank where many other minds, such as Mises and Friedman gathered.\nAlthough Hayek is likely a student of the neo-liberal school of libertarianism, he is nonetheless influential in the conservative movement, mainly for his critique of collectivism.\nHayek and policy discussions.\nHayek's ideas on spontaneous order and the importance of prices in dealing with the knowledge problem inspired a debate on economic development and transition economies after the fall of the Berlin wall. For instance, economist Peter Boettke elaborated in detail on why reforming socialism failed and the Soviet Union broke down. Economist Ronald McKinnon uses Hayekian ideas to describe the challenges of transition from a centralized state and planned economy to a market economy. Former World Bank Chief Economist William Easterly emphasizes why foreign aid tends to have no effect at best in books such as \"The White Man's Burden: Why the West's Efforts to Aid the Rest Have Done So Much Ill and So Little Good\".\nSince the 2007\u20132008 financial crisis, there is a renewed interest in Hayek's core explanation of boom-and-bust cycles, which serves as an alternative explanation to that of the savings glut as launched by economist and former Federal Reserve Chair Ben Bernanke. Economists at the Bank for International Settlements, e.g. William R. White, emphasize the importance of Hayekian insights and the impact of monetary policies and credit growth as root causes of financial cycles. Andreas Hoffmann and Gunther Schnabl provide an international perspective and explain recurring financial cycles in the world economy as consequence of gradual interest rate cuts led by the central banks in the large advanced economies since the 1980s. Nicolas Cachanosky outlines the impact of American monetary policy on the production structure in Latin America.\nIn line with Hayek, an increasing number of contemporary researchers sees expansionary monetary policies and too low interest rates as mal-incentives and main drivers of financial crises in general and the subprime market crisis in particular. To prevent problems caused by monetary policy, Hayekian and Austrian economists discuss alternatives to current policies and organizations. For instance, Lawrence H. White argued in favor of free banking in the spirit of Hayek's \"Denationalization of Money\". Along with market monetarist economist Scott Sumner, White also noted that the monetary policy norm that Hayek prescribed, first in \"Prices and Production\" (1931) and as late as the 1970s, was the stabilization of nominal income.\nHayek's ideas find their way into the discussion of the post-Great Recession issues of secular stagnation. Monetary policy and mounting regulation are argued to have undermined the innovative forces of the market economies. Quantitative easing following the financial crises is argued to have not only conserved structural distortions in the economy, leading to a fall in trend-growth. It also created new distortions and contributes to distributional conflicts.\nCentral European politics.\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, the writings of Hayek were a major influence on some of the future postsocialist economic and political elites in Central and Eastern Europe. Supporting examples include the following:\nPersonal life.\nIn August 1926, Hayek married Helen Berta Maria von Fritsch (1901\u20131960), a secretary at the civil service office where Hayek worked, on the rebound upon hearing of his cousin's marriage. They had two children together. Upon the close of World War II, Hayek restarted a relationship with his cousin, who had married since they first met, but kept it secret until 1948. Hayek and Fritsch divorced in July 1950 and he married his cousin Helene Bitterlich (1900\u20131996) just a few weeks later after moving to Arkansas to take advantage of permissive divorce laws. His wife and children were offered settlement and compensation for accepting a divorce. The divorce caused some scandal at LSE where certain academics refused to have anything to do with Hayek. In a 1978 interview to explain his actions, Hayek stated that he was unhappy in his first marriage and as his wife would not grant him a divorce he had to enforce it.\nAfter divorce, for a time, Hayek rarely visited his children, but continued more regular contact with them in his older age, after moving to Europe. Hayek's son, Laurence Hayek (1934\u20132004) was a distinguished microbiologist. His daughter Christine was an entomologist at the British Museum of Natural History, and she cared for him during his last years of declining health.\nHayek had a lifelong interest in biology and was also concerned with ecology and environmental protection. After being awarded Nobel Prize he offered his name to be used for endorsements by World Wildlife Fund, National Audubon Society, and conservationist National Trust. Evolutionary biology was simply one of his interests in natural sciences. Hayek also had a unique interest in epistemology, which he often applied to his own thinking, as a social scientist. He held that methodological differences in the social sciences and in natural sciences were key to understanding why, in his mind, incompetent policies are often allowed.\nHayek was brought up in non-religious setting and decided that he was an agnostic from age 15. He died in 1992 in Freiburg, Germany, where he had lived since leaving Chicago in 1961. Although he was old by the 80s, he continued to write, even finishing a book, \"The Fatal Conceit\", in 1988.\nLegacy and honours.\nHayek holds a mixed legacy, and has been criticized for his advisorship to authoritarian leaders, like Chile's Pinochet.\nEven after his death, Hayek's intellectual presence is noticeable, especially in the universities where he had taught, namely the London School of Economics, the University of Chicago and the University of Freiburg. His influence and contributions have been noted by many. A number of tributes have resulted, many established posthumously:"}
{"id": "11652", "revid": "448191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11652", "title": "Fred Brooks", "text": "Frederick Phillips \"Fred\" Brooks Jr. (born April 19, 1931) is an American computer architect, software engineer, and computer scientist, best known for managing the development of IBM's System/360 family of computers and the OS/360 software support package, then later writing candidly about the process in his seminal book \"The Mythical Man-Month\". Brooks has received many awards, including the National Medal of Technology in 1985 and the Turing Award in 1999.\nEducation.\nBorn in Durham, North Carolina, he attended Duke University, graduating in 1953 with a Bachelor of Science degree in physics, and he received a Ph.D. in applied mathematics (computer science) from Harvard University in 1956, supervised by Howard Aiken.\nBrooks served as the graduate teaching assistant for Ken Iverson at Harvard's graduate program in \"automatic data processing\", the first such program in the world.\nCareer and research.\nBrooks joined IBM in 1956, working in Poughkeepsie, New York, and Yorktown, New York. He worked on the architecture of the IBM 7030 Stretch, a $10 million scientific supercomputer of which nine were sold, and the IBM 7950 Harvest computer for the National Security Agency. Subsequently, he became manager for the development of the IBM System/360 family of computers and the OS/360 software package. During this time he coined the term \"computer architecture\".\nIn 1964, Brooks accepted an invitation to come to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and founded the University's computer science department. He chaired it for 20 years. he was still engaged in active research there, primarily in virtual environments and scientific visualization.\nA few years after leaving IBM he wrote \"The Mythical Man-Month\". The seed for the book was planted by IBM's then-CEO Thomas Watson Jr., who asked in Brooks's exit interview why it was so much harder to manage software projects than hardware projects. In this book, Brooks made the now-famous statement: \"Adding manpower to a late software project makes it later.\" This has since come to be known as \"Brooks's law\". In addition to \"The Mythical Man-Month\", Brooks is also known for the paper \"No Silver Bullet \u2013 Essence and Accident in Software Engineering\".\nIn 2004 in a talk at the Computer History Museum and also in a 2010 interview in \"Wired\" magazine, Brooks was asked \"What do you consider your greatest technological achievement?\" Brooks responded, \"The most important single decision I ever made was to change the IBM 360 series from a 6-bit byte to an 8-bit byte, thereby enabling the use of lowercase letters. That change propagated everywhere.\"\nA \"20th anniversary\" edition of \"The Mythical Man-Month\" with four additional chapters was published in 1995.\nAs well as \"The Mythical Man-Month\", Brooks has authored or co-authored many books and peer reviewed papers including \"Automatic Data Processing\", \"No Silver Bullet\", \"Computer Architecture\", and \"The Design of Design\".\nHis contributions to human\u2013computer interaction are described in Ben Shneiderman's HCI pioneers website.\nService and memberships.\nBrooks has served on a number of US national boards and committees.\nAwards and honors.\nIn chronological order:\nIn January 2005 he gave the Turing Lecture on the subject of \"Collaboration and Telecollaboration in Design\". In 1994 he was inducted as a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery.\nPersonal life.\nBrooks is an evangelical Christian who is active with InterVarsity Christian Fellowship.\nBrooks named his eldest son after Kenneth E. Iverson."}
{"id": "11655", "revid": "1015721459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11655", "title": "Factoid", "text": "A factoid is either an invented or assumed statement presented as a fact, \"or\" a true but brief or trivial item of news or information.\nThe term was coined in 1973 by American writer Norman Mailer to mean a piece of information that becomes accepted as a fact even though it is not actually true, or an invented fact believed to be true because it appears in print. Since its creation in 1973, the term has evolved, now often being used to describe a brief or trivial item of news or information.\nUsage.\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" defines a factoid as a brief or trivial item of news or information and as an item of unreliable information that is repeated so often that it becomes accepted as fact.\nThe term was coined by American writer Norman Mailer in his 1973 biography of Marilyn Monroe. Mailer described factoids as \"facts which have no existence before appearing in a magazine or newspaper\", and created the word by combining the word \"fact\" and the ending \"-oid\" to mean \"similar but not the same\". The \"Washington Times\" described Mailer's new word as referring to \"something that looks like a fact, could be a fact, but in fact is not a fact\".\nAccordingly, factoids may give rise to, or arise from, common misconceptions and urban legends. Several decades after the term was coined by Mailer, it grew to have several meanings, some of which are quite different from each other. In 1993, William Safire identified several contrasting senses of \"factoid\":\nThis new sense of a factoid as a trivial but interesting fact was popularized by the CNN Headline News TV channel, which, during the 1980s and 1990s, often included such a fact under the heading \"factoid\" during newscasts. BBC Radio\u00a02 presenter Steve Wright uses factoids extensively on his show.\nVersus factlet.\nAs a result of confusion over the meaning of factoid, some English-language style and usage guides discommend its use. William Safire in his \"On Language\" column advocated the use of the word \"factlet\" instead of \"factoid\" to express a brief interesting fact as well as a \"little bit of arcana\" but did not explain how adopting this new term would alleviate the ongoing confusion over the existing contradictory common use meanings of \"factoid\".\nSafire suggested that \"factlet\" be used to designate a small or trivial bit of information that is nonetheless true or accurate. A report in \"The Guardian\" identified Safire as the writer who coined the term \"factlet\", although Safire's 1993 column suggested \"factlet\" was already in use at that time. \"The Atlantic\" magazine agreed with Safire, and recommended \"factlet\" to signify a \"small probably unimportant but interesting fact,\" as \"factoid\" still connoted a spurious fact. The term \"factlet\" has been used in publications such as \"Mother Jones\", the \"San Jose Mercury News\", and in the \"Reno Gazette Journal\"."}
{"id": "11656", "revid": "20445980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11656", "title": "Figured bass", "text": "Figured bass, also called thoroughbass, is a kind of musical notation in which numerals and symbols (often accidentals) indicate intervals, chords, and non-chord tones that a musician playing piano, harpsichord, organ, lute (or other instruments capable of playing chords) play in relation to the bass note that these numbers and symbols appear above or below. Figured bass is closely associated with basso continuo, a historically improvised accompaniment used in almost all genres of music in the Baroque period of Classical music ( 1600\u20131750), though rarely in modern music.\nOther systems for denoting or representing chords include plain staff notation, used in classical music; Roman numerals, commonly used in harmonic analysis; chord letters, sometimes used in modern musicology; the Nashville Number System; and various chord names and symbols used in jazz and popular music (e.g., C Major or simply C; D minor, Dm, or D\u2212; G7, etc.).\nBasso continuo.\nBasso continuo parts, almost universal in the Baroque era (1600\u20131750), provided the harmonic structure of the music by supplying a bassline and a chord progression. The phrase is often shortened to \"continuo\", and the instrumentalists playing the continuo part are called the \"continuo group\".\nThe makeup of the continuo group is often left to the discretion of the performers (or, for a large performance, the conductor), and practice varied enormously within the Baroque period. At least one instrument capable of playing chords must be included, such as a piano, harpsichord, organ, lute, theorbo, guitar, regal, or harp. In addition, any number of instruments that play in the bass register may be included, such as cello, double bass, bass viol, or bassoon. The most common combination, at least in modern performances, is harpsichord and cello for instrumental works and secular vocal works, such as operas, and organ and cello for sacred music. A double bass may be added, particularly when accompanying a lower-pitched solo voice (e.g., a bass singer).\nTypically performers match the instrument families used in the full ensemble: including bassoon when the work includes oboes or other winds, but restricting it to cello and/or double bass if only strings are involved. Harps, lutes, and other handheld instruments are more typical of early 17th-century music. Sometimes instruments are specified by the composer: in \"L'Orfeo\" (1607) Monteverdi calls for an exceptionally varied instrumentation, with multiple harpsichords and lutes with a bass violin in the pastoral scenes followed by lamenting to the accompaniment of \"organo di legno\" and \"chitarrone\", while Charon stands watch to the sound of a regal.\nThe keyboard (or other chord-playing instrument) player \"realizes\" (adds in an improvised fashion) a continuo part by playing, in addition to the notated bass line, notes above it to complete chords, either determined ahead of time or improvised in performance. The figured bass notation, described below, is a guide, but performers are also expected to use their musical judgment and the other instruments or voices (notably the lead melody and any accidentals that might be present in it) as a guide. Experienced players sometimes incorporate motives found in the other instrumental parts into their improvised chordal accompaniment. Modern editions of such music usually supply a realized keyboard part, fully written out in staff notation for a player, in place of improvisation. With the rise in historically informed performance, however, the number of performers who are able to improvise their parts from the figures, as Baroque players would have done, has increased.\nBasso continuo, though an essential structural and identifying element of the Baroque period, rapidly declined in the classical period (up to around 1800). A late example is C. P. E. Bach's Concerto in D minor for flute, strings and basso continuo (1747). Examples of its use in the 19th century are rarer, but they do exist: masses by Anton Bruckner, Beethoven, and Franz Schubert, for example, have a basso continuo part that was for an organist.\nFigured bass notation.\nA part notated with figured bass consists of a bass line notated with notes on a musical staff plus added numbers and accidentals (or in some cases (back)slashes added to a number) beneath the staff to indicate what intervals above the bass notes should be played, and therefore which inversions of which chords are to be played.\nThe phrase \"tasto solo\" indicates that only the bass line (without any upper chords) is to be played for a short period, usually until the next figure is encountered. This instructs the chord-playing instrumentalist not to play any improvised chords for a period. The reason \"tasto solo\" had to be specified was because it was an accepted convention that if no figures were present in a section of otherwise figured bass line, the chord-playing performer would either assume that it was a root-position triad, or deduce from the harmonic motion that another figure was implied. For example, if a continuo part in the key of C begins with a C bass note in the first measure, which descends to a B in the second measure, even if there were no figures, the chord-playing instrumentalist would deduce that this was most likely a first inversion dominant chord (spelled B\u2013D\u2013G, from bottom note of the chord to the top).\nComposers were inconsistent in the usages described below. Especially in the 17th century, the numbers were omitted whenever the composer thought the chord was obvious. Early composers such as Claudio Monteverdi often specified the octave by the use of compound intervals such as 10, 11, and 15.\nNumbers.\nContemporary figured bass abbreviations for triads and seventh chords are shown in the table to the right.\nThe numbers indicate the number of scale steps above the given bass-line that a note should be played. For example:\nHere, the bass note is a C, and the numbers 4 and 6 indicate that notes a fourth and a sixth above it should be played, that is an F and an A. In other words, the second inversion of an F major chord can be realized as:\nIn cases where the numbers 3 or 5 would normally be understood, these are usually left out. For example:\nhas the same meaning as\nand can be realized as\nalthough the performer may choose which octave to play the notes in and will often elaborate them in some way, such as by playing them as arpeggios rather than as block chords, or by adding improvised ornaments, depending on the tempo and texture of the music.\nSometimes, other numbers are omitted: a 2 on its own or indicates , for example. From the figured bass-writer's perspective, this bass note is obviously a third inversion seventh chord, so the sixth interval is viewed as an interval that the player should automatically infer. In many cases entire figures can be left out, usually where the chord is obvious from the progression or the melody.\nSometimes the chord changes but the bass note itself is held. In these cases the figures for the new chord are written wherever in the bar they are meant to occur.\nWhen the bass note changes but the notes in the chord above it are to be held, a line is drawn next to the figure or figures, for as long as the chord is to be held, to indicate this:\nNote that when the bass moves the chord intervals have effectively changed, in this case from to , but no additional numbers are written.\nAccidentals.\nWhen an accidental is shown on its own without a number, it applies to the note a third above the lowest note; most commonly, this is the third of the chord. Otherwise, if a number is shown, the accidental affects the said interval. For example, this, showing the widespread default meaning of an accidental without number as applying to the third above the bass:\nSometimes the accidental is placed after the number rather than before it.\nAlternatively, a cross placed next to a number indicates that the pitch of that note should be raised (augmented) by a semitone (so that if it is normally a flat it becomes a natural, and if it is normally a natural it becomes a sharp). A different way to indicate this is to draw a backslash through the number itself. The following three notations, therefore, all indicate the same thing:\nMore rarely, a \"forward\" slash through a number indicates that a pitch is to be lowered (diminished) by a semitone: \nWhen sharps or flats are used with key signatures, they may have a slightly different meaning, especially in 17th-century music. A sharp might be used to cancel a flat in the key signature, or vice versa, instead of a natural sign.\nContemporary uses.\nIn the 20th and 21st century, figured bass is also sometimes used by classical musicians as a shorthand way of indicating chords when a composer is sketching out ideas for a new piece or when a music student is analyzing the harmony of a notated piece of music (e.g., a Bach chorale or a Chopin piano prelude). Figured bass is not generally used in modern musical compositions, except for neo-Baroque pieces. A form of figured bass is used in notation of accordion music; another simplified form is used to notate guitar chords. In the 2000s, outside of professional Baroque ensembles that specialize in the performance practice of the Baroque era, the most common use of figured bass notation is to indicate the inversion in a harmonic analysis or composer's sketch context, however, often without the staff notation, using letter note names followed with the figure. For instance, if a piano piece had a C major triad in the right hand (C\u2013E\u2013G), with the bass note a G with the left hand, this would be a second inversion C major chord, which would be written G. If this same C major triad had an E in the bass, it would be a first inversion chord, which would be written E or E (this is different from the jazz notation, where a C means the major sixth chord C\u2013E\u2013G\u2013A, i.e., a C major with an added 6th degree). The symbols can also be used with Roman numerals in analyzing functional harmony, a usage called \"figured Roman\"; see chord symbol."}
{"id": "11657", "revid": "470876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11657", "title": "Fashion", "text": "Fashion is a form of self-expression and autonomy at a particular period and place and in a specific context, of clothing, footwear, lifestyle, accessories, makeup, hairstyle, and body posture. In its everyday use, the term implies a look defined by the fashion industry as that which is \"trending\". Everything that is considered \"fashion\" is available and popular by the fashion system (industry and media).\nIn reaction to the increased mass-production of commodities clothing at lower prices and global reach, sustainability has become an urgent issue among politicians, brands, and consumers.\nDefinitions of fashion.\nAs noted by fashion scholar Susan Kaiser, everyone is \"forced to appear\", that is, there is no unmediated way of being before others. Whether we want it or not, everyone appearing before another is evaluated by the dress, their attire. This most commonly means how one looks, what colors, materials, and silhouette one wears on the body. Even if the garments are all the same, they will appear different; if the item is washed, folded, mended, or new.\nThe term fashion is plagued by its many different uses, and by the unclear application of the concept. For example, the term connotes difference, but also sameness. It signifies the latest distinction, as well as the return of the old. While it may be defined by an insular and esteemed aesthetic elite, who make a look exclusive, this look is often using references from those excluded from making the distinction.\nWhereas a trend often connotes a peculiar aesthetic expression and often lasting shorter than a season, fashion is a distinctive and industry-supported expression traditionally tied to the fashion season and collections. Style is an expression that lasts over many seasons and is often connected to cultural movements and social markers, symbols, class, and culture (ex. Baroque, Rococo, etc.). According to sociologist Pierre Bourdieu, fashion connotes \"the latest difference.\"\nEven though the terms are often used together, fashion differs from clothing and costumes \u2014 \"clothing\" describes the material and technical garment; \"costume\" has come to mean fancy-dress or masquerade wear. \"Fashion,\" by contrast, describes the social and temporal system that \"activates\" dress as a social signifier in a certain time and context. Philosopher Giorgio Agamben connects fashion to the current intensity of the qualitative moment, to the temporal aspect the Greek called kairos, whereas clothing belongs to the quantitative, what the Greek called Chronos.\nWhile some exclusive brands may claim the label \"haute couture,\" the term is technically limited to members of the \"Chambre Syndicale de la Haute Couture\" in Paris. Haute couture is more aspirational; inspired by art and culture, and in most cases, reserved for the economic elite.\nFashion is also a source of art, allowing people to display their unique tastes and styling. Different designers are influenced by outside stimuli and reflect this inspiration in their works. For example, Gucci's 'stained green' jeans may look like a grass stain, but to many others, they display purity, freshness, and summer.\nFashion is unique, self-fulfilling and may be a part of someone's identity. Just like art, fashion does not have to be liked by everyone, it is an expression of one's tastes. Whilst art is usually locked into a drawing, sculpture, picture etc, clothes are a moving form of art; a unique characteristic.\nFunctions.\nThe functions of fashion include the ability to construct, predict, distribute and implement certain values and samples of behaviour, to form the entity's tastes and manage them. Fashion complements the traditional forms of culture through their turning by modernity and constructs on this basis a new human environment and.\nFashion is one of the means of socialization: the imitation of this sample \"satisfies the needs of social support, gives a general, generally accepted\" to the lonely man (Zimmel). Fashion is presented as a means of social marking, identification, distance.\nThe economic function of fashion is associated with its dynamism: the fashion is ahead of physical wear of the subject (product) moral and, consequently, provides the industry in demand for a new, constantly clearing the market for sales.\nFashion, or one\u2019s own personal style, functions as a \u201csocietal formation always combining two opposite principles. It is a socially acceptable and secure way to distinguish oneself from others and, at the same time, it satisfies the individual\u2019s need for social adaptation and imitation\u201d. While philosopher Immanuel Kant believed fashion \u201chas nothing to do with genuine judgements of taste\u2026 but is a case of unreflected and \u2018blind\u2019 imitation\u201d, sociologist Georg Simmel thought of fashion as something that \u201chelped to overcome the distance between an individual and his society\u201d.\nCharacteristics.\nNormally fashion is associated with:\nClothing fashions.\nFashion is a form of expression. Fashion is what people wear in a specific context. If a stranger would appear in this setting, adorning something different, the stranger would be considered \"out of fashion.\"\nEarly Western travelers, traveling to India, Persia, Turkey, or China, would frequently remark on the absence of change in fashion in those countries. The Japanese \"sh\u014dgun\"s secretary bragged (not completely accurately) to a Spanish visitor in 1609 that Japanese clothing had not changed in over a thousand years. However, there is considerable evidence in Ming China of rapidly changing fashions in Chinese clothing. Costume changes often took place at times of economic or social change, as occurred in ancient Rome and the medieval Caliphate, followed by a long period without significant changes. In 8th-century Moorish Spain, the musician Ziryab introduced to C\u00f3rdoba sophisticated clothing styles based on seasonal and daily fashions from his native Baghdad, modified by his inspiration. Similar changes in fashion occurred in the 11th century in the Middle East following the arrival of the Turks, who introduced clothing styles from Central Asia and the Far East.\nAdditionally, there is a long history of fashion in West Africa. The Cloth was used as a form of currency in trade with the Portuguese and Dutch as early as the 16th Century. Locally produced cloth and cheaper European imports were assembled into new styles to accommodate the growing elite class of West Africans and resident gold and slave traders. There was an exceptionally strong tradition of cloth-weaving in Oyo and the areas inhabited by the Igbo people.\nFashion in Europe and the Western hemisphere.\nAccording to scholars, a specific definition of fashion emerges with the rise of capitalism and more liberal societies in Europe during late medieval times. The beginning in Europe of continual and increasingly rapid change in clothing styles can be fairly reliably dated. Historians, including James Laver and Fernand Braudel, date the start of Western fashion in clothing to the middle of the 14th century, though they tend to rely heavily on contemporary imagery and illuminated manuscripts were not common before the fourteenth century. The most dramatic early change in fashion was a sudden drastic shortening and tightening of the male over-garment from calf-length to barely covering the buttocks, sometimes accompanied with stuffing in the chest to make it look bigger. This created the distinctive Western outline of a tailored top worn over leggings or trousers.\nThe pace of change accelerated considerably in the following century, and women's and men's fashion, especially in the dressing and adorning of the hair, became equally complex. Art historians are, therefore, able to use fashion with confidence and precision to date images, often to within five years, particularly in the case of images from the 15th century. Initially, changes in fashion led to a fragmentation across the upper classes of Europe of what had previously been a very similar style of dressing and the subsequent development of distinctive national styles. These national styles remained very different until a counter-movement in the 17th to 18th centuries imposed similar styles once again, mostly originating from Ancien R\u00e9gime France. Though the rich usually led fashion, the increasing affluence of early modern Europe led to the bourgeoisie and even peasants following trends at a distance, but still uncomfortably close for the elites \u2013 a factor that Fernand Braudel regards as one of the main motors of changing fashion.\nIn the 16th century, national differences were at their most pronounced. Ten 16th century portraits of German or Italian gentlemen may show ten entirely different hats. Albrecht D\u00fcrer illustrated the differences in his actual (or composite) contrast of Nuremberg and Venetian fashions at the close of the 15th century (\"illustration, right\"). The \"Spanish style\" of the late 16th century began the move back to synchronicity among upper-class Europeans, and after a struggle in the mid-17th century, French styles decisively took over leadership, a process completed in the 18th century.\nThough different textile colors and patterns changed from year to year, the cut of a gentleman's coat and the length of his waistcoat, or the pattern to which a lady's dress was cut, changed more slowly. Men's fashions were primarily derived from military models, and changes in a European male silhouette were galvanized in theaters of European war where gentleman officers had opportunities to make notes of different styles such as the \"Steinkirk\" cravat or necktie.\nThough there had been distribution of dressed dolls from France since the 16th century and Abraham Bosse had produced engravings of fashion in the 1620s, the pace of change picked up in the 1780s with increased publication of French engravings illustrating the latest Paris styles. By 1800, all Western Europeans were dressing alike (or thought they were); local variation became first a sign of provincial culture and later a badge of the conservative peasant.\nAlthough tailors and dressmakers were no doubt responsible for many innovations, and the textile industry indeed led many trends, the history of fashion design is generally understood to date from 1858 when the English-born Charles Frederick Worth opened the first authentic \"haute couture\" house in Paris. The Haute house was the name established by the government for the fashion houses that met the standards of the industry. These fashion houses have to adhere to standards such as keeping at least twenty employees engaged in making the clothes, showing two collections per year at fashion shows, and presenting a certain number of patterns to costumers. Since then, the idea of the fashion designer as a celebrity in his or her own right has become increasingly dominant.\nAlthough fashion can be feminine or masculine, additional trends are androgynous. The idea of unisex dressing originated in the 1960s when designers such as Pierre Cardin and Rudi Gernreich created garments, such as stretch jersey tunics or leggings, meant to be worn by both males and females. The impact of unisex wearability expanded more broadly to encompass various themes in fashion, including androgyny, mass-market retail, and conceptual clothing. The fashion trends of the 1970s, such as sheepskin jackets, flight jackets, duffel coats, and unstructured clothing, influenced men to attend social gatherings without a dinner jacket and to accessorize in new ways. Some men's styles blended the sensuality and expressiveness, and the growing gay-rights movement and an emphasis on youth allowed for a new freedom to experiment with style and with fabrics such as wool crepe, which had previously been associated with women's attire.\nThe four major current fashion capitals are acknowledged to be Paris, Milan, New York City, and London, which are all headquarters to the most significant fashion companies and are renowned for their major influence on global fashion. Fashion weeks are held in these cities, where designers exhibit their new clothing collections to audiences. A succession of major designers such as Coco Chanel and Yves Saint-Laurent have kept Paris as the center most watched by the rest of the world, although \"haute couture\" is now subsidized by the sale of ready-to-wear collections and perfume using the same branding.\nModern Westerners have a vast number of choices in the selection of their clothes. What a person chooses to wear can reflect his or her personality or interests. When people who have high cultural status start to wear new or different styles, they may inspire a new fashion trend. People who like or respect these people are influenced by their style and begin wearing similarly styled clothes.\nFashions may vary considerably within a society according to age, social class, generation, occupation, and geography, and may also vary over time. The terms \"fashionista\" and \"fashion victim\" refer to someone who slavishly follows current fashions.\nIn the early 2000s, Asian fashion has become increasingly significant in local and global markets. Countries such as China, Japan, India, and Pakistan have traditionally had large textile industries, which have often been drawn upon by Western designers, but now Asian clothing styles are also gaining influence based on their ideas.\nFashion industry.\nIn its most common use, the term fashion refers to the current expressions on sale through the fashion industry. The global fashion industry is a product of the modern age. In the Western world, tailoring has since medieval times been controlled by guilds, but with the emergence of industrialism, the power of the guilds was undermined. Before the mid-19th century, most clothing was custom-made. It was handmade for individuals, either as home production or on order from dressmakers and tailors. By the beginning of the 20th century, with the rise of new technologies such as the sewing machine, the rise of global trade, the development of the factory system of production, and the proliferation of retail outlets such as department stores, clothing became increasingly mass-produced in standard sizes and sold at fixed prices.\nAlthough the fashion industry developed first in Europe and America, , it is an international and highly globalized industry, with clothing often designed in one country, manufactured in another, and sold worldwide. For example, an American fashion company might source fabric in China and have the clothes manufactured in Vietnam, finished in Italy, and shipped to a warehouse in the United States for distribution to retail outlets internationally.\nThe fashion industry was for a long time one of the largest employers in the United States, and it remains so in the 21st century. However, U.S. employment in fashion began to decline considerably as production increasingly moved overseas, especially to China. Because data on the fashion industry typically are reported for national economies and expressed in terms of the industry's many separate sectors, aggregate figures for the world production of textiles and clothing are difficult to obtain. However, by any measure, the clothing industry accounts for a significant share of world economic output.\nThe fashion industry consists of four levels:\nThe levels of focus in the fashion industry consist of many separate but interdependent sectors. These sectors include Textile Design and Production, Fashion Design and Manufacturing, Fashion Retailing, Marketing and Merchandising, Fashion Shows, and Media and Marketing. Each sector is devoted to the goal of satisfying consumer demand for apparel under conditions that enable participants in the industry to operate at a profit.\nFashion trend.\nA fashion trend signifies a specific look or expression that is spread across a population at a specific time and place. A trend is considered a more ephemeral look, not defined by the seasons when collections are released by the fashion industry. A trend can thus emerge from street style, across cultures, from influencers and celebrities.\nFashion trends are influenced by several factors, including cinema, celebrities, climate, creative explorations, innovations, designs, political, economic, social, and technological. Examining these factors is called a PEST analysis. Fashion forecasters can use this information to help determine the growth or decline of a particular trend.\nSocial influences.\nFashion is inherently a social phenomenon. A person cannot have a fashion by oneself, but for something to be defined as fashion, there needs to be dissemination and followers. This dissemination can take several forms; from the top-down (\"trickle-down\") to bottom-up (\"bubble up\"), or transversally across cultures and through viral memes and media.\nFashion relates to the social and cultural context of an environment. According to Matika, \"Elements of popular culture become fused when a person's trend is associated with a preference for a genre of music\u2026like music, news or literature, fashion has been fused into everyday lives.\" Fashion is not only seen as purely aesthetic; fashion is also a medium for people to create an overall effect and express their opinions and overall art.\nThis mirrors what performers frequently accomplish through music videos. In the music video \u2018Formation\u2019 by Beyonc\u00e9, according to Carlos, \"The pop star pays homage to her Creole roots... tracing the roots of the Louisiana cultural nerve center from the post-abolition era to present day, Beyonc\u00e9 catalogs the evolution of the city's vibrant style and its tumultuous history all at once. Atop a New Orleans police car in a red-and-white Gucci high-collar dress and combat boots, she sits among the ruins of Hurricane Katrina, immediately implanting herself in the biggest national debate on police brutality and race relations in modern day.\"\nThe annual or seasonal runway show is a reflection of fashion trends and a designer's inspirations. For designers like Vivienne Westwood, runway shows are a platform for her voice on politics and current events. For her AW15 menswear show, according to Water, \"where models with severely bruised faces channeled eco-warriors on a mission to save the planet.\" Another recent example is a staged feminist protest march for Chanel's SS15 show, rioting models chanting words of empowerment with signs like \"Feminist but feminine\" and \"Ladies first.\" According to Water, \"The show tapped into Chanel's long history of championing female independence: founder Coco Chanel was a trailblazer for liberating the female body in the post-WWI era, introducing silhouettes that countered the restrictive corsets then in favour.\"\nThe annual Academy Awards ceremony is also a venue where fashion designers and their creations are celebrated.\nSocial media is also a place where fashion is presented most often. Some influencers are paid huge amounts of money to promote a product or clothing item, where the business hopes many viewers will buy the product off the back of the advertisement. Instagram is the most popular platform for advertising, but Facebook, snapchat and other platforms are also used.\nEconomic influences.\nCircular economy.\nWith increasing environmental awareness, the economic imperative to \"Spend now, think later\" is getting increasingly scrutinized. Today's consumer tends to be more mindful about consumption, looking for just enough and better, more durable options. People have also become more conscious of the impact their everyday consumption has on the environment and society, and these initiatives are often described as a move towards sustainable fashion, yet critics argue a circular economy based on growth is an oxymoron, or an increasing spiral of consumption, rather than a utopian cradle-to-cradle circular solution.\nIn today's linear economical system, manufacturers extract resources from the earth to make products that will soon be discarded in landfills, on the other hand, under the circular model, the production of goods operates like systems in nature, where the waste and demise of a substance becomes the food and source of growth for something new. Companies such as MUD Jeans, which is based in the Netherlands employ a leasing scheme for jeans. This Dutch company \"represents a new consuming philosophy that is about using instead of owning,\" according to MUD's website. The concept also protects the company from volatile cotton prices. Consumers pay \u20ac7.50 a month for a pair of jeans; after a year, they can return the jeans to Mud, trade them for a new pair and start another year-long lease, or keep them. MUD is responsible for any repairs during the lease period. Another ethical fashion company, Patagonia set up the first multi-seller branded store on eBay to facilitate secondhand sales; consumers who take the Common Threads pledge can sell in this store and have their gear listed on Patagonia.com's \"Used Gear\" section.\nChina's domestic spending.\nConsumption as a share of gross domestic product in China has fallen for six decades, from 76 percent in 1952 to 28 percent in 2011. China plans to reduce tariffs on a number of consumer goods and expand its 72-hour transit visa plan to more cities in an effort to stimulate domestic consumption.\nThe announcement of import tax reductions follows changes in June 2015, when the government cut the tariffs on clothing, cosmetics and various other goods by half. Among the changes \u2013 easier tax refunds for overseas shoppers and accelerated openings of more duty-free shops in cities covered by the 72-hour visa scheme. The 72-hour visa was introduced in Beijing and Shanghai in January 2013 and has been extended to 18 Chinese cities.\nAccording to reports at the same time, Chinese consumer spending in other countries such as Japan has slowed even though the yen has dropped. There is clearly a trend in the next 5 years that the domestic fashion market will show an increase.\nChina is an interesting market for fashion retail as Chinese consumers' motivation to shop for fashion items are unique from Western Audiences. Demographics have limited association with shopping motivation, with occupation, income and education level having no impact; unlike in Western Countries. Chinese high-street shoppers prefer adventure and social shopping, while online shoppers are motivated by idea shopping. Another difference is how gratification and idea shopping influence spending over \u00a51k per month on fashion items, and regular spending influenced by value shopping.\nMarketing.\nMarket research.\nConsumers of different groups have varying needs and demands. Factors taken into consideration when thinking of consumers' needs include key demographics.\nTo understand consumers' needs and predict fashion trends, fashion companies have to do market research There are two research methods: primary and secondary. Secondary methods are taking other information that has already been collected, for example using a book or an article for research. Primary research is collecting data through surveys, interviews, observation, and/or focus groups. Primary research often focuses on large sample sizes to determine customer's motivations to shop.\nThe benefits of primary research are specific information about a fashion brand's consumer is explored. Surveys are helpful tools; questions can be open-ended or closed-ended. Negative factor surveys and interviews present is that the answers can be biased, due to wording in the survey or on face-to-face interactions. Focus groups, about 8 to 12 people, can be beneficial because several points can be addressed in depth. However, there are drawbacks to this tactic, too. With such a small sample size, it is hard to know if the greater public would react the same way as the focus group. Observation can really help a company gain insight on what a consumer truly wants. There is less of a bias because consumers are just performing their daily tasks, not necessarily realizing they are being observed. For example, observing the public by taking street style photos of people, the consumer did not get dressed in the morning knowing that would have their photo taken necessarily. They just wear what they would normally wear. Through observation patterns can be seen, helping trend forecasters know what their target market needs and wants.\nKnowing the needs of consumers will increase fashion companies' sales and profits. Through research and studying the consumers' lives the needs of the customer can be obtained and help fashion brands know what trends the consumers are ready for.\nSymbolic consumption.\nConsumption is driven not only by need, the symbolic meaning for consumers is also a factor. Consumers engaging in symbolic consumption may develop a sense of self over an extended period of time as various objects are collected as part of the process of establishing their identity and, when the symbolic meaning is shared in a social group, to communicate their identity to others. For teenagers, consumption plays a role in distinguishing the child self from the adult. Researchers have found that the fashion choices of teenagers are used for self-expression and also to recognize other teens who wear similar clothes. The symbolic association of clothing items can link individuals' personality and interests, with music as a prominent factor influencing fashion decisions.\nPolitical influences.\nPolitical figures have played a central role in the development of fashion, at least since the time of French king Louis XIV. For example, First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy was a fashion icon of the early 1960s. Wearing Chanel suits, structural Givenchy shift dresses, and soft color Cassini coats with large buttons, she inspired trends of both elegant formal dressing and classic feminine style.\nCultural upheavals have also had an impact on fashion trends. For example, during the 1960s, the U.S. economy was robust, the divorce rate was increasing, and the government approved the birth control pill. These factors inspired the younger generation to rebel against entrenched social norms. The civil rights movement, a struggle for social justice and equal opportunity for Blacks, and the women's liberation movement, seeking equal rights and opportunities and greater personal freedom for women, were in full bloom. In 1964, the leg-baring mini-skirt was introduced and became a white-hot trend. Fashion designers then began to experiment with the shapes of garments: loose sleeveless dresses, micro-minis, flared skirts, and trumpet sleeves. Fluorescent colors, print patterns, bell-bottom jeans, fringed vests, and skirts became \"de rigueur\" outfits of the 1960s.\nConcern and protest over U.S involvement in the failing Vietnam War also influenced fashion . Camouflage patterns in military clothing, developed to help military personnel be less visible to enemy forces, seeped into streetwear designs in the 1960s. Camouflage trends have disappeared and resurfaced several times since then, appearing in high fashion iterations in the 1990s. Designers such as Valentino, Dior, and Dolce &amp; Gabbana combined camouflage into their runway and ready-to-wear collections. Today, variations of camouflage, including pastel shades, in every article of clothing or accessory, continue to enjoy popularity.\nTechnology influences.\nToday, technology plays a sizable role in society, and technological influences are correspondingly increasing within the realm of fashion. Wearable technology has become incorporated; for example, clothing constructed with solar panels that charge devices and smart fabrics that enhance wearer comfort by changing color or texture based on environmental changes. 3D printing technology has influenced designers such as Iris van Herpen and Kimberly Ovitz. As the technology evolves, 3D printers will become more accessible to designers and eventually, consumers \u2014 these could potentially reshape design and production in the fashion industry entirely.\nInternet technology, enabling the far reaches of online retailers and social media platforms, has created previously unimaginable ways for trends to be identified, marketed, and sold immediately. Trend-setting styles are easily displayed and communicated online to attract customers. Posts on Instagram or Facebook can quickly increase awareness about new trends in fashion, which subsequently may create high demand for specific items or brands, new \"buy now button\" technology can link these styles with direct sales.\nMachine vision technology has been developed to track how fashions spread through society. The industry can now see the direct correlation on how fashion shows influence street-chic outfits. Effects such as these can now be quantified and provide valuable feedback to fashion houses, designers, and consumers regarding trends.\nMedia.\nThe media plays a significant role when it comes to fashion. For instance, an important part of fashion is fashion journalism. Editorial critique, guidelines, and commentary can be found on television and in magazines, newspapers, fashion websites, social networks, and fashion blogs. In recent years, fashion blogging and YouTube videos have become a major outlet for spreading trends and fashion tips, creating an online culture of sharing one's style on a website or Instagram account. Through these media outlets, readers and viewers all over the world can learn about fashion, making it very accessible. In addition to fashion journalism, another media platform that is important in fashion industry is advertisement. Advertisements provide information to audiences and promote the sales of products and services. The fashion industry utilizes advertisements to attract consumers and promote its products to generate sales. A few decades ago when technology was still underdeveloped, advertisements heavily relied on radio, magazines, billboards, and newspapers. These days, there are more various ways in advertisements such as television ads, online-based ads using internet websites, and posts, videos, and live streaming in social media platforms.\nFashion in printed media.\nThere are two subsets of print styling: editorial and lifestyle. Editorial styling is the high - fashion styling seen in fashion magazines, and this tends to be more artistic and fashion-forward. Lifestyle styling focuses on a more overtly commercial goal, like a department store advertisement, a website, or an advertisement where fashion is not what's being sold but the models hired to promote the product in the photo.\nThe dressing practices of the powerful has traditionally been mediated through art and the practices of the courts. The looks of the French court were disseminated through prints, from the 16th century, but became prevalent with the promotion of the centralized court around king Louis XIV, and the style that became known under his name. At the beginning of the 20th century, fashion magazines began to include photographs of various fashion designs and became even more influential than in the past. In cities throughout the world these magazines were greatly sought after and had a profound effect on public taste in clothing. Talented illustrators drew exquisite fashion plates for the publications which covered the most recent developments in fashion and beauty. Perhaps the most famous of these magazines was \"La Gazette du Bon Ton\", which was founded in 1912 by Lucien Vogel and regularly published until 1925 (with the exception of the war years).\n\"Vogue\", founded in the United States in 1892, has been the longest-lasting and most successful of the hundreds of fashion magazines that have come and gone. Increasing affluence after World War\u00a0II and, most importantly, the advent of cheap color printing in the 1960s, led to a huge boost in its sales and heavy coverage of fashion in mainstream women's magazines, followed by men's magazines in the 1990s. One such example of \"Vogue\"'s popularity is the younger version, \"Teen Vogue\", which covers clothing and trends that are targeted more toward the \"fashionista on a budget\". Haute couture designers followed the trend by starting ready-to-wear and perfume lines which are heavily advertised in the magazines and now dwarf their original couture businesses. A recent development within fashion print media is the rise of text-based and critical magazines which aim to prove that fashion is not superficial, by creating a dialogue between fashion academia and the industry. Examples of this development are: \"Fashion Theory\" (1997), \"Fashion Practice: The Journal of Design, Creative Process &amp; the Fashion Industry\" (2008), and \"Vestoj\" (2009).\nFashion in television.\nTelevision coverage began in the 1950s with small fashion features. In the 1960s and 1970s, fashion segments on various entertainment shows became more frequent, and by the 1980s, dedicated fashion shows such as \"Fashion Television\" started to appear. \"FashionTV\" was the pioneer in this undertaking and has since grown to become the leader in both Fashion Television and new media channels. The Fashion Industry is beginning to promote their styles through Bloggers on social media's. Vogue specified Chiara Ferragni as \"blogger of the moment\" due to the rises of followers through her Fashion Blog, that became popular.\nA few days after the 2010 Fall Fashion Week in New York City came to a close, \"The New Islander\"'s Fashion Editor, Genevieve Tax, criticized the fashion industry for running on a seasonal schedule of its own, largely at the expense of real-world consumers. \"Because designers release their fall collections in the spring and their spring collections in the fall, fashion magazines such as \"Vogue\" always and only look forward to the upcoming season, promoting parkas come September while issuing reviews on shorts in January\", she writes. \"Savvy shoppers, consequently, have been conditioned to be extremely, perhaps impractically, farsighted with their buying.\"\nThe fashion industry has been the subject of numerous films and television shows, including the reality show \"Project Runway\" and the drama series \"Ugly Betty\". Specific fashion brands have been featured in film, not only as product placement opportunities, but as bespoke items that have subsequently led to trends in fashion.\nVideos in general have been very useful in promoting the fashion industry. This is evident not only from television shows directly spotlighting the fashion industry, but also movies, events and music videos which showcase fashion statements as well as promote specific brands through product placements.\nControversial advertisements in fashion industry.\nRacism in fashion advertisements.\nThere are some fashion advertisements that were accused of racism and led to boycotts from the customers. Globally known, Swedish fashion brand H&amp;M faced this issue with one of its children's wear advertisements in 2018. A black child wearing a hoodie with a slogan written as \"coolest monkey in the jungle\" right at the center was featured in the ad. When it was released, it immediately became controversial and even led to a boycott. A lot of people including celebrities posted on social media about their resentments towards H&amp;M and refusal to work with and buy its products. H&amp;M issued a statement saying \"we apologise to anyone this may have offended\", which seemed insincere to some. \nAnother fashion advertisement regarding racism is from GAP, an American worldwide clothing brand. GAP collaborated with Ellen DeGeneres in 2016 for the advertisement. It features playful, four young girls where a tall white girl is leaning with her arm on a shorter black girl's head. When this ad was released, some viewers harshly criticized that it underlies passive racism. A representative from The Root, black culture magazine commented on the ad that it portrays the message that black people are undervalued and seen like props for white people to look better. There were different points of views on this issue, some saying that people are being too sensitive, and some getting offended. Regardless of various views and thoughts, GAP replaced the ad to different image and apologized to critics.\nSexism in fashion advertisements.\nMany fashion brands have published ads that were too provocative and sexy to attract customers\u2019 attention. British high fashion brand, Jimmy Choo, was blamed for having sexism in its ad which featured a female British mode wearing the brand's boots. In this two-minute ad, men whistle at a model, walking on the street with red, sleeveless mini dress. This ad gained much backlash and criticism by the viewers since sexual harassment and misconduct were a huge issue during this time and even till now. Many people showed their dismay through social media posts, leading Jimmy Choo to pull down the ad from social media platforms.\nFrench luxury fashion brand Yves Saint Laurent also faced this issue with its print ad shown in Paris in 2017. A female model is wearing a fishnet tights with roller-skate stilettos, almost lying down with her legs opened in front of the camera. This advertisement brought harsh comments from the viewers and French advertising organization directors for going against the advertising codes related to \"respect for decency, dignity and those prohibiting submission, violence or dependence, as well as the use of stereotypes.\" They even said that this ad is causing \"mental harm to adolescents.\" Lot of sarcastic comments were made in social media about the ad and the poster was removed from the city.\nPublic relations and social media.\nFashion public relations involves being in touch with a company's audiences and creating strong relationships with them, reaching out to media, and initiating messages that project positive images of the company. Social media plays an important role in modern-day fashion public relations; enabling practitioners to reach a wide range of consumers through various platforms.\nBuilding brand awareness and credibility is a key implication of good public relations. In some cases, the hype is built about new designers' collections before they are released into the market, due to the immense exposure generated by practitioners. Social media, such as blogs, microblogs, podcasts, photo and video sharing sites have all become increasingly important to fashion public relations. The interactive nature of these platforms allows practitioners to engage and communicate with the public in real-time, and tailor their clients' brand or campaign messages to the target audience. With blogging platforms such as Instagram, Tumblr, WordPress, Squarespace, and other sharing sites, bloggers have emerged as expert fashion commentators, shaping brands and having a great impact on what is \u2018on trend\u2019. Women in the fashion public relations industry such as Sweaty Betty PR founder Roxy Jacenko and Oscar de la Renta's PR girl Erika Bearman, have acquired copious followers on their social media sites, by providing a brand identity and a behind the scenes look into the companies they work for.\nSocial media is changing the way practitioners deliver messages, as they are concerned with the media, and also customer relationship building. PR practitioners must provide effective communication among all platforms, in order to engage the fashion public in an industry socially connected via online shopping. Consumers have the ability to share their purchases on their personal social media pages (such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, etc.), and if practitioners deliver the brand message effectively and meet the needs of its public, word-of-mouth publicity will be generated and potentially provide a wide reach for the designer and their products.\nFashion and political activism.\nAs fashion concerns people, and signifies social hierarchies, fashion intersects with politics and the social organization of societies. Whereas haute couture and business suits are associated by people in power, also groups aiming to challenge the political order also use clothes to signal their position. The explicit use of fashion as a form of activism, is usually referred to as \"fashion activism.\"\nThere is a complex relationship between fashion and feminism. Some feminists have argued that by participating in feminine fashions women are contributing to maintaining the gender differences which are part of women's oppression.. Brownmiller felt that women should reject traditionally feminine dress, focusing on comfort and practicality rather than fashion. Others believe that it is the fashion system itself that is repressive in requiring women to seasonally change their clothes to keep up with trends. Greer has advocated this argument that seasonal changes in dress should be ignored; she argues that women can be liberated by replacing the compulsiveness of fashion with enjoyment of rejecting the norm to create their own personal styling.\nThis rejection of seasonal fashion led to many protests in the 1960's alongside rejection of fashion on socialist, racial and environmental grounds. However, Mosmann has pointed out that the relationship between protesting fashion and creating fashion is dynamic because\nthe language and style used in these protests has then become part of fashion itself.\nFashion designers and brands have traditionally kept themselves out of political conflicts, there has been a movement in the industry towards taking more explicit positions across the political spectrum. From maintaining a rather apolitical stance, designers and brands today engage more explicitly in current debates.\nFor example, considering the U.S.'s political climate in the surrounding months of the 2016 presidential election, during 2017 fashion weeks in London, Milan, New York, Paris and S\u00e3o Paulo amongst others, many designers took the opportunity to take political stances leveraging their platforms and influence to reach their customers. This has also led to some confusion around democratic values, as fashion is not always the most inclusive platform for political debate, but a one-way broadcast of top-down messages.\nWhen taking an explicit political stance, designers appear to favor issues around which can be phrased using clear language with virtuous undertones. For example, aiming to \"amplify a greater message of unity, inclusion, diversity, and feminism in a fashion space\", designer Mara Hoffman invited the founders of the \"Women's March on Washington\" to open her show which featured modern silhouettes of utilitarian wear, described by critics as \"Made for a modern warrior\" and \"Clothing for those who still have work to do\". Prabal Gurung debuted his collection of T-shirts featuring slogans such as \"The Future is Female\", \"We Will Not Be Silenced\", and \"Nevertheless She Persisted\", with proceeds going to the ACLU, Planned Parenthood, and Gurung's own charity, \"Shikshya Foundation Nepal\". Similarly, \"The Business of Fashion\" launched the \"#TiedTogether\" movement on Social Media, encouraging member of the industry from editors to models, to wear a white bandana advocating for \"unity, solidarity, and inclusiveness during fashion week\".\nFashion may be used to promote a cause, such as to promote healthy behavior, to raise money for a cancer cure, or to raise money for local charities such as the Juvenile Protective Association or a children's hospice.\nOne fashion cause is trashion, which is using trash to make clothes, jewelry, and other fashion items in order to promote awareness of pollution. There are a number of modern trashion artists such as Marina DeBris, Ann Wizer, and Nancy Judd. Other designers have used DIY fashions, in the tradition of the punk movement, to address elitism in the industry to promote more inclusion and diversity.\nAnthropological perspective.\nFrom an academic lens, the sporting of various fashions has been seen as a form of fashion language, a mode of communication that produced various fashion statements, using a grammar of fashion. This is a perspective promoted in the work of influential French philosopher and semiotician Roland Barthes.\nAnthropology, the study of culture and of human societies, examines fashion by asking why certain styles are deemed socially appropriate and others are not. From the theory of interactionism, a certain practice or expression is chosen by those in power in a community, and that becomes \"the fashion\" as defined at a certain time by the people under influence of those in power. If a particular style has a meaning in an already occurring set of beliefs, then that style may have a greater chance of become fashion.\nAccording to cultural theorists Ted Polhemus and Lynn Procter, one can describe fashion as adornment, of which there are two types: fashion and anti-fashion. Through the capitalization and commoditization of clothing, accessories, and shoes, etc., what once constituted anti-fashion becomes part of fashion as the lines between fashion and anti-fashion are blurred, as expressions that were once outside the changes of fashion are swept along with trends to signify new meanings. Examples range from how elements from ethnic dress becomes part of a trend and appear on catwalks or street cultures, for example how tattoos travel from sailors, laborers and criminals to popular culture.\nTo cultural theorist Malcolm Bernard, fashion and anti-fashion differ as follows: Anti-fashion is fixed and changes little over time. Anti-fashion varies depending on the cultural or social group one is associated with or where one lives, but within that group or locality the style changes little. Fashion is the exact opposite of anti-fashion. Fashion can change (evolve) very quickly\nand is not affiliated with one group or area of the world but spreads throughout the world wherever people can communicate easily with each other. For example, Queen Elizabeth II's 1953 coronation gown is an example of anti-fashion because it is traditional and does not change over any period, whereas a gown from fashion-designer Dior's collection of 1953 is fashion because Dior's style changes every season as Dior comes up with a new gown to replace the old one. In the Dior gown the length, cut, fabric, and embroidery of the gown change from season to season. Anti-fashion is concerned with maintaining the \"status quo\" while fashion is concerned with social mobility. Time is expressed in terms of continuity in anti-fashion and as change in fashion. Fashion has changing modes of adornment while anti-fashion has fixed modes of adornment. Indigenous and peasant modes of adornment exemplify anti-fashion, as they are not primarily used for manifesting social hierarchies while also allowing for social mobility. From this theoretical lens, change in fashion is part of the larger industrial system and is structured by the powerful actors in this system to be a \"deliberate\" change in style, promoted through the channels influenced by the industry (such as paid ads etc).\nAnthropology of dress in Indonesia.\nThe change from anti-fashion to fashion because of the influence of western consumer-driven culture can be seen in eastern Indonesia. The \"ikat\" textiles of the Ngada area of eastern Indonesia are changing because of modernization and development. Traditionally, in the Ngada area there was no idea similar to that of the Western idea of fashion, but anti-fashion in the form of traditional textiles and ways to adorn oneself were widely popular. Textiles in Indonesia have played many roles for the local people. Textiles defined a person's rank and status; certain textiles indicated being part of the ruling class. People expressed their ethnic identity and social hierarchy through textiles. Because some Indonesians bartered \"ikat\" textiles for food, the textiles constituted economic goods, and as some textile-design motifs had spiritual religious meanings, textiles were also a way to communicate religious messages.\nIn eastern Indonesia, both the production and use of traditional textiles have been transformed as the production, use and value associated with textiles have changed due to modernization. In the past, women produced the textiles either for home consumption or to trade with others. Today, this has changed as most textiles are not being produced at home. Western goods are considered modern and are valued more than traditional goods, including the sarong, which retain a lingering association with colonialism. Now, sarongs are used only for rituals and ceremonial occasions, whereas western clothes are worn to church or government offices. Civil servants working in urban areas are more likely than peasants to make the distinction between western and traditional clothes. Following Indonesia's independence from the Dutch in the 1940s, people increasingly started buying factory-made shirts and sarongs. In textile-producing areas the growing of cotton and the production of naturally colored thread became obsolete. Traditional motifs on textiles are no longer considered the property of a certain social class or age-group. Wives of government officials are promoting the use of traditional textiles in the form of western garments such as skirts, vests and blouses. This trend is also being followed by the general populace, and whoever can afford to hire a tailor is doing so to stitch traditional \"ikat\" textiles into western clothes. Thus traditional textiles are now fashion goods and are no longer confined to the black, white and brown colour-palette, but come in an array of colours. Traditional textiles are also being used in interior decoration and to make handbags, wallets and other accessories, which are considered fashionable by civil servants and their families. There is also a booming tourist trade in the eastern Indonesian city of Kupang where international and domestic tourists are eager to purchase traditionally printed western goods.\nThe use of traditional textiles for fashion is becoming big business in eastern Indonesia, but these traditional textiles are losing their ethnic identity-markers and are being used as an item of fashion.\nIntellectual property.\nIn the fashion industry, intellectual property is not enforced as it is within the film industry and music industry. Robert Glariston, an intellectual property expert, mentioned in a fashion seminar held in LA that \"Copyright law regarding clothing is a current hot-button issue in the industry. We often have to draw the line between designers being inspired by a design and those outright stealing it in different places.\" To take inspiration from others' designs contributes to the fashion industry's ability to establish clothing trends. For the past few years, WGSN has been a dominant source of fashion news and forecasts in encouraging fashion brands worldwide to be inspired by one another. Enticing consumers to buy clothing by establishing new trends is, some have argued, a key component of the industry's success. Intellectual property rules that interfere with this process of trend-making would, in this view, be counter-productive. On the other hand, it is often argued that the blatant theft of new ideas, unique designs, and design details by larger companies is what often contributes to the failure of many smaller or independent design companies.\nSince fakes are distinguishable by their poorer quality, there is still a demand for luxury goods, and as only a trademark or logo can be copyrighted, many fashion brands make this one of the most visible aspects of the garment or accessory. In handbags, especially, the designer's brand may be woven into the fabric (or the lining fabric) from which the bag is made, making the brand an intrinsic element of the bag.\nIn 2005, the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) held a conference calling for stricter intellectual property enforcement within the fashion industry to better protect small and medium businesses and promote competitiveness within the textile and clothing industries."}
{"id": "11659", "revid": "1015238744", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11659", "title": "Fourier analysis", "text": "In mathematics, Fourier analysis () is the study of the way general functions may be represented or approximated by sums of simpler trigonometric functions. Fourier analysis grew from the study of Fourier series, and is named after Joseph Fourier, who showed that representing a function as a sum of trigonometric functions greatly simplifies the study of heat transfer.\nToday, the subject of Fourier analysis encompasses a vast spectrum of mathematics. In the sciences and engineering, the process of decomposing a function into oscillatory components is often called Fourier analysis, while the operation of rebuilding the function from these pieces is known as Fourier synthesis. For example, determining what component frequencies are present in a musical note would involve computing the Fourier transform of a sampled musical note. One could then re-synthesize the same sound by including the frequency components as revealed in the Fourier analysis. In mathematics, the term \"Fourier analysis\" often refers to the study of both operations.\nThe decomposition process itself is called a Fourier transformation. Its output, the Fourier transform, is often given a more specific name, which depends on the domain and other properties of the function being transformed. Moreover, the original concept of Fourier analysis has been extended over time to apply to more and more abstract and general situations, and the general field is often known as harmonic analysis. Each transform used for analysis (see list of Fourier-related transforms) has a corresponding inverse transform that can be used for synthesis.\nApplications.\nFourier analysis has many scientific applications \u2013 in physics, partial differential equations, number theory, combinatorics, signal processing, digital image processing, probability theory, statistics, forensics, option pricing, cryptography, numerical analysis, acoustics, oceanography, sonar, optics, diffraction, geometry, protein structure analysis, and other areas.\nThis wide applicability stems from many useful properties of the transforms:\nIn forensics, laboratory infrared spectrophotometers use Fourier transform analysis for measuring the wavelengths of light at which a material will absorb in the infrared spectrum. The FT method is used to decode the measured signals and record the wavelength data. And by using a computer, these Fourier calculations are rapidly carried out, so that in a matter of seconds, a computer-operated FT-IR instrument can produce an infrared absorption pattern comparable to that of a prism instrument.\nFourier transformation is also useful as a compact representation of a signal. For example, JPEG compression uses a variant of the Fourier transformation (discrete cosine transform) of small square pieces of a digital image. The Fourier components of each square are rounded to lower arithmetic precision, and weak components are eliminated entirely, so that the remaining components can be stored very compactly. In image reconstruction, each image square is reassembled from the preserved approximate Fourier-transformed components, which are then inverse-transformed to produce an approximation of the original image.\nApplications in signal processing.\nWhen processing signals, such as audio, radio waves, light waves, seismic waves, and even images, Fourier analysis can isolate narrowband components of a compound waveform, concentrating them for easier detection or removal. A large family of signal processing techniques consist of Fourier-transforming a signal, manipulating the Fourier-transformed data in a simple way, and reversing the transformation.\nSome examples include:\nVariants of Fourier analysis.\n(Continuous) Fourier transform.\nMost often, the unqualified term Fourier transform refers to the transform of functions of a continuous real argument, and it produces a continuous function of frequency, known as a \"frequency distribution\". One function is transformed into another, and the operation is reversible. When the domain of the input (initial) function is time (), and the domain of the output (final) function is ordinary frequency, the transform of function at frequency is given by the complex number:\nEvaluating this quantity for all values of produces the \"frequency-domain\" function. Then can be represented as a recombination of complex exponentials of all possible frequencies:\nwhich is the inverse transform formula. The complex number, , conveys both amplitude and phase of frequency .\nSee Fourier transform for much more information, including:\nFourier series.\nThe Fourier transform of a periodic function, , with period , becomes a Dirac comb function, modulated by a sequence of complex coefficients:\nThe inverse transform, known as Fourier series, is a representation of in terms of a summation of a potentially infinite number of harmonically related sinusoids or complex exponential functions, each with an amplitude and phase specified by one of the coefficients:\nAny can be expressed as a periodic summation of another function, :\nand the coefficients are proportional to samples of at discrete intervals of :\nNote that any whose transform has the same discrete sample values can be used in the periodic summation. A sufficient condition for recovering (and therefore ) from just these samples (i.e. from the Fourier series) is that the non-zero portion of be confined to a known interval of duration , which is the frequency domain dual of the Nyquist\u2013Shannon sampling theorem.\nSee Fourier series for more information, including the historical development.\nDiscrete-time Fourier transform (DTFT).\nThe DTFT is the mathematical dual of the time-domain Fourier series. Thus, a convergent periodic summation in the frequency domain can be represented by a Fourier series, whose coefficients are samples of a related continuous time function:\nwhich is known as the DTFT. Thus the DTFT of the sequence is also the Fourier transform of the modulated Dirac comb function.\nThe Fourier series coefficients (and inverse transform), are defined by:\nParameter corresponds to the sampling interval, and this Fourier series can now be recognized as a form of the Poisson summation formula.\u00a0 Thus we have the important result that when a discrete data sequence, , is proportional to samples of an underlying continuous function, , one can observe a periodic summation of the continuous Fourier transform, .\u00a0 Note that any with the same discrete sample values produces the same DTFT\u00a0 But under certain idealized conditions one can theoretically recover and exactly.\u00a0 A sufficient condition for perfect recovery is that the non-zero portion of be confined to a known frequency interval of width .\u00a0 When that interval is , the applicable reconstruction formula is the Whittaker\u2013Shannon interpolation formula. This is a cornerstone in the foundation of digital signal processing.\nAnother reason to be interested in is that it often provides insight into the amount of aliasing caused by the sampling process.\nApplications of the DTFT are not limited to sampled functions. See Discrete-time Fourier transform for more information on this and other topics, including:\nDiscrete Fourier transform (DFT).\nSimilar to a Fourier series, the DTFT of a periodic sequence, , with period , becomes a Dirac comb function, modulated by a sequence of complex coefficients (see ):\nThe sequence is what is customarily known as the DFT of one cycle of .\u00a0 It is also -periodic, so it is never necessary to compute more than coefficients. The inverse transform, also known as a discrete Fourier series, is given by:\nWhen is expressed as a periodic summation of another function:\nthe coefficients are proportional to samples of at discrete intervals of :\nConversely, when one wants to compute an arbitrary number () of discrete samples of one cycle of a continuous DTFT, , it can be done by computing the relatively simple DFT of , as defined above. In most cases, is chosen equal to the length of non-zero portion of . Increasing , known as \"zero-padding\" or \"interpolation\", results in more closely spaced samples of one cycle of . Decreasing , causes overlap (adding) in the time-domain (analogous to aliasing), which corresponds to decimation in the frequency domain. (see ) In most cases of practical interest, the sequence represents a longer sequence that was truncated by the application of a finite-length window function or FIR filter array.\nThe DFT can be computed using a fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm, which makes it a practical and important transformation on computers.\nSee Discrete Fourier transform for much more information, including:\nSummary.\nFor periodic functions, both the Fourier transform and the DTFT comprise only a discrete set of frequency components (Fourier series), and the transforms diverge at those frequencies. One common practice (not discussed above) is to handle that divergence via Dirac delta and Dirac comb functions. But the same spectral information can be discerned from just one cycle of the periodic function, since all the other cycles are identical. Similarly, finite-duration functions can be represented as a Fourier series, with no actual loss of information except that the periodicity of the inverse transform is a mere artifact.\nIt is common in practice for the duration of \"s\"(\u2022) to be limited to the period, or .\u00a0 But these formulas do not require that condition.\nSymmetry properties.\nWhen the real and imaginary parts of a complex function are decomposed into their even and odd parts, there are four components, denoted below by the subscripts RE, RO, IE, and IO. And there is a one-to-one mapping between the four components of a complex time function and the four components of its complex frequency transform:\nFrom this, various relationships are apparent, for example:\nFourier transforms on arbitrary locally compact abelian topological groups.\nThe Fourier variants can also be generalized to Fourier transforms on arbitrary locally compact Abelian topological groups, which are studied in harmonic analysis; there, the Fourier transform takes functions on a group to functions on the dual group. This treatment also allows a general formulation of the convolution theorem, which relates Fourier transforms and convolutions. See also the Pontryagin duality for the generalized underpinnings of the Fourier transform.\nMore specific, Fourier analysis can be done on cosets, even discrete cosets.\nTime\u2013frequency transforms.\nIn signal processing terms, a function (of time) is a representation of a signal with perfect \"time resolution\", but no frequency information, while the Fourier transform has perfect \"frequency resolution\", but no time information.\nAs alternatives to the Fourier transform, in time\u2013frequency analysis, one uses time\u2013frequency transforms to represent signals in a form that has some time information and some frequency information \u2013 by the uncertainty principle, there is a trade-off between these. These can be generalizations of the Fourier transform, such as the short-time Fourier transform, the Gabor transform or fractional Fourier transform (FRFT), or can use different functions to represent signals, as in wavelet transforms and chirplet transforms, with the wavelet analog of the (continuous) Fourier transform being the continuous wavelet transform.\nHistory.\nAn early form of harmonic series dates back to ancient Babylonian mathematics, where they were used to compute ephemerides (tables of astronomical positions).\nThe classical Greek concepts of deferent and epicycle in the Ptolemaic system of astronomy were related to Fourier series (see ).\nIn modern times, variants of the discrete Fourier transform were used by Alexis Clairaut in 1754 to compute an orbit,\nwhich has been described as the first formula for the DFT,\nand in 1759 by Joseph Louis Lagrange, in computing the coefficients of a trigonometric series for a vibrating string. Technically, Clairaut's work was a cosine-only series (a form of discrete cosine transform), while Lagrange's work was a sine-only series (a form of discrete sine transform); a true cosine+sine DFT was used by Gauss in 1805 for trigonometric interpolation of asteroid orbits.\nEuler and Lagrange both discretized the vibrating string problem, using what would today be called samples.\nAn early modern development toward Fourier analysis was the 1770 paper \"R\u00e9flexions sur la r\u00e9solution alg\u00e9brique des \u00e9quations\" by Lagrange, which in the method of Lagrange resolvents used a complex Fourier decomposition to study the solution of a cubic:\nLagrange transformed the roots into the resolvents:\nwhere is a cubic root of unity, which is the DFT of order 3.\nA number of authors, notably Jean le Rond d'Alembert, and Carl Friedrich Gauss used trigonometric series to study the heat equation, but the breakthrough development was the 1807 paper \"M\u00e9moire sur la propagation de la chaleur dans les corps solides\" by Joseph Fourier, whose crucial insight was to model \"all\" functions by trigonometric series, introducing the Fourier series.\nHistorians are divided as to how much to credit Lagrange and others for the development of Fourier theory: Daniel Bernoulli and Leonhard Euler had introduced trigonometric representations of functions, and Lagrange had given the Fourier series solution to the wave equation, so Fourier's contribution was mainly the bold claim that an arbitrary function could be represented by a Fourier series.\nThe subsequent development of the field is known as harmonic analysis, and is also an early instance of representation theory.\nThe first fast Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm for the DFT was discovered around 1805 by Carl Friedrich Gauss when interpolating measurements of the orbit of the asteroids Juno and Pallas, although that particular FFT algorithm is more often attributed to its modern rediscoverers Cooley and Tukey.\nInterpretation in terms of time and frequency.\nIn signal processing, the Fourier transform often takes a time series or a function of continuous time, and maps it into a frequency spectrum. That is, it takes a function from the time domain into the frequency domain; it is a decomposition of a function into sinusoids of different frequencies; in the case of a Fourier series or discrete Fourier transform, the sinusoids are harmonics of the fundamental frequency of the function being analyzed.\nWhen the function is a function of time and represents a physical signal, the transform has a standard interpretation as the frequency spectrum of the signal. The magnitude of the resulting complex-valued function at frequency represents the amplitude of a frequency component whose initial phase is given by the phase of\u00a0.\nFourier transforms are not limited to functions of time, and temporal frequencies. They can equally be applied to analyze \"spatial\" frequencies, and indeed for nearly any function domain. This justifies their use in such diverse branches as image processing, heat conduction, and automatic control."}
{"id": "11660", "revid": "2043601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11660", "title": "Fat Man", "text": "\"Fat Man\" is the codename for the type of nuclear bomb that was detonated over the Japanese city of Nagasaki by the United States on 9 August 1945. It was the second of the only two nuclear weapons ever used in warfare, the first being Little Boy, and its detonation marked the third nuclear explosion in history. It was built by scientists and engineers at Los Alamos Laboratory using plutonium from the Hanford Site, and it was dropped from the Boeing B-29 Superfortress \"Bockscar\" piloted by Major Charles Sweeney.\nThe name Fat Man refers to the early design of the bomb because it had a wide, round shape; it was also known as the Mark III. Fat Man was an implosion-type nuclear weapon with a solid plutonium core. The first of that type to be detonated was the Gadget in the Trinity nuclear test less than a month earlier on 16 July at the Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range in New Mexico. Two more were detonated during the Operation Crossroads nuclear tests at Bikini Atoll in 1946, and some 120 were produced between 1947 and 1949, when it was superseded by the Mark 4 nuclear bomb. The Fat Man was retired in 1950.\nEarly decisions.\nRobert Oppenheimer held conferences in Chicago in June 1942, prior to the Army taking over wartime atomic research, and in Berkeley, California, in July, at which various engineers and physicists discussed nuclear bomb design issues. They chose a gun-type design in which two sub-critical masses would be brought together by firing a \"bullet\" into a \"target\". Richard C. Tolman suggested an implosion-type nuclear weapon, but the proposal attracted little interest.\nThe feasibility of a plutonium bomb was questioned in 1942. Wallace Akers, the director of the British \"Tube Alloys\" project, told James Bryant Conant on 14 November that James Chadwick had \"concluded that plutonium might not be a practical fissionable material for weapons because of impurities.\" Conant consulted Ernest Lawrence and Arthur Compton, who acknowledged that their scientists at Berkeley and Chicago respectively knew about the problem, but they could offer no ready solution. Conant informed Manhattan Project director Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves Jr., who in turn assembled a special committee consisting of Lawrence, Compton, Oppenheimer, and McMillan to examine the issue. The committee concluded that any problems could be overcome simply by requiring higher purity.\nOppenheimer reviewed his options in early 1943 and gave priority to the gun-type weapon, but he created the E-5 Group at the Los Alamos Laboratory under Seth Neddermeyer to investigate implosion as a hedge against the threat of pre-detonation. Implosion-type bombs were determined to be significantly more efficient in terms of explosive yield per unit mass of fissile material in the bomb, because compressed fissile materials react more rapidly and therefore more completely. Nonetheless, it was decided that the plutonium gun would receive the bulk of the research effort, since it was the project with the least amount of uncertainty involved. It was assumed that the uranium gun-type bomb could be easily adapted from it.\nNaming.\nThe gun-type and implosion-type designs were codenamed \"Thin Man\" and \"Fat Man\" respectively. These code names were created by Robert Serber, a former student of Oppenheimer's who worked on the Manhattan Project. He chose them based on their design shapes; the Thin Man was a very long device, and the name came from the Dashiell Hammett detective novel \"The Thin Man\" and series of movies. The Fat Man was round and fat and was named after Sydney Greenstreet's character in Hammett's \"The Maltese Falcon\". Little Boy came last as a variation of Thin Man.\nDevelopment.\nNeddermeyer discarded Serber and Tolman's initial concept of implosion as assembling a series of pieces in favor of one in which a hollow sphere was imploded by an explosive shell. He was assisted in this work by Hugh Bradner, Charles Critchfield, and John Streib. L. T. E. Thompson was brought in as a consultant, and discussed the problem with Neddermeyer in June 1943. Thompson was skeptical that an implosion could be made sufficiently symmetric. Oppenheimer arranged for Neddermeyer and Edwin McMillan to visit the National Defense Research Committee's Explosives Research Laboratory near the laboratories of the Bureau of Mines in Bruceton, Pennsylvania (a Pittsburgh suburb), where they spoke to George Kistiakowsky and his team. But Neddermeyer's efforts in July and August at imploding tubes to produce cylinders tended to produce objects that resembled rocks. Neddermeyer was the only person who believed that implosion was practical, and only his enthusiasm kept the project alive.\nOppenheimer brought John von Neumann to Los Alamos in September 1943 to take a fresh look at implosion. After reviewing Neddermeyer's studies, and discussing the matter with Edward Teller, von Neumann suggested the use of high explosives in shaped charges to implode a sphere, which he showed could not only result in a faster assembly of fissile material than was possible with the gun method, but which could greatly reduce the amount of material required, because of the resulting higher density. The idea that, under such pressures, the plutonium metal itself would be compressed came from Teller, whose knowledge of how dense metals behaved under heavy pressure was influenced by his pre-war theoretical studies of the Earth's core with George Gamow. The prospect of more-efficient nuclear weapons impressed Oppenheimer, Teller, and Hans Bethe, but they decided that an expert on explosives would be required. Kistiakowsky's name was immediately suggested, and Kistiakowsky was brought into the project as a consultant in October 1943.\nThe implosion project remained a backup until April 1944, when experiments by Emilio G. Segr\u00e8 and his P-5 Group at Los Alamos on the newly reactor-produced plutonium from the X-10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge and the B Reactor at the Hanford site showed that it contained impurities in the form of the isotope plutonium-240. This has a far higher spontaneous fission rate and radioactivity than plutonium-239. The cyclotron-produced isotopes, on which the original measurements had been made, held much lower traces of plutonium-240. Its inclusion in reactor-bred plutonium appeared unavoidable. This meant that the spontaneous fission rate of the reactor plutonium was so high that it would be highly likely that it would predetonate and blow itself apart during the initial formation of a critical mass. The distance required to accelerate the plutonium to speeds where predetonation would be less likely would need a gun barrel too long for any existing or planned bomber. The only way to use plutonium in a workable bomb was therefore implosion.\nThe impracticability of a gun-type bomb using plutonium was agreed at a meeting in Los Alamos on 17 July 1944. All gun-type work in the Manhattan Project was directed at the Little Boy, enriched-uranium gun design, and the Los Alamos Laboratory was reorganized, with almost all of the research focused on the problems of implosion for the Fat Man bomb. The idea of using shaped charges as three-dimensional explosive lenses came from James L. Tuck, and was developed by von Neumann. To overcome the difficulty of synchronizing multiple detonations, Luis Alvarez and Lawrence Johnston invented exploding-bridgewire detonators to replace the less precise primacord detonation system. Robert Christy is credited with doing the calculations that showed how a solid subcritical sphere of plutonium could be compressed to a critical state, greatly simplifying the task, since earlier efforts had attempted the more-difficult compression of a hollow spherical shell. After Christy's report, the solid-plutonium core weapon was referred to as the \"Christy Gadget\".\nThe task of the metallurgists was to determine how to cast plutonium into a sphere. The difficulties became apparent when attempts to measure the density of plutonium gave inconsistent results. At first contamination was believed to be the cause, but it was soon determined that there were multiple allotropes of plutonium. The brittle \u03b1 phase that exists at room temperature changes to the plastic \u03b2 phase at higher temperatures. Attention then shifted to the even more malleable \u03b4 phase that normally exists in the range. It was found that this was stable at room temperature when alloyed with aluminum, but aluminum emits neutrons when bombarded with alpha particles, which would exacerbate the pre-ignition problem. The metallurgists then hit upon a plutonium\u2013gallium alloy, which stabilized the \u03b4 phase and could be hot pressed into the desired spherical shape. As plutonium was found to corrode readily, the sphere was coated with nickel.\nThe size of the bomb was constrained by the available aircraft, which were investigated for suitability by Dr. Norman Foster Ramsey. The only Allied aircraft considered capable of carrying the Fat Man without major modification were the British Avro Lancaster and the American Boeing B-29 Superfortress. At the time, the B-29 represented the epitome of bomber technology with significant advantages in MTOW, range, speed, flight ceiling, and survivability. Without the availability of the B-29, dropping the bomb would likely have been impossible. However, this still constrained the bomb to a maximum length of , width of and weight of . Removing the bomb rails allowed a maximum width of .\nDrop tests began in March 1944, and resulted in modifications to the Silverplate aircraft due to the weight of the bomb. High-speed photographs revealed that the tail fins folded under the pressure, resulting in an erratic descent. Various combinations of stabilizer boxes and fins were tested on the Fat Man shape to eliminate its persistent wobble until an arrangement dubbed a \"California Parachute\", a cubical open-rear tail box outer surface with eight radial fins inside of it, four angled at 45\u00b0 and four perpendicular to the line of fall holding the outer square-fin box to the bomb's rear end, was approved. In drop tests in early weeks, the Fat Man missed its target by an average of , but this was halved by June as the bombardiers became more proficient with it.\nThe early Y-1222 model Fat Man was assembled with some 1,500 bolts. This was superseded by the Y-1291 design in December 1944. This redesign work was substantial, and only the Y-1222 tail design was retained. Later versions included the Y-1560, which had 72 detonators; the Y-1561, which had 32; and the Y-1562, which had 132. There were also the Y-1563 and Y-1564, which were practice bombs with no detonators at all. The final wartime Y-1561 design was assembled with just 90 bolts.\nOn 16 July 1945, a Y-1561 model Fat Man, known as the Gadget, was detonated in a test explosion at a remote site in New Mexico, known as the \"Trinity\" test. It gave a yield of about . Some minor changes were made to the design as a result of the Trinity test. Philip Morrison recalled that \"There were some changes of importance... The fundamental thing was, of course, very much the same.\"\nInterior.\nThe bomb was long and in diameter. It weighed .\nAssembly.\nThe plutonium pit was in diameter and contained an \"Urchin\" modulated neutron initiator that was in diameter. The depleted uranium tamper was an diameter sphere, surrounded by a thick shell of boron-impregnated plastic. The plastic shell had a diameter cylindrical hole running through it, like the hole in a cored apple, in order to allow insertion of the pit as late as possible. The missing tamper cylinder containing the pit could be slipped in through a hole in the surrounding diameter aluminum pusher. The pit was warm to touch, emitting 2.4 W/kg-Pu, about 15 W for the core.\nThe explosion symmetrically compressed the plutonium to twice its normal density before the \"Urchin\" added free neutrons to initiate a fission chain reaction.\nThe result was the fission of about of the of plutonium in the pit, i.e. of about 16% of the fissile material present. The detonation released the energy equivalent to the detonation of . About 30% of the yield came from fission of the uranium tamper.\nBombing of Nagasaki.\nBomb assembly.\nThe first plutonium core was transported with its polonium-beryllium modulated neutron initiator in the custody of Project Alberta courier Raemer Schreiber in a magnesium field carrying case designed for the purpose by Philip Morrison. Magnesium was chosen because it does not act as a tamper. It left Kirtland Army Air Field on a C-54 transport aircraft of the 509th Composite Group's 320th Troop Carrier Squadron on 26 July and arrived at North Field on Tinian on 28 July. Three Fat Man high-explosive pre-assemblies (designated F31, F32, and F33) were picked up at Kirtland on 28 July by three B-29s: \"Luke the Spook\" and \"Laggin' Dragon\" from the 509th Composite Group's 393d Bombardment Squadron, and another from the 216th Army Air Forces Base Unit. The cores were transported to North Field, arriving on 2 August, when F31 was partly disassembled in order to check all its components. F33 was expended near Tinian during a final rehearsal on 8 August. F32 presumably would have been used for a third attack or its rehearsal.\nOn 7 August, the day after the bombing of Hiroshima, Rear Admiral William R. Purnell, Commodore William S. Parsons, Tibbets, General Carl Spaatz and Major General Curtis LeMay met on Guam to discuss what should be done next. Since there was no indication of Japan surrendering, they decided to proceed with their orders and drop another bomb. Parsons said that Project Alberta would have it ready by 11 August, but Tibbets pointed to weather reports indicating poor flying conditions on that day due to a storm and asked if the bomb could be made ready by 9 August. Parsons agreed to try to do so.\nFat Man F31 was assembled on Tinian by Project Alberta personnel, and the physics package was fully assembled and wired. It was placed inside its ellipsoidal aerodynamic bombshell and wheeled out, where it was signed by nearly 60 people, including Purnell, Brigadier General Thomas F. Farrell, and Parsons. It was then wheeled to the bomb bay of the B-29 Superfortress named \"Bockscar\" after the plane's command pilot Captain Frederick C. Bock, who flew \"The Great Artiste\" with his crew on the mission. \"Bockscar\" was flown by Major Charles W. Sweeney and his crew, with Commander Frederick L. Ashworth from Project Alberta as the weaponeer in charge of the bomb.\nBombing of Nagasaki.\n\"Bockscar\" lifted off at 03:47 on the morning of 9 August 1945, with Kokura as the primary target and Nagasaki the secondary target. The weapon was already armed, but with the green electrical safety plugs still engaged. Ashworth changed them to red after ten minutes so that Sweeney could climb to in order to get above storm clouds. During the pre-flight inspection of \"Bockscar\", the flight engineer notified Sweeney that an inoperative fuel transfer pump made it impossible to use of fuel carried in a reserve tank. This fuel would still have to be carried all the way to Japan and back, consuming still more fuel. Replacing the pump would take hours; moving the Fat Man to another aircraft might take just as long and was dangerous as well, as the bomb was live. Colonel Paul Tibbets and Sweeney therefore elected to have \"Bockscar\" continue the mission.\nThe target for the bomb was the city of Kokura, but it was found to be obscured by clouds and drifting smoke from fires started by a major firebombing raid by 224 B-29s on nearby Yahata the previous day. This covered 70% of the area over Kokura, obscuring the aiming point. Three bomb runs were made over the next 50 minutes, burning fuel and repeatedly exposing the aircraft to the heavy defenses of Yahata, but the bombardier was unable to drop visually. By the time of the third bomb run, Japanese anti-aircraft fire was getting close; Second Lieutenant Jacob Beser was monitoring Japanese communications, and he reported activity on the Japanese fighter direction radio bands.\nSweeney then proceeded to the alternative target of Nagasaki. It was obscured by cloud, as well, and Ashworth ordered Sweeney to make a radar approach. At the last minute, however, bombardier Captain Kermit K. Beahan found a hole in the clouds. The Fat Man was dropped and exploded at 11:02 local time, following a 43-second free-fall, at an altitude of about . There was poor visibility due to cloud cover and the bomb missed its intended detonation point by almost two miles, so the damage was somewhat less extensive than that in Hiroshima.\nAn estimated 35,000\u201340,000 people were killed outright by the bombing at Nagasaki. A total of 60,000\u201380,000 fatalities resulted, including from long-term health effects, the strongest of which was leukemia with an attributable risk of 46% for bomb victims. Others died later from related blast and burn injuries, and hundreds more from radiation illnesses from exposure to the bomb's initial radiation. Most of the direct deaths and injuries were among munitions or industrial workers.\nMitsubishi's industrial production in the city was also severed by the attack; the dockyard would have produced at 80 percent of its full capacity within three to four months, the steelworks would have required a year to get back to substantial production, the electric works would have resumed some production within two months and been back at capacity within six months, and the arms plant would have required 15 months to return to 60 to 70 percent of former capacity. The Mitsubishi-Urakami Ordnance Works, which manufactured the type 91 torpedoes released in the attack on Pearl Harbor, was destroyed in the blast.\nPost-war development.\nAfter the war, two Y-1561 Fat Man bombs were used in the Operation \"Crossroads\" nuclear tests at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific. The first was known as \"Gilda\" after Rita Hayworth's character in the 1946 movie \"Gilda,\" and it was dropped by the B-29 \"Dave's Dream\"; it missed its aim point by . The second bomb was nicknamed \"Helen of Bikini\" and was placed without its tail fin assembly in a steel caisson made from a submarine's conning tower; it was detonated beneath the landing craft \"USS LSM-60\". The two weapons yielded about each.\nThe Los Alamos Laboratory and the Army Air Forces had already commenced work on improving the design. The North American B-45 Tornado, Convair XB-46, Martin XB-48, and Boeing B-47 Stratojet bombers had bomb bays sized to carry the Grand Slam, which was much longer but not as wide as the Fat Man. The only American bombers that could carry the Fat Man were the B-29 and the Convair B-36. In November 1945, the Army Air Forces asked Los Alamos for 200 Fat Man bombs, but there were only two sets of plutonium cores and high-explosive assemblies at the time. The Army Air Forces wanted improvements to the design to make it easier to manufacture, assemble, handle, transport, and stockpile. The wartime Project W-47 was continued, and drop tests resumed in January 1946.\nThe Mark III Mod 0 Fat Man was ordered into production in mid-1946. High explosives were manufactured by the Salt Wells Pilot Plant, which had been established by the Manhattan Project as part of Project Camel, and a new plant was established at the Iowa Army Ammunition Plant. Mechanical components were made or procured by the Rock Island Arsenal; electrical and mechanical components for about 50 bombs were stockpiled at Kirtland Army Air Field by August 1946, but only nine plutonium cores were available. Production of the Mod 0 ended in December 1948, by which time there were still only 53 cores available. It was replaced by improved versions known as Mods 1 and 2 which contained a number of minor changes, the most important of which was that they did not charge the X-Unit firing system's capacitors until released from the aircraft. The Mod 0s were withdrawn from service between March and July 1949, and by October they had all been rebuilt as Mods 1 and 2. Some 120 Mark III Fat Man units were added to the stockpile between 1947 and 1949 when it was superseded by the Mark 4 nuclear bomb. The Mark III Fat Man was retired in 1950.\nA nuclear strike would have been a formidable undertaking in the post-war 1940s due to the limitations of the Mark III Fat Man. The lead-acid batteries which powered the fuzing system remained charged for only 36 hours, after which they needed to be recharged. To do this meant disassembling the bomb, and recharging took 72 hours. The batteries had to be removed in any case after nine days or they corroded. The plutonium core could not be left in for much longer, because its heat damaged the high explosives. Replacing the core also required the bomb to be completely disassembled and reassembled. This required about 40 to 50 men and took between 56 and 72 hours, depending on the skill of the bomb assembly team, and the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project had only three teams in June 1948. The only aircraft capable of carrying the bomb were Silverplate B-29s, and the only group equipped with them was the 509th Bombardment Group at Walker Air Force Base in Roswell, New Mexico. They would first have to fly to Sandia Base to collect the bombs, and then to an overseas base from which a strike could be mounted.\nThe Soviet Union's first nuclear weapon was based closely on Fat Man's design thanks to spies Klaus Fuchs, Theodore Hall, and David Greenglass, who provided them with secret information concerning the Manhattan Project and Fat Man. It was detonated on 29 August 1949 as part of Operation \"First Lightning\"."}
{"id": "11661", "revid": "34703313", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11661", "title": "False Claims Act", "text": "The False Claims Act (FCA), also called the \"Lincoln Law\", is an American federal law that imposes liability on persons and companies (typically federal contractors) who defraud governmental programs. It is the federal Government's primary litigation tool in combating fraud against the Government. The law includes a \"qui tam\" provision that allows people who are not affiliated with the government, called \"relators\" under the law, to file actions on behalf of the government (informally called \"whistleblowing\" especially when the relator is employed by the organization accused in the suit). Persons filing under the Act stand to receive a portion (15-30 percent, depending on certain factors) of any recovered damages. \nAs of 2019, over 71 percent of all FCA actions were initiated by whistleblowers. Claims under the law have typically involved health care, military, or other government spending programs, and dominate the list of largest pharmaceutical settlements. The government has recovered more than $62 billion under the False Claims Act between 1987 and 2019.\nHistory.\n\"Qui tam\" laws have history dating back to the Middle Ages in England. In 1318, King Edward II offered one third of the penalty to the relator when the relator successfully sued government officials who moonlighted as wine merchants. The Maintenance and Embracery Act 1540 of Henry VIII provided that common informers could sue for certain forms of interference with the course of justice in legal proceedings that were concerned with the title to land. This act is still in force today in the Republic of Ireland, although in 1967 it was extinguished in England. The idea of a common informer bringing suit for damages to the Commonwealth was later brought to Massachusetts, where \"penalties for fraud in the sale of bread [are] to be distributed one third to inspector who discovered the fraud and the remainder for the benefit of the town where the offense occurred.\" Other statutes can be found on the colonial law books of Connecticut, New York, Virginia and South Carolina.\nThe American Civil War (1861\u20131865) was marked by fraud on all levels, both in the Union north and the Confederate south. During the war, unscrupulous contractors sold the Union Army decrepit horses and mules in ill health, faulty rifles and ammunition, and rancid rations and provisions, among other unscrupulous actions. In response, Congress passed the False Claims Act on March 2, 1863, . Because it was passed under the administration of President Abraham Lincoln, the False Claims Act is often referred to as the \"Lincoln Law\".\nImportantly, a reward was offered in what is called the \"qui tam\" provision, which permits citizens to sue on behalf of the government and be paid a percentage of the recovery. \"Qui tam\" is an abbreviated form of the Latin legal phrase \"qui tam pro domino rege quam pro se ipso in hac parte sequitur\" (\"he who brings a case on behalf of our lord the King, as well as for himself\") In a \"qui tam\" action, the citizen filing suit is called a \"relator\". As an exception to the general legal rule of standing, courts have held that \"qui tam\" relators are \"partially assigned\" a portion of the government's legal injury, thereby allowing relators to proceed with their suits.\nU.S. Senator Jacob M. Howard, who sponsored the legislation, justified giving rewards to whistle blowers, many of whom had engaged in unethical activities themselves. He said, \"I have based the [\"qui tam\" provision] upon the old-fashioned idea of holding out a temptation, and \u2018setting a rogue to catch a rogue,\u2019 which is the safest and most expeditious way I have ever discovered of bringing rogues to justice.\"\nIn the massive military spending leading up to and during World War II, the US Attorney General relied on criminal provisions of the law to deal with fraud, rather than using the FCA. As a result, attorneys would wait for the Department of Justice to file criminal cases and then immediately file civil suits under the FCA, a practice decried as \"parasitic\" at the time. Congress moved to abolish the FCA but at the last minute decided instead to reduce the relator's share of the recovered proceeds.\nThe law was again amended in 1986, again due to issues with military spending. Under President Ronald Reagan's military buildup, reports of massive fraud among military contractors had become major news, and Congress acted to strengthen the FCA.\nThe first qui tam case under the amended False Claims Act was filed in 1987 by an eye surgeon against an eye clinic and one of its doctors, alleging unnecessary surgeries and other procedures were being performed. The case settled in 1988 for a total of $605,000. However, the law was primarily used in the beginning against defense contractors. By the late 1990s, health care fraud began to receive more focus, accounting for approximately 40% of recoveries by 2008 \"Franklin v. Parke-Davis\", filed in 1996, was the first case to apply the FCA to fraud committed by a pharma company against the government, due to bills submitted for payment by Medicaid/Medicare for treatments that those programs do not pay for as they are not FDA-approved or otherwise listed on a government formulary. FCA cases against pharma companies are often related to off-label marketing of drugs by drug companies, which is illegal under a different law, the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; the intersection occurs when off-label marketing leads to prescriptions being filled and bills for those prescriptions being submitted to Medicare/Medicaid.\nAs of 2019, over 72 percent of all federal FCA actions were initiated by whistleblowers. The government recovered $62.1 billion under the False Claims Act between 1987 and 2019 and of this amount, over $44.7 billion or 72% was from \"qui tam\" cases brought by relators. In 2014, whistleblowers filed over 700 False Claims Act lawsuits. In 2014, the Department of Justice had its highest annual recovery in False Claims Act history, obtaining more than $6.1 billion in settlements and judgments from civil cases involving fraud and false claims against the government. In fiscal year 2019, the Department of Justice recovered over $3 billion under the False Claims Act, $2.2 billion of which were generated by whistleblowers. Since 2010, the federal government has recovered over $37.6 billion in False Claims Act settlements and judgments. In 2020, the DOJ recovered $2.2 billion from FCA cases: $1.6 billion of that total was from cases filed under the FCA. \"Qui tam\" whistleblowers received a total of $309 million in whistleblower rewards in 2020.\nProvisions.\nThe Act establishes liability when any person or entity improperly receives from or avoids payment to the Federal government. The Act prohibits:\nThe statute provides that anyone who violates the law \"is liable to the United States Government for a civil penalty of not less than $5,000 and not more than $10,000, as adjusted by the Federal Civil Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act of 1990, plus 3 times the amount of damages which the Government sustains because of the act of that person.\" The False Claims Act requires a separate penalty for each violation of the statute. Under the Civil Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act, False Claims Act penalties are periodically adjusted for inflation. In 2020, the penalties range from $11,665 to $23,331 per violation.\nCertain claims are not actionable, including:\nThere are unique procedural requirements in False Claims Act cases. For example:\nIn addition, the FCA contains an anti-retaliation provision, which allows a relator to recover, in addition to his award for reporting fraud, double damages plus attorney fees for any acts of retaliation for reporting fraud against the Government. This provision specifically provides relators with a personal claim of double damages for harm suffered and reinstatement.\nUnder the False Claims Act, the Department of Justice is authorized to pay rewards to those who report fraud against the federal government and are not convicted of a crime related to the fraud, in an amount of between 15 and 25 (but up to 30 percent in some cases) of what it recovers based upon the whistleblower's report. The relator's share is determined based on the FCA itself, legislative history, Department of Justice guidelines released in 1997, and court decisions.\n1986 changes.\n(False Claims Act Amendments \n2009 changes.\nOn May 20, 2009, the Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009 (FERA) was signed into law. It includes the most significant amendments to the FCA since the 1986 amendments. FERA enacted the following changes:\nWith this revision, the FCA now prohibits knowingly (changes are in bold):\n2010 changes under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.\nOn March 23, 2010, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (also referred to as the health reform bill or PPACA) was signed into law by President Barack Obama. The Affordable Care Act made further amendments to the False Claims Act, including:\nPractical application of the law.\nThe False Claims Act has a detailed process for making a claim under the Act. Mere complaints to the government agency are insufficient to bring claims under the Act. A complaint (lawsuit)\nmust be filed in U.S. District Court (federal court) \"in camera\" (under seal). After an investigation by the Department of Justice within 60 days, or frequently several months after an extension is granted, the Department of Justice decides whether it will pursue the case.\nIf the case is pursued, the amount of the reward is less than if the Department of Justice decides not to pursue the case and the plaintiff/relator continues the lawsuit himself. However, the success rate is higher in cases that the Department of Justice decides to pursue.\nTechnically, the government has several options in handing cases. These include: \nIn practice, there are two other options for the Department of Justice:\nThere is case law where claims may be prejudiced if disclosure of the alleged unlawful act has been reported in the press, if complaints were filed to an agency instead of filing a lawsuit, or if the person filing a claim under the act is not the first person to do so. Individual states in the U.S. have different laws regarding whistleblowing involving state governments.\nFederal income taxation of awards under FCA in the United States.\nThe U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) takes the position that, for Federal income tax purposes, \"qui tam\" payments to a relator under FCA are ordinary income and not capital gains. The IRS position was challenged by a relator in the case of \"Alderson v. United States\" and, in 2012, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit upheld the IRS' stance. As of 2013, this remained the only circuit court decision on tax treatment of these payments.\nRelevant decisions by the United States Supreme Court.\nIn a 2000 case, \"Vermont Agency of Natural Resources v. United States ex rel. Stevens\", 529 U.S. 765 (2000), the United States Supreme Court held that a private individual may not bring suit in federal court on behalf of the United States against a State (or state agency) under the FCA. In \"Stevens\", the Supreme Court also endorsed the \"partial assignment\" approach to \"qui tam\" relator standing to sue, which had previously been articulated by the Ninth Circuit Federal Court of Appeals and is an exception to the general legal rule for standing.\nIn a 2007 case, \"Rockwell International Corp. v. United States\", the United States Supreme Court considered several issues relating to the \"original source\" exception to the FCA's public-disclosure bar. The Court held that (1) the original source requirement of the FCA provision setting for the original-source exception to the public-disclosure bar on federal-court jurisdiction is jurisdictional; (2) the statutory phrase \"information on which the allegations are based\" refers to the relator's allegations and not the publicly disclosed allegations; the terms \"allegations\" is not limited to the allegations in the original complaint, but includes, at a minimum, the allegations in the original complaint as amended; (3) relator's knowledge with respect to the pondcrete fell short of the direct and independent knowledge of the information on which the allegations are based required for him to qualify as an original source; and (4) the government's intervention did not provide an independent basis of jurisdiction with respect to the relator.\nIn a 2008 case, \"Allison Engine Co. v. United States ex rel. Sanders\", the United States Supreme Court considered whether a false claim had to be presented directly to the Federal government, or if it merely needed to be paid with government money, such as a false claim by a subcontractor to a prime contractor. The Court found that the claim need not be presented directly to the government, but that the false statement must be made with the intention that it will be relied upon by the government in paying, or approving payment of, a claim. The Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009 reversed the Court's decision and made the types of fraud to which the False Claims Act applies more explicit.\nIn a 2009 case, \"United States ex rel. Eisenstein v. City of New York\", the United States Supreme Court considered whether, when the government declines to intervene or otherwise actively participate in a \"qui tam\" action under the False Claims Act, the United States is a \"party\" to the suit for purposes of Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 4(a)(1)(A) (which requires that a notice of appeal in a federal civil action generally be filed within 30 days after entry of a judgment or order from which the appeal is taken). The Court held that when the United States has declined to intervene in a privately initiated FCA action, it is not a \"party\" for FRAP 4 purposes, and therefore, petitioner's appeal filed after 30 days was untimely.\nIn a 2016 case, \"Universal Health Services, Inc. v. United States ex rel. Escobar\", the United States Supreme Court sought to clarify the standard for materiality under the FCA. The court unanimously upheld the implied certification theory of FCA liability and strengthened the FCA's materiality requirement.\nState False Claims Acts and application in other jurisdictions.\nAs of 2020, 29 states and the District of Columbia have false-claims laws modeled on the federal statute to protect their publicly funded programs from fraud by including qui tam provisions, which enables them to recover money at state level. Some of these state False Claims Act statutes provide similar protections to those of the federal law, while others limit recovery to claims of fraud related to the Medicaid program.\nThe California False Claims Act was enacted in 1987, but lay relatively dormant until the early 1990s, when public entities, frustrated by what they viewed as a barrage of unjustified and unmeritorious claims, began to employ the False Claims Act as a defensive measure.\nIn 1995, the State of Texas passed the Texas Medicaid Fraud Prevention Act (TMFPA), which specifically aims at combating fraud against the Texas Medicaid Program, which provides healthcare and prescription drug coverage to low-income individuals. The Texas law enacts state qui tam provisions that allow individuals to report fraud and initiate action against violations of the TMFPA, imposes consequences for noncompliance and includes whistleblower protections.\nIn Australia, The Treasury Laws Amendment (Enhancing Whistleblower Protections) Act, was passed in December 2018 and went into effect in 2019. The law expanded protections for whistleblowers, allowing them to report misconduct anonymously, as well as applying anti-retaliation protections to additional kinds of whistleblowers. Importantly, the law does not provide for rewards for whistleblowers. There have been calls since 2011 for legislation modeled on the False Claims Act and for their application to the tobacco industry and carbon pricing schemes. \nIn October 2013, the UK Government announced that it is considering the case for financially incentivising individuals reporting fraud in economic crime cases by private sector organisations, in an approach much like the US False Claims Act. The 'Serious and Organised Crime Strategy' paper released by the UK's Secretary of State for the Home Department sets out how that government plans to take action to prevent serious and organised crime and strengthen protections against and responses to it. The paper asserts that serious and organised crime costs the UK more than \u00a324 billion a year. In the context of anti-corruption, the paper acknowledges that there is a need to not only target serious and organised criminals but also support those who seek to help identify and disrupt serious and organised criminality. Three UK agencies, the Department for Business, Innovation &amp; Skills, the Ministry of Justice and the Home Office were tasked with considering the case for a US-style False Claims Act in the UK. In July 2014, the Financial Conduct Authority and the Bank of England Prudential Regulation Authority recommended Parliament enact strong measure to encourage and protect whistleblowers, but without offering whistleblower rewards \u2013 rejecting the US model. \nRule 9(b) circuit split.\nUnder Rule 9(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, allegations of fraud or mistake must be pleaded with particularity. All appeals courts to have addressed the issue of whether Rule 9(b) pleading standards apply to qui tam actions have held that the heightened standard applies. The Fifth Circuit, the Sixth Circuit, the Seventh Circuit, the Eighth Circuit, the Tenth Circuit, and the Eleventh Circuit have all found that plaintiffs must allege specific false claims.\nIn 2010, the First Circuit decision in \"U.S. ex rel. Duxbury v. Ortho Biotech Prods., L.P.\"(2009) and the Eleventh Circuit ruling in \"U.S. ex rel. Hopper v. Solvay Pharms., Inc.\"(2009) were both appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. The Court denied \"certiorari\" for both cases, however, declining to resolve the divergent appeals court decisions.\nACLU et al. v. Holder.\nIn 2009, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), Government Accountability Project (GAP) and OMB Watch filed suit against the Department of Justice challenging the constitutionality of the \"seal provisions\" of the FCA that require the whistleblower and the court to keep lawsuits confidential for at least 60 days. The plaintiffs argued that the requirements infringe the First Amendment rights of the public and the whistleblower, and that they violate the division of powers, since courts are not free to release the documents until the executive branch acts. The government moved for dismissal, and the district court granted that motion in 2009. The plaintiffs appealed, and in 2011 their appeal was denied.\nExamples.\nIn 2004, the billing groups associated with the University of Washington agreed to pay $35 million to resolve civil claims brought by whistleblower Mark Erickson, a former compliance officer, under the False Claims Act. The settlement, approved by the UW Board of Regents, resolved claims that they systematically overbilled Medicaid and Medicare and that employees destroyed documents to hide the practice. The fraud settlement, the largest against a teaching hospital since the University of Pennsylvania agreed to pay $30 million in 1995, ended a five-year investigation that resulted in guilty pleas from two prominent doctors. The whistleblower was awarded $7.25M.\nIn 2010, a subsidiary of Johnson &amp; Johnson agreed to pay over $81 million in civil and criminal penalties to resolve allegations in a FCA suit filed by two whistleblowers. The suit alleged that Ortho-McNeil-Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (OMJPI) acted improperly concerning the marketing, promotion and sale of the anti-convulsant drug Topamax. Specifically, the suit alleged that OMJPI \"illegally marketed Topamax by, among other things, promoting the sale and use of Topamax for a variety of psychiatric conditions other than those for which its use was approved by the Food and Drug Administration, (i.e., \"off-label\" uses).\" It also states that \"certain of these uses were not medically accepted indications for which State Medicaid programs provided coverage\" and that as a result \"OMJPI knowingly caused false or fraudulent claims for Topamax to be submitted to, or caused purchase by, certain federally funded healthcare programs.\nIn response to a complaint from whistleblower Jerry H. Brown II, the US Government filed suit against Maersk for overcharging for shipments to US forces fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan. In a settlement announced on 3 January 2012, the company agreed to pay $31.9 million in fines and interest, but made no admission of wrongdoing. Brown was entitled to $3.6 million of the settlement.\nThe largest healthcare fraud settlement in history was made by GlaxoSmithKline in 2012 when it paid a total of $3 billion to resolve four qui tam lawsuits brought under the False Claims Act and related criminal charges. The claims include allegations Glaxo engaged in off-label marketing and paid kickbacks to doctors to prescribe certain drugs, including Paxil, Wellbutrin and Advair.\nIn 2013, Wyeth Pharmaceuticals Inc., a pharmaceutical company acquired by Pfizer, Inc. in 2009, paid $490.9 million to resolve its criminal and civil liability arising from the unlawful marketing of its drug Rapamune for uses that were not FDA-approved and potentially harmful. The case, \"U.S. ex rel. Sandler and Paris v. Wyeth Pharmaceuticals and Pfizer, Inc.\" was brought by multiple whistleblowers and culminated in one of the largest False Claims Act recoveries for a single drug.\nIn 2014, CareFusion paid $40.1 million to settle allegations of violating the False Claims Act by promoting off label use of its products in the case United States ex rel. Kirk v. CareFusion et al., No. 10-2492. The government alleged that CareFusion promoted the sale of its drug ChloraPrep for uses that were not approved by the FDA. ChloraPrep is the commercial name under which CareFusion produced the drug chlorhexidine, used to clean the skin before surgery. In 2017, this case was called into question and was under review by the DOJ because the lead attorney for the DOJ serving as Assistant Attorney General in the case, Jeffery Wertkin, was arrested by the FBI on January 31, 2017 for allegedly attempting to sell a copy of a complaint in a secret whistleblower suit that was under seal.\nIn 2017, bio-pharmaceutical giant Celgene Corporation paid $240 million to settle allegations it sold and marketed its drugs Thalomid and Revlimid off-label in \"U.S. ex rel. Brown v. Celgene\", CV 10-03165 (RK) (C.D. Cal.). The case, brought by former Celgene sales representative, Beverly Brown, alleged violations under the False Claims Act including promoting Thalomid and Revlimid off-label for uses that were not FDA-approved and, in many cases, unsafe and not medically necessary, offered illegal kickbacks to influence healthcare providers to select its products, and concealed potential adverse events related to use of its drugs."}
{"id": "11664", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11664", "title": "Fantastic Four", "text": "The Fantastic Four are a fictional superhero team appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. They debuted in \"The Fantastic Four\" #1 (cover dated Nov. 1961), helping usher in a new level of realism in the medium. They were the first superhero team created by artist/co-plotter Jack Kirby and editor/co-plotter Stan Lee, who developed a collaborative approach to creating comics with this title.\nThe four characters traditionally associated with the Fantastic Four, who gained superpowers after exposure to cosmic rays during a scientific mission to outer space, are: Mister Fantastic (Reed Richards), a scientific genius and the leader of the group, who can stretch his body into incredible lengths and shapes; the Invisible Woman (Susan \"Sue\" Storm), who eventually married Reed, who can render herself invisible and later project powerful invisible force fields; the Human Torch (Johnny Storm), Sue's younger brother, who can generate flames, surround himself with them and fly; the monstrous Thing (Ben Grimm), their grumpy but benevolent friend, a former college football star, Reed's college roommate and a good pilot, who possesses tremendous superhuman strength, durability and endurance due to his stone-like flesh.\nSince their 1961 introduction, the Fantastic Four have been portrayed as a somewhat dysfunctional, yet loving, family. Breaking convention with other comic archetypes, they squabbled, held grudges both deep and petty, and eschewed anonymity or secret identities in favor of celebrity status. They are also well known for their recurring encounters with characters such as the villainous monarch Doctor Doom; the planet-devouring Galactus; the Kree Empire's ruthless and tyrannical enforcer Ronan the Accuser; Annihilus, ruler of the Negative Zone; the sea-dwelling prince Namor; the spacefaring Silver Surfer; and the Skrull warrior Kl'rt.\nThe Fantastic Four have been adapted into other media, including four animated series and four live-action films.\nPublication history.\nOrigins.\nApocryphal legend has it that in 1961, longtime magazine and comic book publisher Martin Goodman was playing golf with either Jack Liebowitz or Irwin Donenfeld of rival company DC Comics, then known as National Periodical Publications, and that the top executive bragged about DC's success with the new superhero team the Justice League of America. While film producer and comics historian Michael Uslan has debunked the particulars of that story, Goodman, a publishing trend-follower, aware of the JLA's strong sales, did direct his comics editor, Stan Lee, to create a comic-book series about a team of superheroes. According to Lee, writing in 1974, \"Martin mentioned that he had noticed one of the titles published by National Comics seemed to be selling better than most. It was a book called \"The\" \"Justice League of America\" and it was composed of a team of superheroes. ... 'If the Justice League is selling', spoke he, 'why don't we put out a comic book that features a team of superheroes?'\"\nLee, who had served as editor-in-chief and art director of Marvel Comics and its predecessor companies, Timely Comics and Atlas Comics, for two decades, found that the medium had become creatively restrictive. Determined \"to carve a real career for myself in the nowhere world of comic books\", Lee concluded that, \"For just this once, I would do the type of story I myself would enjoy reading... And the characters would be the kind of characters I could personally relate to: they'd be flesh and blood, they'd have their faults and foibles, they'd be fallible and feisty, and \u2014 most important of all \u2014 inside their colorful, costumed booties they'd still have feet of clay.\"\nLee provided one of his earliest recorded comments on the creation of the Fantastic Four for a fanzine in 1968, during which time Jack Kirby was also working at Marvel (Kirby himself is interviewed separately in the same publication). When asked who conceived the team, him or Kirby, Lee responded \"Both \u2013 'twas mainly my idea, but Jack created characters visually\". In the 1974 book Origins of Marvel Comics Lee described the creative process in more detail, stating that he developed the basic characters as well as a story synopsis for the first issue penciller Jack Kirby to follow. Lee noted the involvement of both Kirby and Publisher Martin Goodman prior to preparing his synopsis: \"After kicking it around with Martin and Jack for a while I decided to call our quaint quartet the Fantastic Four. I wrote a detailed first synopsis for Jack to follow and the rest is history.\" Kirby turned in his penciled art pages to Lee, who added dialogue and captions. This approach to creating comics, which became known as the \"Marvel Method\", worked so well that Lee and Kirby used it from then on, and the Marvel Method became standard for the company within a year.\nKirby recalled events somewhat differently. In a 1970 Fanzine interview he confirmed Lee's involvement in the creation of the Fantastic Four but took credit for the main characters and ideas, stating \"It was my idea. It was my idea to do it the way it was; my idea to develop it the way it was. I'm not saying Stan had nothing to do with it. Of course he did. We talked things out.\" Years later, when specifically challenged with Lee's version of events in a 1990 interview, Kirby responded: \"I would say that's an outright lie\", although the interviewer, Gary Groth, notes that this statement needs to be viewed with caution. Kirby claims he came up with the idea for the Fantastic Four in Marvel's offices, and that Lee merely added the dialogue after the story was pencilled. Kirby also sought to establish, more credibly and on numerous occasions, that the visual elements of the strip were his conceptions. He regularly pointed to a team he created for rival publisher DC Comics in the 1950s, the Challengers of the Unknown. \"[I]f you notice the uniforms, they're the same... I always give them a skintight uniform with a belt... the Challengers and the FF have a minimum of decoration. And of course, the Thing's skin is a kind of decoration, breaking up the monotony of the blue uniform.\" It is important to note, however, that the Fantastic Four originally wore civilian garb instead of uniforms, which were only introduced (along with the Baxter Building Headquarters) in the third issue of the series following readership feedback. The original submitted design was also modified to include the iconic chest insignia of a \"4\" within a circle that was designed by Lee.\nGiven the conflicting statements, outside commentators have found it hard to ascertain who created the Fantastic Four. A typed synopsis by Lee for the introductory segment of the first Fantastic Four issue exists and outlines the characters and their origins, with various minor differences to the published version. However Earl Wells, writing in \"The Comics Journal\", points out that its existence does not assert its place in the creation: \"[W]e have no way of knowing of whether Lee wrote the synopsis after a discussion with Kirby in which Kirby supplied most of the ideas\".\nIt is also notable that the Fantastic Four's first adventure in 1961 depicts a team of four adventurers (three men and a woman) led by a Professor travelling to the Earth\u2019s centre and encountering giant monsters while contending with a human protagonist who is also from the surface world. These are elements present in the very successful Journey to the Centre of the Earth 1959 film. Although neither Lee nor Kirby ever mentioned the movie as a direct inspiration, publisher Martin Goodman was well known for following popular entertainment trends to attract sales in his comics line.\nComics historian R. C. Harvey believes the Fantastic Four was a continuation of the work Kirby previously did, and so \"more likely Kirby's creations than Lee's\". But Harvey notes that the Marvel Method of collaboration allowed each man to claim credit, and that Lee's dialogue added to the direction the team took. Wells argues that Lee's contributions set the framework within which Kirby worked, and this made Lee \"more responsible\". Comics historian Mark Evanier, a studio assistant to Jack Kirby in the 1970s, says that the considered opinion of Lee and Kirby's contemporaries was \"that \"Fantastic Four\" was created by Stan and Jack. No further division of credit seemed appropriate.\"\n1961\u20131970s.\nThe release of \"The Fantastic Four\" #1 (Nov. 1961) was an unexpected success. Lee had felt ready to leave the comics field at the time, but the positive response to \"Fantastic Four\" persuaded him to stay on. The title began to receive fan mail and Lee started printing the letters in a letter column with issue #3. Also with the third issue, Lee created the hyperbolic slogan \"The Greatest Comic Magazine in the World!!\" With the following issue, the slogan was changed to \"The World's Greatest Comic Magazine!\" and became a fixture on the issue covers into the 1990s, and on numerous covers in the 2000s.\nIssue #4 (May 1962) reintroduced Namor the Sub-Mariner, an aquatic antihero who was a star character of Marvel's earliest iteration, Timely Comics, during the late 1930s and 1940s period that historians and fans call the Golden Age of Comics. Issue #5 (July 1962) introduced the team's most frequent nemesis, Doctor Doom. These earliest issues were published bimonthly. With issue #16 (July 1963), the cover title dropped its \"The\" and became simply \"Fantastic Four\".\nWhile the early stories were complete narratives, the frequent appearances of these two antagonists, Doom and Namor, in subsequent issues indicated the creation of a long narrative by Lee and Kirby that extended over months. According to comics historian Les Daniels, \"only narratives that ran to several issues would be able to contain their increasingly complex ideas\". During its creators' lengthy run, the series produced many acclaimed storylines and characters that have become central to Marvel, including the hidden race of alien-human genetic experiments, the Inhumans; the Black Panther, an African king who would be mainstream comics' first black superhero; the rival alien races the Kree and the shapeshifting Skrulls; Him, who would become Adam Warlock; the Negative Zone and unstable molecules. The story frequently cited as Lee and Kirby's finest achievement is the three-part \"Galactus Trilogy\" that began in \"Fantastic Four\" #48 (March 1966), chronicling the arrival of Galactus, a cosmic giant who wanted to devour the planet, and his herald, the Silver Surfer. \"Fantastic Four\" #48 was chosen as #24 in the 100 Greatest Marvels of All Time poll of Marvel's readers in 2001. Editor Robert Greenberger wrote in his introduction to the story that, \"As the fourth year of the Fantastic Four came to a close, Stan Lee and Jack Kirby seemed to be only warming up. In retrospect, it was perhaps the most fertile period of any monthly title during the Marvel Age.\" Daniels noted that \"[t]he mystical and metaphysical elements that took over the saga were perfectly suited to the tastes of young readers in the 1960s\", and Lee soon discovered that the story was a favorite on college campuses. The \"Fantastic Four Annual\" was used to spotlight several key events. The Sub-Mariner was crowned king of Atlantis in the first annual (1963). The following year's annual revealed the origin story of Doctor Doom. \"Fantastic Four Annual\" #3 (1965) presented the wedding of Reed Richards and Sue Storm. Lee and Kirby reintroduced the original Human Torch in \"Fantastic Four Annual\" #4 (1966) and had him battle Johnny Storm. Sue Richards' pregnancy was announced in \"Fantastic Four Annual\" #5 (1967), and the Richards' son, Franklin Richards was born in \"Fantastic Four Annual\" #6 (1968) in a story which introduced Annihilus as well.\nMarvel filed for a trademark for \"Fantastic Four\" in 1967 and the United States Patent and Trademark Office issued the registration in 1970.\nKirby left Marvel in mid-1970, having drawn the first 102 issues plus an unfinished issue, partially published in \"Fantastic Four\" #108, with alterations, and later completed and published as \"Fantastic Four: The Lost Adventure\" (April 2008), \"Fantastic Four\" continued with Lee, Roy Thomas, Gerry Conway and Marv Wolfman as its consecutive regular writers, working with artists such as John Romita Sr., John Buscema, Rich Buckler and George P\u00e9rez, with longtime inker Joe Sinnott adding some visual continuity. Jim Steranko also contributed some covers during this time. A short-lived series starring the team, \"Giant-Size Super-Stars\", began in May 1974 and changed its title to \"Giant-Size Fantastic Four\" with issue #2. The fourth issue introduced Jamie Madrox, a character who later became part of the X-Men. \"Giant-Size Fantastic Four\" was canceled with issue #6 (Oct. 1975). Roy Thomas and George P\u00e9rez crafted a metafictional story for \"Fantastic Four\" #176 (Nov. 1976) in which the Impossible Man visited the offices of Marvel Comics and met numerous comics creators. Marv Wolfman and Keith Pollard crafted a multi-issue storyline involving the son of Doctor Doom which culminated in issue #200 (Nov. 1978). John Byrne joined the title with issue #209 (Aug. 1979), doing pencil breakdowns for Sinnott to finish. He and Wolfman introduced a new herald for Galactus named Terrax the Tamer in #211 (Oct. 1979).\n1980s and 1990s.\nBill Mantlo briefly followed Wolfman as writer of the series and wrote a crossover with \"Peter Parker, The Spectacular Spider-Man\" #42 (May 1980). Byrne wrote and drew a giant-sized Fantastic Four promotional comic for Coca-Cola, which was rejected by Coca-Cola as being too violent and published as \"Fantastic Four\" #220\u2013221 (July\u2013Aug. 1980) instead. Writer Doug Moench and penciller Bill Sienkiewicz then took over for 10 issues. With issue #232 (July 1981), the aptly titled \"Back to the Basics\", Byrne began his run as writer, penciller and inker, the last under the pseudonym Bjorn Heyn for this issue only.\nByrne revitalized the slumping title with his run. Originally, Byrne was slated to write with Sienkiewicz providing the art. Sienkiewicz left to do \"Moon Knight\", and Byrne subsequently became writer, artist, and inker. Various editors were assigned to the comic; eventually Bob Budiansky became the regular editor. Byrne told Jim Shooter that he could not work with Budiansky, although they ultimately continued to work together. In 2006, Byrne said \"that's my paranoia. I look back and I think that was Shooter trying to force me off the book\". Byrne left following issue #293 (Aug. 1986) in the middle of a story arc, explaining he could not recapture the fun he had previously had on the series. One of Byrne's changes was making the Invisible Girl into the Invisible Woman: assertive and confident. During this period, fans came to recognize that she was quite powerful, whereas previously, she had been primarily seen as a superpowered mother and wife in the tradition of television moms like those played by Donna Reed and Florence Henderson.\nByrne staked new directions in the characters' personal lives, having the married Sue Storm and Reed Richards suffer a miscarriage and the Thing quitting the Fantastic Four, with She-Hulk being recruited as his long-term replacement. He also re-emphasized the family dynamic which he felt the series had drifted away from after the Lee/Kirby run, commenting that, \"\"Family\"\u2014and not \"dysfunctional family\"\u2014is the central, key element to the FF. It is an absolutely vital dynamic between the characters.\" [emphases in original]\nByrne was followed by a quick succession of writers: Roger Stern, Tom DeFalco, and Roy Thomas. Steve Englehart took over as writer for issues 304\u2013332 (except #320). The title had been struggling, so Englehart decided to make radical changes. He felt the title had become stale with the normal makeup of Reed, Sue, Ben, and Johnny, so in issue #308 Reed and Sue retired and were replaced with the Thing's new girlfriend, Sharon Ventura, and Johnny Storm's former love, Crystal. The changes increased readership through issue #321. At this point, Marvel made decisions about another Englehart comic, \"West Coast Avengers\", that he disagreed with, and in protest he changed his byline to S.F.X. Englehart (S.F.X. is the abbreviation for Simple Sound Effects). In issue #326, Englehart was told to bring Reed and Sue back and undo the other changes he had made. This caused Englehart to take his name entirely off the book. He used the pseudonym John Harkness, which he had created years before for work he didn't want to be associated with. According to Englehart, the run from #326 through his last issue, #332, was \"one of the most painful stretches of [his] career.\" Writer-artist Walt Simonson took over as writer with #334 (December 1989), and three issues later began pencilling and inking as well. With brief inking exceptions, two fill-in issues, and a three-issue stint drawn by Arthur Adams, Simonson remained in all three positions through #354 (July 1991).\nSimonson, who had been writing the team comic \"The Avengers\", had gotten approval for Reed and Sue to join that team after Engelhart had written them out of \"Fantastic Four\". Yet by \"The Avengers\" #300, where they were scheduled to join the team, Simonson was told the characters were returning to \"Fantastic Four\". This led to Simonson quitting \"The Avengers\" after that issue. Shortly afterward, he was offered the job of writing \"Fantastic Four\". Having already prepared a number of stories involving the Avengers with Reed and Sue in the lineup, he then rewrote these for \"Fantastic Four\". Simonson later recalled that working on \"Fantastic Four\" allowed him the latitude to use original Avengers members Thor and Iron Man, which he had been precluded from using in \"The Avengers\".\nAfter another fill-in, the regular team of writer and Marvel editor-in-chief Tom DeFalco, penciller Paul Ryan and inker Dan Bulanadi took over, with Ryan self-inking beginning with #360 (Jan. 1992). That team, with the very occasional different inker, continued for years through #414 (July 1996). DeFalco nullified the Storm-Masters marriage by retconning that the alien Skrull Empire had kidnapped the real Masters and replaced her with a spy named Lyja. Once discovered, Lyja, who herself had fallen for Storm, helped the Fantastic Four rescue Masters. Ventura departed after being further mutated by Doctor Doom. Although some fans were not pleased with DeFalco's run on \"Fantastic Four\", calling him \"The Great Satan\", the title's sales rose steadily over the period.\nOther key developments included Franklin Richards being sent into the future and returning as a teenager; the return of Reed's time-traveling father, Nathaniel, who is revealed to be the father of time-travelling villain Kang the Conqueror and Reed's apparent death at the hands of a seemingly mortally wounded Doctor Doom. It would be two years before DeFalco resurrected the two characters, revealing that their \"deaths\" were orchestrated by the supervillain Hyperstorm.\nThe ongoing series was canceled with issue #416 (Sept. 1996) and relaunched with vol. 2 #1 (Nov. 1996) as part of the multi-series \"Heroes Reborn\" crossover story arc. The yearlong volume retold the team's first adventures in a more contemporary style, and set in a parallel universe. Following the end of that experiment, \"Fantastic Four\" was relaunched with vol. 3 #1 (Jan. 1998). Initially by the team of writer Scott Lobdell and penciller Alan Davis, it went after three issues to writer Chris Claremont (co-writing with Lobdell for #4\u20135) and penciller Salvador Larroca; this team enjoyed a long run through issue #32 (Aug. 2000).\n2000s.\nFollowing the run of Claremont, Lobdell and Larroca, Carlos Pacheco took over as penciller and co-writer, first with Rafael Mar\u00edn, then with Mar\u00edn and Jeph Loeb. This series began using dual numbering, as if the original \"Fantastic Four\" series had continued unbroken, with issue #42 / #471 (June 2001). At the time, the Marvel Comics series begun in the 1960s, such as \"Thor\" and \"The Amazing Spider-Man\", were given such dual numbering on the front cover, with the present-day volume's numbering alongside the numbering from the original series. After issue #70 / #499 (Aug. 2003), the title reverted to its original vol. 1 numbering with issue #500 (Sept. 2003).\nKarl Kesel succeeded Loeb as co-writer with issue #51 / #480 (March 2002), and after a few issues with temporary teams, Mark Waid took over as writer with #60 / 489 (October 2002) with artist Mike Wieringo with Marvel releasing a promotional variant edition of their otherwise $2.25 debut issue at the price of nine cents US. Pencillers Mark Buckingham, Casey Jones, and Howard Porter variously contributed through issue #524 (May 2005), with a handful of issues by other teams also during this time. Writer J. Michael Straczynski and penciller Mike McKone did issues #527\u2013541 (July 2005 \u2013 Nov. 2006), with Dwayne McDuffie taking over as writer the following issue, and Paul Pelletier succeeding McKone beginning with #544 (May 2007).\nAs a result of the events of the \"Civil War\" company-crossover storyline, the Black Panther and Storm temporarily replaced Reed and Susan Richards on the team. During that period, the Fantastic Four also appeared in \"Black Panther\", written by Reginald Hudlin and pencilled primarily by Francis Portela. Beginning with issue #554 (April 2008), writer Mark Millar and penciller Bryan Hitch began what Marvel announced as a sixteen-issue run. Following the summer 2008 crossover storyline, \"Secret Invasion\", and the 2009 aftermath \"Dark Reign\", chronicling the U.S. government's assigning of the Nation's security functions to the seemingly reformed supervillain Norman Osborn, the Fantastic Four starred in a five-issue miniseries, \"Dark Reign: Fantastic Four\" (May\u2013Sept. 2009), written by Jonathan Hickman, with art by Sean Chen. Hickman took over as the series regular writer as of issue #570 with Dale Eaglesham and later Steve Epting on art.\n2010s.\nIn the storyline \"Three\", which concluded in \"Fantastic Four\" #587 (cover date March 2011, published January 26, 2011), the Human Torch appears to die stopping a horde of monsters from the other-dimensional Negative Zone. The series ended with the following issue, #588, and relaunched in March 2011 as simply \"FF\". The relaunch saw the team assume a new name, the Future Foundation, adopt new black-and-white costumes, and accept longtime ally Spider-Man as a member. In October 2011, with the publication of \"FF\" #11 (cover-dated Dec. 2011), the \"Fantastic Four\" series reached its 599th issue.\nIn November 2011, to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Fantastic Four and of Marvel Comics, the company published the 100-page \"Fantastic Four\" #600 (cover-dated Jan. 2012), which returned the title to its original numbering and featured the return of the Human Torch. It revealed the fate of the character of Johnny Storm after issue #587, showing that while he did in fact die, he was resurrected to fight as a gladiator for the entertainment of Annihilus. Storm later formed a resistance force called Light Brigade and defeated Annihilus.\nAlthough it was launched as a continuation of the \"Fantastic Four\" title, \"FF\" continues publication as a separate series. Starting with issue #12, the title focuses upon the youthful members of the Future Foundation, including Franklin and Valeria Richards.\nIn the graphic novel \"Fantastic Four: Season One\", the Fantastic Four is given an updated origin story set in the present day instead of the 1960s. The hardcover compilation debuted at number four on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list for graphic novels.\nAs part of Marvel NOW! \"Fantastic Four\" ended with #611, ending Jonathan Hickman's long run on \"FF\" titles, and the title was relaunched in November 2012 with the creative team of writer Matt Fraction and artist Mark Bagley. In the new title with its numbering starting at #1, the entire Fantastic Four family explore space together, with the hidden intent for Reed Richards to discover why his powers are fading.\nWriter James Robinson and artist Leonard Kirk launched a new \"Fantastic Four\" series in February 2014 (cover dated April 2014).\nRobinson later confirmed that \"Fantastic Four\" would be cancelled in 2015 with issue #645, saying that \"The book is reverting to its original numbers, and the book is going away for a while. I'm moving towards the end of \"Fantastic Four\". I just want to reassure people that you will not leave this book with a bad taste in your mouth.\" In the aftermath of the \"Secret Wars\" storyline, the Thing is working with the Guardians of the Galaxy and the Human Torch is acting as an ambassador with the Inhumans. With Franklin's powers restored and Reed having absorbed the power of the Beyonders from Doom, the Richards family is working on travelling through and reconstructing the multiverse, but Peter Parker has purchased the Baxter Building to keep it \"safe\" until the team is ready to come back together.\nA new volume for the Fantastic Four was released in August 2018, written by Dan Slott, as part of Marvel's Fresh Start event. The first issue of the new series was met with strong sales, and a positive critical reaction. When the Future Foundation is threatened by the Griever at the End of All Things, Mister Fantastic plays on her ego to convince her to provide him with equipment that will allow him to summon his teammates. When Human Torch and Thing are reunited with Mister Fantastic and Invisible Woman, the other superheroes that were part of the Fantastic Four at some point in their lives also arrived, including unexpectedly, X-Men's Iceman. With the gathered heroes assisted the Fantastic Four into causing so much damage to the Griever's equipment, she is forced to retreat in her final telepod or be trapped in that universe. This left the heroes to salvage components from the broken ship to create their own teleport system to return to their universe. The Fantastic Four and their extended family returned to Earth where they find that Liberteens members Ms. America, 2-D, Hope, and Iceberg have come together as the Fantastix with Ms. America taking the codename of Ms. Fantastix. Following the staged bank robbery that the Wrecking Crew committed and their involvement of being hired to humiliate the Fantastix in public, the Fantastic Four gave the Fantastix their blessing to continue using the Baxter Building while the FF operate in a house on Yancy Street with a dimensionally-transcendental interior.\nIn the storyline \"Point of Origin\", the Fantastic Four entrust Alicia, H.E.R.B.I.E. Franklin and Valerie to protect Earth while they begin their mission to learn a further origin of the cosmic radiation that granted them their powers in the first place, piloting a new space ship called Marvel-2. While in a middle of space adventure to find the origin behind their super power results from a cosmic ray, the Fantastic Four are attacked by a group who believed themselves to be the superheroes of Planet Spyre, the Unparalleled. As both Reed and Sue got separated from the Thing, while Human Torch is revealed to be the soulmate of the Unparalleled member named Sky, they learned the Unparalleled's leader and the Overseer of Planet Spyre, Revos was responsible for the cosmic rays that struck the team on their original trip as he wanted to stop them coming to his planet, and subsequently mutated his people to 'prepare for their return' before trying to eradicate the mutates who are unable to retain their original forms in the same manner as the Thing, accusing the mutates of being \"villains and imperfects\"; as a result, through his own paranoia and xenophobia, the Overseer himself is responsible for the fateful creation of the Fantastic Four and mutated his entire race to face a non-existent threat. Revos challenges Mr. Fantastic for a fight over their differences, until it has settled and they finally made peace. As the Fantastic Four are about to depart Spyre after helping its citizens clean up the Planet (as well as Reed providing the mutates with a variation of the temporary 'cure' he has created for Ben), Skye join them to learn about Earth and every unseen galaxy. When the incoming Kree-Skrull Empyre occur at the same time when the teen heroes being outlawed, the original Fantastic Four went to space with Avengers to stop this Empyre, leaving Franklin and Valerie being backed by Spider-Man and Wolverine to defend Earth.\nSpinoffs.\nAncillary titles and features spun off from the flagship series include the 1970s quarterly \"Giant-Size Fantastic Four\" and the 1990s \"Fantastic Four Unlimited\" and \"Fantastic Four Unplugged\"; \"Fantastic Force\", an 18-issue spinoff (November 1994 \u2013 April 1996) featuring an adult Franklin Richards, from a different timeline, as Psi-Lord. A 12-issue series \"Fantastic Four: The World's Greatest Comics Magazine\" ran in 2001, paying homage to Stan Lee and Jack Kirby's legendary run. A spinoff title \"Marvel Knights 4\" (April 2004 \u2013 August 2006) was written by Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa and initially illustrated by Steve McNiven in his first Marvel work. There have also been numerous limited series featuring the group.\nIn 1996, Marvel launched the series \"Fantastic Four 2099,\" part of the company's Marvel 2099 imprint which explored an alternate future of the Marvel Universe. The four protagonists inexplicably find themselves in 2099, with the world believing them to be clones of the original members of the Fantastic Four. The series ran for 8 issues (Jan. \u2013 Aug. 1996), serving as a companion to \"Doom 2099\"\u2014an original Marvel 2099 title featuring an individual claiming to be the original Victor von Doom.\nIn 2004, Marvel launched \"Ultimate Fantastic Four\". As part of the company's Ultimate Marvel imprint, the series re-imagined the team as teenagers. It ran for 60 issues (Feb. 2004 \u2013 Feb. 2009). In 2008, they also launched \"Marvel Adventures: Fantastic Four\", an out-of-continuity series aimed at younger readers.\nAlthough it was launched by Marvel as a continuation of the Fantastic Four title in 2011, \"FF\" continued publication as a separate series after the regular series resumed in 2012. From issues #12, the title focused on the youthful members of the Future Foundation, including Franklin and Valeria Richards. A second volume was launched as part of Marvel NOW! by Matt Fraction and Mike Allred depicting a substitute Fantastic Four team starring Scott Lang, Medusa, She-Hulk and Ms. Thing.\nSolo series.\nThe Human Torch solo.\nThe Human Torch was given a solo strip in \"Strange Tales\" in 1962 to bolster the title's sales. The series began in \"Strange Tales\" #101 (October 1962), in 12- to 14-page stories plotted by Lee and initially scripted by his brother Larry Lieber, and drawn by penciller Kirby and inker Dick Ayers.\nHere, Johnny was seen living with his older sister, Susan, in fictional Glenview, Long Island, New York, where he continued high school and, with youthful naivet\u00e9, attempted to maintain a \"secret identity\". In \"Strange Tales\" #106 (March 1963), Johnny discovered that his friends and neighbors knew of his dual identity all along from Fantastic Four news reports, but were humoring him. Supporting characters included Johnny's girlfriend, Doris Evans, usually in consternation as Johnny cheerfully flew off to battle bad guys. She was seen again in a 1973 issue of \"Fantastic Four\", having become a heavyset but cheerful wife and mother. Ayers took over the penciling after ten issues, later followed by original Golden Age Human Torch creator Carl Burgos and others. The Fantastic Four made occasional cameo appearances, and the Thing became a co-star with issue #123 (Aug. 1964).\nThe Human Torch shared the split book \"Strange Tales\" with fellow feature Doctor Strange for the majority of its run, before being replaced in issue #135 (August 1965) by Nick Fury, Agent of S.H.I.E.L.D.. The Silver Age stories were republished in 1974, along with some Golden Age Human Torch stories, in a short-lived ongoing \"Human Torch\" series.\nA later ongoing solo series in Marvel's manga-influenced Tsunami imprint, \"Human Torch\", ran 12 issues (June 2003 \u2013 June 2004), by writer Karl Kesel and penciler Skottie Young. The series was followed by the five-issue limited series \"Spider-Man/Human Torch\" (March\u2013July 2005), an untold tales team-up arc spanning the course of their friendship.\nThe Thing solo.\nThe Thing appeared in two team-up issues of \"Marvel Feature\" (#11\u201312, September\u2013November 1973). Following their success, he was given his own regular team-up title \"Marvel Two-in-One\", co-starring with Marvel heroes not only in the present day but occasionally in other time periods (fighting alongside the World War II-era Liberty Legion in #20 and the 1930s hero Doc Savage in #21, for example) and in alternate realities. The series ran 100 issues (January 1974 \u2013 June 1983), with seven summer annuals (1976\u20131982) and was immediately followed by the solo title \"The Thing\" #1\u201336 (July 1983 \u2013 June 1986). Another ongoing solo series, also titled \"The Thing\", ran eight issues (January\u2013August 2006).\nInvisible Woman solo.\nIn April 2019, Marvel Comics announced that it would publish \"Invisible Woman\", a five-issue miniseries written by Mark Waid. This was Sue Storm's first solo title. Adam Hughes drew the cover for Issue #1.\nCharacters.\nThe Fantastic Four is formed after four civilian astronauts are exposed to cosmic rays during an unauthorized outer space test flight in an experimental rocket ship designed by Dr. Reed Richards. Pilot Ben Grimm and crew-members Susan Storm and her brother Johnny Storm survive an emergency crash-landing in a field on Earth. Upon exiting the rocket, the four discover they have developed incredible superpowers, and decide to use these powers to help others.\nIn the first issue the crew talks about Reed Richards' rocketship flying to the stars. Stan Lee's original synopsis described the crew's plan to fly to Mars, but Lee later shortly afterward wrote that due to \"the rate the Communists are progressing in space, maybe we better make this a flight to the STARS, instead of just to Mars, because by the time this mag goes on sale, the Russians may have already MADE a flight to Mars!\"\nIn a significant departure from preceding superhero conventions, the Fantastic Four make no effort to maintain secret identities or, until issue #3, to wear superhero costumes, instead maintaining a public profile and enjoying celebrity status for scientific and heroic contributions to society. At the same time, they are often prone to arguing and even fighting with one another. Despite their bickering, the Fantastic Four consistently prove themselves to be \"a cohesive and formidable team in times of crisis.\"\nWhile there have been a number of lineup changes to the group, the four characters who debuted in \"Fantastic Four\" #1 remain the core and most frequent lineup.\nThe Fantastic Four has had several headquarters, most notably the Baxter Building, located at 42nd Street and Madison Avenue in New York City. The Baxter Building was replaced by Four Freedoms Plaza at the same location after its destruction at the hands of Kristoff Vernard, adopted son of the team's seminal foe Doctor Doom. (Prior to the completion of Four Freedoms Plaza, the team took up temporary residence at Avengers Mansion.) Pier 4, a waterfront warehouse, served as a temporary headquarters after Four Freedoms Plaza was destroyed by the ostensible superhero team the Thunderbolts shortly after the revelation that they were actually the supervillain team the Masters of Evil in disguise. Pier 4 was eventually destroyed during a battle with the longtime Fantastic Four supervillain Diablo, after which the team received a new Baxter Building, courtesy of one of team leader Reed Richards' former professors, Noah Baxter. This second Baxter Building was constructed in Earth's orbit and teleported into the vacant lot formerly occupied by the original.\nSupporting characters.\nAllies and supporting characters.\nA number of characters are closely affiliated with the team, share complex personal histories with one or more of its members but have never actually held an official membership. Some of these characters include, but are not limited to: Namor the Sub-Mariner (previously an antagonist), Alicia Masters, Lyja the Lazerfist, H.E.R.B.I.E., Kristoff Vernard (Doctor Doom's former prot\u00e9g\u00e9), Wyatt Wingfoot, Sue and Johnny's father Franklin Storm, the receptionist android Roberta, governess Agatha Harkness, and Reed and Sue's children Franklin Richards and Valeria Richards.\nSeveral allies of the Fantastic Four have served as temporary members of the team, including Crystal, Medusa, Power Man (Luke Cage), Nova (Frankie Raye), She-Hulk, Ms. Marvel (Sharon Ventura), Ant-Man (Scott Lang), Namorita, Storm, and the Black Panther. A temporary lineup from \"Fantastic Four\" #347\u2013349 (December 1990 \u2013 February 1991) consisted of the Hulk (in his \"Joe Fixit\" persona), Spider-Man, Wolverine, and Ghost Rider (Daniel Ketch).\nOther notable characters who have been involved with the Fantastic Four include Alyssa Moy, Caledonia (Alysande Stuart of Earth-9809), Fantastic Force, the Inhumans (particularly the royal family members Black Bolt, Crystal, Medusa, Gorgon, Karnak, Triton, and Lockjaw), Reed's father Nathaniel Richards, the Silver Surfer (previously an antagonist), Thundra, postal worker Willie Lumpkin, Baxter Building landlord Walter Collins, the Thing's rivals the Yancy Street Gang and Uatu the Watcher.\nAuthor Christopher Knowles states that Kirby's work on creations such as the Inhumans and the Black Panther served as \"a showcase of some of the most radical concepts in the history of the medium\".\nAntagonists.\nWriters and artists over many years have created a variety of characters to challenge the Fantastic Four. Knowles states that Kirby helped to create \"an army of villains whose rage and destructive power had never been seen before,\" and \"whose primary impulse is to smash the world.\" Some of the team's oldest and most frequent enmities have involved such foes as the Mole Man, the Skrulls, Namor the Sub-Mariner, Doctor Doom, the Puppet Master, Kang the Conqueror/Rama-Tut/Immortus, Blastaar, the Frightful Four, Annihilus, Galactus, and Klaw. Other prominent antagonists of the Fantastic Four have included the Wizard, the Impossible Man, the Red Ghost and the Super-Apes, the Mad Thinker, the Super-Skrull, the Molecule Man, Diablo, Dragon Man, Psycho-Man, Ronan the Accuser, Salem's Seven, Terrax the Tamer, Terminus, Hyperstorm and Lucia von Bardas.\nFantastic Four Incorporated.\nFantastic Four Incorporated, also known as Fantastic Enterprises, is a fictional organization appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. It was founded by Reed Richards to license use of Richard's patents and funded the Fantastic Four's operation and their source of income. Staff are:\nCultural impact.\nThe Fantastic Four's characterization was initially different from all other superheroes at the time. One major difference is that they do not conceal their identities, leading the public to be both suspicious and in awe of them. Also, they frequently argued and disagreed with each other, hindering their work as a team. Described as \"heroes with hangups\" by Stan Lee, the Thing has a temper, and the Human Torch resents being a child among adults. Mr. Fantastic blames himself for the Thing's transformation. Social scientist Bradford W. Wright describes the team as a \"volatile mix of human emotions and personalities\". In spite of their disagreements, they ultimately function well as a team.\nThe first issue of \"The Fantastic Four\" proved a success, igniting a new direction for superhero comics and soon influencing many other superhero comics. Readers grew fond of Ben's grumpiness, Johnny's tendency to annoy others and Reed and Sue's spats. Stan Lee was surprised at the reaction to the first issue, leading him to stay in the comics field despite previous plans to leave. Comics historian Stephen Krensky said that \"Lee's natural dialogue and flawed characters appealed to 1960s kids looking to 'get real'\".\nAs of 2005, 150 million comics featuring the Fantastic Four had been sold.\nIn other media.\nThere have been four \"The Fantastic Four\" animated TV series and three released feature films. The Fantastic Four also guest-starred in the \"Secret Wars\" story arc of the 1990s \"Spider-Man\" animated series, and the Thing guest-starred (with a small cameo from the other Fantastic Four members) in the \"Fantastic Fortitude\" episode of the 1996 \"The Incredible Hulk\" series. The Fantastic Four also appeared in the 2010 series \"\".\nThere was a short-lived radio show in 1975 that adapted early Lee/Kirby stories and is notable for casting a pre-\"Saturday Night Live\" Bill Murray as the Human Torch. Also in the cast were Bob Maxwell as Reed Richards, Cynthia Adler as Sue Storm, Jim Pappas as Ben Grimm and Jerry Terheyden as Doctor Doom. Other Marvel characters featured in the series included Ant-Man, Prince Namor, Nick Fury and the Hulk. Stan Lee narrated the series and the scripts were taken almost verbatim from the comic books. The radio show was packaged into five-minute segments, with five segments comprising a complete adventure. The team appeared on the Power Records album \"Fantastic Four: \"The Way It Began\"\" book and record set, an audio dramatization of \"Fantastic Four\" #126.\nTelevision.\nThe Fantastic Four has been the subject of four animated television series. The first, \"Fantastic Four\", produced by Hanna-Barbera, ran 20 episodes on ABC from September 9, 1967 to September 21, 1968. The second \"Fantastic Four\" series, produced by DePatie-Freleng, ran 13 episodes from September 9, 1978, to December 16, 1978; this series features a H.E.R.B.I.E. Unit in place of the Human Torch.\nIn 1979, the Thing was featured as half of the Saturday morning cartoon \"Fred and Barney Meet the Thing\". The character of the Thing received a radical make-over for the series. The title character for this program was Benjy Grimm, a teenage boy who possessed a pair of magic Thing-rings which could transform him into the Thing when he put them together and said \"Thing-ring, do your thing!\" The other members of the Fantastic Four do not appear in the series, nor do the animated \"The Flintstones\" stars Fred Flintstone and Barney Rubble, despite the title of the program.\nThe third \"Fantastic Four\" was broadcast as part of \"The Marvel Action Hour\" umbrella, with introductions by Stan Lee. This series ran 26 episodes from September 24, 1994 to February 24, 1996. The fourth series, \", debuted on September 2, 2006, on Cartoon Network and ran for 26 episodes.\nDifferent Fantastic Four members appear briefly and with little or no dialogue and are mentioned various times throughout the first season of \". The most expansive appearances are in the episode \"The Private War of Doctor Doom\", in which the Avengers team up with the Fantastic Four to battle the titular supervillain, and in the final episode of season two, in which the groups team up to battle Galactus. The Thing becomes a member of the New Avengers in episode 23 of season 2.\nThe Fantastic Four appear in the \"Hulk and the Agents of S.M.A.S.H.\" episode \"Monster No More.\" The Agents of S.M.A.S.H. assist the Fantastic Four in thwarting the Tribbitite Invasion.\nFilm.\nA film adaptation of the characters, \"The Fantastic Four\", was completed in 1994 by producer Roger Corman and starred Alex Hyde-White as Reed Richards/Mr. Fantastic, Rebecca Staab as Sue Storm-Richards/Invisible Woman, Jay Underwood as Johnny Storm/Human Torch, Michael Bailey Smith as Ben Grimm and Carl Ciarfalio as The Thing and Joseph Culp as Victor von Doom/Doctor Doom. The film was not released to theaters or on home video, but it has since been made available through bootleg video distributors. It was made because Constantin Film owned the film rights and would have lost them if it failed to begin production by a certain deadline, a tactic known as creating an ashcan copy. According to producer Bernd Eichinger, Avi Arad had Marvel purchase the film for a few million dollars.\nIn 2005, the second film adaptation, \"Fantastic Four\" directed by Tim Story, was released by 20th Century Fox. Despite mixed reviews from critics, it earned US$155 million in North America and $330 million worldwide. The sequel, \"\", directed by Story and written by Don Payne, was released in 2007. Despite mixed-to-negative reviews, the sequel earned $132 million in North America and a total of $330.6 million worldwide. Both films feature Ioan Gruffudd as Reed Richards / Mr. Fantastic, Jessica Alba as Susan Storm / Invisible Woman, Chris Evans as Johnny Storm / Human Torch, Michael Chiklis as Ben Grimm / The Thing, and Julian McMahon as Victor Von Doom / Dr. Doom. Stan Lee makes cameo appearances as the mailman Willie Lumpkin in the first film and as himself in the second film.\nA reboot directed by Josh Trank (also titled \"Fantastic Four\", but stylized as \"Fant4stic\") was released on August 7, 2015. The film stars Miles Teller as Reed Richards, Kate Mara as Sue Storm, Michael B. Jordan as Johnny Storm, Jamie Bell as Ben Grimm and Toby Kebbell as Doctor Doom. It is based on \"Ultimate Fantastic Four\". It earned poor reviews and box office results. On March 20, 2019, due to the acquisition of 21st Century Fox by Disney, the film rights of \"Fantastic Four\" reverted to Marvel Studios.\nIn July 2019 at the San Diego Comic-Con, producer and head of Marvel Studios Kevin Feige, announced that a Fantastic Four film set within the Marvel Cinematic Universe is in development. In December 2020, it was announced Jon Watts will direct the film.\nVideo games.\nIn 1985, the Fantastic Four starred in ', an adventure game from Adventure International for the Atari 8-bit series. In 1997, the group starred in the \"Fantastic Four\" video game. The team appeared in the ' video game, based on the 1990s Spider-Man animated series, for the Super NES and Sega Genesis. The Thing and the Human Torch appeared in the 2005 game \".\nAll of the Fantastic Four appear as playable characters in the game ' with Doctor Doom being the main enemy. The members of the Fantastic Four are also featured in ', although the team is separated over the course of the game, with Mister Fantastic being 'locked' into the Pro-Registration side of the game's storyline and the Thing briefly becoming unavailable to the player - just as he left America in protest of the war - until he returns to assist in preventing civilian casualties during the conflict. The Fantastic Four also appear in \" this time as playable DLC (downloadable content) alongside additional members of Marvel Knights and the X-Men.\nThe Human Torch has an appearance in a mini-game where the player races against him in all versions of \"Ultimate Spider-Man\", except on the Game Boy Advance platform. The Fantastic Four star in tie-in videogames based on the 2005 film \"Fantastic Four\", and . The Fantastic Four are also playable characters in \"Marvel Heroes\", and \"Lego Marvel Super Heroes\".\nThe Fantastic Four starred in their own virtual pinball game Fantastic Four for \"Pinball FX 2\" released by Zen Studios."}
{"id": "11665", "revid": "136926", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11665", "title": "Filtration", "text": "Filtration is a physical or chemical separation process that separates solid matter and fluid from a mixture using a \"filter medium\" that has a complex structure through which only the fluid can pass. Solid particles that cannot pass through the filter medium are described as \"oversize\" and the fluid that passes through is called the \"filtrate\". Oversize particles may form a filter cake on top of the filter and may also block the filter lattice, preventing the fluid phase from crossing the filter, known as \"blinding\". The size of the largest particles that can successfully pass through a filter is called the effective \"pore size\" of that filter. The separation of solid and fluid is imperfect; solids will be contaminated with some fluid and filtrate will contain fine particles (depending on the pore size, filter thickness and biological activity). Filtration occurs both in nature and in engineered systems; there are biological, geological, and industrial forms.\nFiltration is also used to describe biological and physical systems that not only separate solids from a fluid stream, but also remove chemical species and biological organisms by entrainment, phagocytosis, adsorption and absorption. Examples include slow sand filters and trickling filters. It is also used a general term for microphagy in which organisms use a variety of means to filter small food particles from their environment. Examples range from the microscopic \"Vorticella\" up to the Basking shark one of the largest fishes, and the baleen whales, all of which are described as Filter feeders.\nPhysical processes.\nMethods.\nThere are many different methods of filtration; all aim to attain the separation of substances. Separation is achieved by some form of interaction between the substance or objects to be removed and the filter. The substance that is to pass through the filter must be a fluid, i.e. a liquid or gas. Methods of filtration vary depending on the location of the targeted material, i.e. whether it is dissolved in the fluid phase or suspended as a solid.\nThere are several laboratory filtration techniques depending on the desired outcome namely, hot, cold and vacuum filtration. Some of the major purposes of getting the desired outcome are, for the removal of impurities from a mixture or, for the isolation of solids from a mixture.\nHot filtration method is mainly used to separate solids from a hot solution. This is done in order to prevent crystal formation in the filter funnel and other apparatuses that comes in contact with the solution. As a result, the apparatus and the solution used are heated in order to prevent the rapid decrease in temperature which in turn, would lead to the crystallization of the solids in the funnel and hinder the filtration process.\nOne of the most important measures to prevent the formation of crystals in the funnel and to undergo effective hot filtration is the use stemless filter funnel. Due to the absence of a stem in the filter funnel, there is a decrease in the surface area of contact between the solution and the stem of the filter funnel, hence preventing re-crystallization of solid in the funnel, adversely affecting the filtration process.\nCold filtration method is the use of ice bath in order to rapidly cool down the solution to be crystallized rather than leaving it out to cool it down slowly in the room temperature. This technique results to the formation of very small crystals as opposed to getting large crystals by cooling the solution down at room temperature.\nVacuum filtration technique is mostly preferred for small batches of solution in order to quickly dry out small crystals. This method requires a B\u00fcchner funnel, filter paper of smaller diameter than the funnel, B\u00fcchner flask, and rubber tubing to connect to vacuum source.\nFilter media.\nFilter media are the materials used to do the separation of materials.\nTwo main types of filter media are employed in laboratories: \"surface filters\", which are solid sieves which trap the solid particles, with or without the aid of filter paper (e.g. B\u00fcchner funnel, belt filter, rotary vacuum-drum filter, cross-flow filters, screen filter), and \"depth filters\", a bed of granular material which retains the solid particles as they pass (e.g. sand filter). The surface filter type allows the solid particles, i.e. the residue, to be collected intact; the depth filter does not permit this. However, the depth filter is less prone to clogging due to the greater surface area where the particles can be trapped. Also, when the solid particles are very fine, it is often cheaper and easier to discard the contaminated granules than to clean the solid sieve.\nFilter media can be cleaned by rinsing with solvents or detergents or backwashing. Alternatively, in engineering applications, such as swimming pool water treatment plants, they may be cleaned by backwashing. Self-cleaning screen filters utilize point-of-suction backwashing to clean the screen without interrupting system flow.\nAchieving flow through the filter.\nFluids flow through a filter due to a difference in pressure\u2014fluid flows from the high-pressure side to the low-pressure side of the filter. The simplest method to achieve this is by gravity and can be seen in the coffeemaker example. In the laboratory, pressure in the form of compressed air on the feed side (or vacuum on the filtrate side) may be applied to make the filtration process faster, though this may lead to clogging or the passage of fine particles. Alternatively, the liquid may flow through the filter by the force exerted by a pump, a method commonly used in industry when a reduced filtration time is important. In this case, the filter need not be mounted vertically.\nFilter aid.\nCertain filter aids may be used to aid filtration. These are often incompressible diatomaceous earth, or kieselguhr, which is composed primarily of silica. Also used are wood cellulose and other inert porous solids such as the cheaper and safer perlite. Activated carbon is often used in industrial applications that require changes in the filtrates properties, such as altering color or odor.\nThese filter aids can be used in two different ways. They can be used as a precoat before the slurry is filtered. This will prevent gelatinous-type solids from plugging the filter medium and also give a clearer filtrate. They can also be added to the slurry before filtration. This increases the porosity of the cake and reduces resistance of the cake during filtration. In a rotary filter, the filter aid may be applied as a precoat; subsequently, thin slices of this layer are sliced off with the cake.\nThe use of filter aids is usually limited to cases where the cake is discarded or where the precipitate can be chemically separated from the filter.\nAlternatives.\nFiltration is a more efficient method for the separation of mixtures than decantation, but is much more time-consuming. If very small amounts of solution are involved, most of the solution may be soaked up by the filter medium.\nAn alternative to filtration is centrifugation\u2014instead of filtering the mixture of solid and liquid particles, the mixture is centrifuged to force the (usually) denser solid to the bottom, where it often forms a firm cake. The liquid above can then be decanted. This method is especially useful for separating solids which do not filter well, such as gelatinous or fine particles. These solids can clog or pass through the filter, respectively.\nBiological filtration.\nBiological filtration may take place inside an organism, or the biological component may be grown on a medium in the material being filtered. Removal of solids, emulsified components, organic chemicals and ions may be achieved by ingestion and digestion, adsorption or absorption. Because of the complexity of biological interactions, especially in multi-organism communities, it is often not possible to determine which processes are achieving the filtration result. At the molecular level, it may often by individual catalytic enzyme actions within an individual organisms. The waste products of sone organisms may subsequently broken down by other organisms to extract as much energy as possible and in so doing reducing complex organic molecules to very simple inorganic species such as water, carbon dioxide and nitrogen.\nExcretion.\nInside mammals reptile and birds, the kidneys function by renal filtration in which the glomerulus selectively removes undesirable constituents such as Urea, followed by selective reabsorption of many substances essential for the body to maintain homeostasis. The complete process is termed excretion.\nSimilar but often less complex solutions are deployed in all animals even the Protozoa where the contractile vacuole provides a similar function.\nBiofilms.\nBiofilms are often complex communities of bacteria, phages, yeasts and often more complex organisms including protozoa, Rotifers and Annelids which form dynamic and complex, frequently gelatinous films on wet substrates. Such biofilms coat the rocks of most rivers and the sea and they provide the key filtration capability of the Schmutzdecke on the surface of slow sand filters and the film on the filter media of trickling filters which are used to create potable water and treat sewage respectively.\nFilter feeders.\nFilter feeders are organisms that obtain their food by filtering their, generally aquatic, environment. Many of the protozoa are filter feeders using a range of adaptations including rigid spikes of protoplasm held in the water flow as in the Suctoria to various arrangements of beating Cillia to direct particles to the mouth including organisms such as \"Vorticella\" which have a complex ring of cilia which create a vortex in the flow drafting particles into the oral cavity. Similar feeding techniques are used by the Rotifera and the Ectoprocta. Many aquatic arthropods are filter feeders . Some use rhythmical beating of abdominal limbs to create a water current to the mouth whilst the hairs on the legs trap any particle. Other such as some caddis flies spin fine webs in the water flow to trap particles.\nApplications and examples.\nMany filtration processes include more than one filtration mechanism, and particulates are often removed from the fluid firest to prevent clogging of downstream elements.\nParticulate filtration includes:\nAdsorption filtration includes:\nCombined applications include:"}
{"id": "11668", "revid": "9956628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11668", "title": "Follies", "text": "Follies is a musical with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and a book by James Goldman.\nThe story concerns a reunion in a crumbling Broadway theatre, scheduled for demolition, of the past performers of the \"Weismann's Follies\", a musical revue (based on the \"Ziegfeld Follies\"), that played in that theatre between the World Wars. It focuses on two couples, Buddy and Sally Durant Plummer and Benjamin and Phyllis Rogers Stone, who are attending the reunion. Sally and Phyllis were showgirls in the Follies. Both couples are deeply unhappy with their marriages. Buddy, a traveling salesman, is having an affair with a girl on the road; Sally is still as much in love with Ben as she was years ago; and Ben is so self-absorbed that Phyllis feels emotionally abandoned. Several of the former showgirls perform their old numbers, sometimes accompanied by the ghosts of their former selves. The musical numbers in the show have been interpreted as pastiches of the styles of the leading Broadway composers of the 1920s and 1930s, and sometimes as parodies of specific songs.\nThe Broadway production opened on April 4, 1971, directed by Harold Prince and Michael Bennett, and with choreography by Bennett. The musical was nominated for 11 Tony Awards and won seven. The original production, the second-most costly performed on Broadway to that date, ran for over 500 performances but ultimately lost its entire investment. The musical has had a number of major revivals, and several of its songs have become standards, including \"Broadway Baby\", \"I'm Still Here\", \"Too Many Mornings\", \"Could I Leave You?\", and \"Losing My Mind\".\nBackground.\nAfter the failure of \"Do I Hear a Waltz?\" (1965), for which he had written the lyrics to Richard Rodgers's music, Sondheim decided that he would henceforth work only on projects where he could write both the music and lyrics himself. He asked author and playwright James Goldman to join him as bookwriter for a new musical. Inspired by a \"New York Times\" article about a gathering of former showgirls from the Ziegfeld Follies, they decided upon a story about ex-showgirls.\nOriginally titled \"The Girls Upstairs\", the musical was to be produced by David Merrick and Leland Hayward in late 1967, but the plans ultimately fell through, and Stuart Ostrow became the producer, with Joseph Hardy to direct. These plans also did not work out, and finally Harold Prince, who had worked previously with Sondheim, became the producer and director. He had agreed to work on \"The Girls Upstairs\" if Sondheim agreed to work on \"Company\"; Michael Bennett, the young choreographer of \"Company\", was also brought onto the project. It was Prince who changed the title to \"Follies\"; he was \"intrigued by the psychology of a reunion of old chorus dancers and loved the play on the word 'follies'\".\nPlot.\nIn 1971, on the soon-to-be-demolished stage of the Weismann Theatre, a reunion is being held to honor the Weismann's \"Follies\" shows past and the beautiful chorus girls who performed there every year between the two World Wars. The once resplendent theatre is now little but planks and scaffolding (\"Prologue\"/\"Overture\"). As the ghosts of the young showgirls slowly drift through the theatre, a majordomo enters with his entourage of waiters and waitresses. They pass through the spectral showgirls without seeing them.\nSally Durant Plummer, \"blond, petite, sweet-faced\" and at 49 \"still remarkably like the girl she was thirty years ago\", a former Weismann girl, is the first guest to arrive, and her ghostly youthful counterpart moves towards her. Phyllis Rogers Stone, a stylish and elegant woman, arrives with her husband Ben, a renowned philanthropist and politician. As their younger counterparts approach them, Phyllis comments to Ben about their past. He feigns a lack of interest; there is an underlying tension in their relationship. As more guests arrive, Sally's husband, Buddy, enters. He is a salesman, in his early 50s, appealing and lively, whose smiles cover inner disappointment.\nFinally, Weismann enters to greet his guests. Roscoe, the old master of ceremonies, introduces the former showgirls (\"Beautiful Girls\"). Former Weismann performers at the reunion include Max and Stella Deems, who lost their radio jobs and became store owners in Miami; Solange La Fitte, a coquette, who is vibrant and flirtatious even at 66; Hattie Walker, who has outlived five younger husbands; Vincent and Vanessa, former dancers who now own an Arthur Murray franchise; Heidi Schiller, for whom Franz Leh\u00e1r once wrote a waltz (or was it Oscar Straus? Facts never interest her; what matters is the song!); and Carlotta Campion, a film star who has embraced life and benefited from every experience.\nAs the guests reminisce, the stories of Ben, Phyllis, Buddy, and Sally unfold. Phyllis and Sally were roommates while in the Follies, and Ben and Buddy were best friends at school in New York. When Sally sees Ben, her former lover, she greets him self-consciously (\"Don't Look at Me\"). Buddy and Phyllis join their spouses and the foursome reminisces about the old days of their courtship and the theatre, their memories vividly coming to life in the apparitions of their young counterparts (\"Waiting For The Girls Upstairs\"). Each of the four is shaken at the realization of how life has changed them. Elsewhere, Willy Wheeler (portly, in his sixties) cartwheels for a photographer. Emily and Theodore Whitman, ex-vaudevillians in their seventies, perform an old routine (\"The Rain on the Roof\"). Solange proves she is still fashionable at what she claims is 66 (\"Ah, Paris!\"), and Hattie Walker performs her old showstopping number (\"Broadway Baby\").\nBuddy warns Phyllis that Sally is still in love with Ben, and she is shaken by how the past threatens to repeat itself. Sally is awed by Ben's apparently glamorous life, but Ben wonders if he made the right choices and considers how things might have been (\"The Road You Didn't Take\"). Sally tells Ben how her days have been spent with Buddy, trying to convince him (and herself) (\"In Buddy\u2019s Eyes\"). However, it is clear that Sally is still in love with Ben \u2013 even though their affair ended badly when Ben decided to marry Phyllis. She shakes loose from the memory and begins to dance with Ben, who is touched by the memory of the Sally he once cast aside.\nPhyllis interrupts this tender moment and has a biting encounter with Sally. Before she has a chance to really let loose, they are both called on to participate in another performance \u2013 Stella Deems and the ex-chorines line up to perform an old number (\"Who's That Woman?\"), as they are mirrored by their younger selves. Afterwards, Phyllis and Ben angrily discuss their lives and relationship, which has become numb and emotionless. Sally is bitter and has never been happy with Buddy, although he has always adored her. She accuses him of having affairs while he is on the road, and he admits he has a steady girlfriend, Margie, in another town, but always returns home. Carlotta amuses a throng of admirers with a tale of how her dramatic solo was cut from the Follies because the audience found it humorous, transforming it as she sings it into a toast to her own hard-won survival (\"I'm Still Here\").\nBen confides to Sally that his life is empty. She yearns for him to hold her, but young Sally slips between them and the three move together (\"Too Many Mornings\"). Ben, caught in the passion of memories, kisses Sally as Buddy watches from the shadows. Sally thinks this is a sign that the two will finally get married, and Ben is about to protest until Sally interrupts him with a kiss and runs off to gather her things, thinking that the two will leave together. Buddy leaves the shadows furious, and fantasizes about the girl he should have married, Margie, who loves him and makes him feel like \"a somebody\", but bitterly concludes he does not love her back (\"The Right Girl\"). He tells Sally that he's done, but she is lost in a fantasy world and tells him that Ben has asked her to marry him. Buddy tells her she must be either crazy or drunk, but he's already supported Sally through rehab clinics and mental hospitals and cannot take any more. Ben drunkenly propositions Carlotta, with whom he once had a fling, but she has a young lover and coolly turns him down. Heidi Schiller, joined by her younger counterpart, performs \"One More Kiss\", her aged voice a stark contrast to the sparkling coloratura of her younger self. Phyllis kisses a waiter and confesses to him that she had always wanted a son. She then tells Ben that their marriage can't continue the way it has been. Ben replies by saying that he wants a divorce, and Phyllis assumes the request is due to his love for Sally. Ben denies this, but still wants Phyllis out. Angry and hurt, Phyllis considers whether to grant his request (\"Could I Leave You?\").\nPhyllis begins wondering at her younger self, who worked so hard to become the socialite that Ben needed. Ben yells at his younger self for not appreciating all the work that Phyllis did. Both Buddys enter to confront the Bens about how they stole Sally. Sally and her younger self enter and Ben firmly tells Sally that he never loved her. All the voices begin speaking and yelling at each other. Suddenly, at the peak of madness and confusion, the couples are engulfed by their follies, which transform the rundown theatre into a fantastical \"Loveland\", an extravaganza even more grand and opulent than the gaudiest Weismann confection: \"the place where lovers are always young and beautiful, and everyone lives only for love\". Sally, Phyllis, Ben, and Buddy show their \"real and emotional lives\" in \"a sort of group nervous breakdown.\"\nWhat follows is a series of musical numbers performed by the principal characters, each exploring their biggest desires. The two younger couples sing in a counterpoint of their hopes for the future (\"You're Gonna Love Tomorrow/Love Will See Us Through\"). Buddy then appears, dressed in \"plaid baggy pants, garish jacket, and a shiny derby hat\", and performs a high-energy vaudeville routine depicting how he is caught between his love for Sally and Margie's love for him (\"The God-Why-Don't-You-Love-Me Blues\"). Sally appears next, dressed as a torch singer, singing of her passion for Ben from the past - and her obsession with him now (\"Losing My Mind\"). In a jazzy dance number, accompanied by a squadron of chorus boys, Phyllis reflects on the two sides of her personality, one naive and passionate and the other jaded and sophisticated and her desire to combine them (\"The Story of Lucy and Jessie\"). Resplendent in top hat and tails, Ben begins to offer his devil-may-care philosophy (\"Live, Laugh, Love\"), but stumbles and anxiously calls to the conductor for the lyrics, as he frantically tries to keep going. Ben becomes frenzied, while the dancing ensemble continues as if nothing was wrong. Amidst a deafening discord, Ben screams at all the figures from his past and collapses as he cries out for Phyllis.\n\"Loveland\" has dissolved back into the reality of the crumbling and half-demolished theatre; dawn is approaching. Ben admits to Phyllis his admiration for her, and Phyllis shushes him and helps Ben regain his dignity before they leave. After exiting, Buddy escorts the emotionally devastated Sally back to their hotel with the promise to work things out later. Their ghostly younger selves appear, watching them go. The younger Ben and Buddy softly call to their \"girls upstairs\", and the Follies end.\nSongs.\nSource: \"Follies\" Score\n\u2260 Some productions substitute \"Ah, but Underneath\" when the actress portraying Phyllis is not primarily a dancer.\n\u2260\u2260 Omitted from some productions\nNote: This is the song list from the original Broadway production in 1971. Variations are discussed in Versions.\nSongs cut before the Broadway premiere include \"All Things Bright and Beautiful\" (used in the prologue), \"Can That Boy Foxtrot!\", \"Who Could Be Blue?\", \"Little White House\", \"So Many People\", \"It Wasn't Meant to Happen\", \"Pleasant Little Kingdom\", and \"Uptown Downtown\". The musical numbers \"Ah, but Underneath\" (replacing \"The Story of Lucy and Jessie\"), \"Country House\", \"Make the Most of Your Music\" (replacing \"Live, Laugh, Love\"), \"Social Dancing\" and a new version of \"Loveland\" have been incorporated into various productions.\nAnalysis.\nHal Prince said: \"\"Follies\" examines obsessive behavior, neurosis and self-indulgence more microscopically than anything I know of.\" Bernadette Peters quoted Sondheim on the character of \"Sally\": \"He said early on that [Sally] is off-balance, to put it mildly. He thinks she\u2019s very neurotic, and she is very neurotic, so he said to me 'Congratulations. She\u2019s crazy.'\" Martin Gottfried wrote: \"The concept behind \"Follies\" is theatre nostalgia, representing the rose-colored glasses through which we face the fact of age...the show is conceived in ghostliness. At its very start, ghosts of Follies showgirls stalk the stage, mythic giants in winged, feathered, black and white opulence. Similarly, ghosts of the Twenties shows slip through the evening as the characters try desperately to regain their youth through re-creations of their performances and inane theatre sentiments of their past.\"\nJoanne Gordon, author and Chair and Artistic Director, Theatre, at California State University, Long Beach, wrote \"\"Follies\" is in part an affectionate look at the American musical theatre between the two World Wars and provides Sondheim with an opportunity to use the traditional conventions of the genre to reveal the hollowness and falsity of his characters' dreams and illusions. The emotional high generated by the reunion of the Follies girls ultimately gives way to anger, disappointment, and weary resignation to reality.\" \"\"Follies\" contains two scores: the Follies pastiche numbers and the book numbers.\" Some of the Follies numbers imitate the style of particular composers of the early 20th century: \"Losing My Mind\" is in the style of a George Gershwin ballad \"The Man I Love\". Sondheim noted that the song \"The God-Why-Don't-You-Love-Me Blues\" is \"another generic pastiche: vaudeville music for chases and low comics, but with a patter lyric...I tried to give it the sardonic knowingness of Lorenz Hart or Frank Loesser.\"\n\"Loveland\", the final musical sequence, (that \"consumed the last half-hour of the original\" production) is akin to an imaginary 1941 Ziegfeld Follies sequence, with Sally, Phyllis, Ben and Buddy performing \"like comics and torch singers from a Broadway of yore.\" \"Loveland\" features a string of vaudeville-style numbers, reflecting the leading characters' emotional problems, before returning to the theatre for the end of the reunion party. The four characters are \"whisked into a dream show in which each acts out his or her own principal 'folly'\".\nVersions.\nGoldman continued to revise the book of the musical right up to his death, which occurred shortly before the 1998 Paper Mill Playhouse production. Sondheim, too, has added and removed songs that he judged to be problematic in various productions. Ted Chapin explains: \"Today, \"Follies\" is rarely performed twice in exactly the same version. James Goldman's widow made the observation that the show has morphed throughout its entire life...The London production had new songs and dialogue. The Paper Mill Playhouse production used some elements from London but stayed close to the original. The 2001 Roundabout Broadway revival, the first major production following Goldman's death in 1998, was again a combination of previous versions.\"\nMajor changes were made for the original production in London, which attempted to establish a lighter tone and favored a happier ending than the original Broadway production. According to Joanne Gordon, \"When \"Follies\" opened in London...it had an entirely different, and significantly more optimistic, tone. Goldman's revised book offered some small improvements over the original.\"\nAccording to Sondheim, the producer Cameron Mackintosh asked for changes for the 1987 London production. \"I was reluctantly happy to comply, my only serious balk being at his request that I cut \"The Road You Didn't Take\"...I saw no reason not to try new things, knowing we could always revert to the original (which we eventually did). The net result was four new songs...For reasons which I've forgotten, I rewrote \"Loveland\" for the London production. There were only four showgirls in this version, and each one carried a shepherd's crook with a letter of the alphabet on it.\"\nThe musical was written in one act, and the original director, Prince, did not want an intermission, while the co-director, Bennett, wanted two acts. It originally was performed in one act. The 1987 West End, 2005 Barrington Stage Company, the 2001 Broadway revival and Kennedy Center 2011 productions were performed in two acts. However, August 23, 2011, Broadway preview performance was performed without an intermission. By opening, the 2011 Broadway revival was performed with the intermission, in two acts. The 2017 National Theatre production is performed without an interval.\nProductions.\n1971 Original Broadway.\n\"Follies\" had its pre-Broadway tryout at the Colonial Theatre, Boston, from February 20 through March 20, 1971.\n\"Follies\" premiered on Broadway on April 4, 1971 at the Winter Garden Theatre. It was directed by Harold Prince and Michael Bennett, with choreography by Bennett, scenic design by Boris Aronson, costumes by Florence Klotz, and lighting by Tharon Musser. It starred Alexis Smith (Phyllis), John McMartin (Ben), Dorothy Collins (Sally), Gene Nelson (Buddy), along with several veterans of the Broadway and vaudeville stage. The supporting role of Carlotta was created by Yvonne De Carlo and usually is given to a well-known veteran performer who can belt out a song. Other notable performers in the original productions were Fifi D'Orsay as Solange LaFitte, Justine Johnston as Heidi Schiller, Mary McCarty as Stella Deems, Arnold Moss as Dimitri Weismann, Ethel Shutta as Hattie Walker, and Marcie Stringer and Charles Welch as Emily and Theodore Whitman.\nThe show closed on July 1, 1972, after 522 performances and 12 previews. According to \"Variety\", the production was a \"total financial failure, with a cumulative loss of $792,000.\" Prince planned to present the musical on the West Coast and then on a national tour. However, the show did not do well in its Los Angeles engagement and plans for a tour ended.\nFrank Rich, for many years the chief drama critic for \"The New York Times\", had first garnered attention, while an undergraduate at Harvard University, with a lengthy essay for the \"Harvard Crimson\" about the show, which he had seen during its pre-Broadway run in Boston. He predicted that the show eventually would achieve recognition as a Broadway classic. Rich later wrote that audiences at the original production were baffled and restless.\nFor commercial reasons, the cast album was cut from two LPs to one early in production. Most songs were therefore heavily abridged and several were left entirely unrecorded. According to Craig Zadan, \"It's generally felt that...Prince made a mistake by giving the recording rights of \"Follies\" to Capitol Records, which in order to squeeze the unusually long score onto one disc, mutilated the songs by condensing some and omitting others.\" Chapin confirms this: \"Alas...final word came from Capitol that they would not go for two records...[Dick Jones] now had to propose cuts throughout the score in consultation with Steve.\" \"One More Kiss\" was omitted from the final release but was restored for CD release. Chapin relates that \"there was one song that Dick Jones [producer of the cast album] didn't want to include on the album but which Steve Sondheim most definitely did. The song was \"One More Kiss\", and the compromise was that if there was time, it would be recorded, even if Jones couldn't promise it would end up on the album. (It did get recorded but didn't make its way onto the album until the CD reissue years later.)\"\n1972 Los Angeles.\nThe musical was produced at The Muny, St. Louis, Missouri in July 1972 and then transferred to the Shubert Theatre, Century City, California, running from July 22, 1972, through October 1, 1972. It was directed by Prince and starred Dorothy Collins (Sally; replaced by Janet Blair), Alexis Smith (Phyllis), John McMartin (Ben; replaced by Edward Winter), Gene Nelson (Buddy), and Yvonne De Carlo (Carlotta) reprising their original roles. The production was the premiere attraction at the newly constructed 1,800-seat theatre, which, coincidentally, was itself razed thirty years later (in 2002, in order to build a new office building), thus mirroring the \"Follies\" plot line upon which the musical is based.\n1985 Wythenshawe and Lincoln Center.\nA full production ran at the Forum Theatre, Wythenshawe, England, from 30 April 1985, directed by Howard Lloyd-Lewis, design by Chris Kinman, costumes by Charles Cusick-Smith, lighting by Tim Wratten, musical direction by Simon Lowe, and choreographed by Paul Kerryson. The cast included Mary Millar (Sally Durant Plummer), Liz Izen (Young Sally), Meg Johnson (Stella Deems), Les Want (Max Deems), Betty Benfield (Heidi Schiller), Joseph Powell (Roscoe), Chili Bouchier (Hattie Walker), Shirley Greenwood (Emily Whitman), Bryan Burdon (Theodore Whitman), Monica Dell (Solange LaFitte), Jeannie Harris (Carlotta Campion), Josephine Blake (Phyllis Rogers Stone), Kevin Colson (Ben), Debbie Snook (Young Phyllis), Stephen Hale (Young Ben), Bill Bradley (Buddy Plummer), Paul Burton (Young Buddy), David Scase (Dimitri Weismann), Mitch Sebastian (Young Vincent), Kim Ismay (Young Vanessa), Lorraine Croft (Young Stella), and Meryl Richardson (Young Heidi).\nA staged concert at Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center, was performed on September 6 and 7, 1985. The concert starred Barbara Cook (Sally), George Hearn (Ben), Mandy Patinkin (Buddy), and Lee Remick (Phyllis), and featured Carol Burnett (Carlotta), Betty Comden (Emily), Adolph Green (Theodore), Liliane Montevecchi (Solange LaFitte), Elaine Stritch (Hattie Walker), Phyllis Newman (Stella Deems), Jim Walton (Young Buddy), Howard McGillin (Young Ben), Liz Callaway (Young Sally), Daisy Prince (Young Phyllis), Andre Gregory (Dmitri), Arthur Rubin (Roscoe), and Licia Albanese (Heidi Schiller). Rich, in his review, noted that \"As performed at Avery Fisher Hall, the score emerged as an original whole, in which the 'modern' music and mock vintage tunes constantly comment on each other, much as the script's action unfolds simultaneously in 1971 (the year of the reunion) and 1941 (the year the Follies disbanded).\"\nAmong the reasons the concert was staged was to provide an opportunity to record the entire score. The resulting album was more complete than the original cast album. However, director Herbert Ross took some liberties in adapting the book and score for the concert format\u2014dance music was changed, songs were given false endings, the new dialogue was spoken, reprises were added, and Patinkin was allowed to sing \"The God-Why-Don't-You-Love-Me Blues\" as a solo instead of a trio with two chorus girls. Portions of the concert were seen by audiences worldwide in the televised documentary about the making of the concert, also released on videotape and DVD, of\" 'Follies' in Concert\".\n1987 West End.\nThe musical played in the West End at the Shaftesbury Theatre on July 21, 1987, and closed on February 4, 1989, after 644 performances. The producer was Cameron Mackintosh, the direction was by Mike Ockrent, with choreography by Bob Avian and design by Maria Bj\u00f6rnson. The cast featured Diana Rigg (Phyllis), Daniel Massey (Ben), Julia McKenzie (Sally), David Healy (Buddy), Lynda Baron, Leonard Sachs, Maria Charles, Pearl Carr &amp; Teddy Johnson. Dolores Gray was praised as Carlotta, continuing to perform after breaking her ankle, although in a reduced version of the part. During the run, Eartha Kitt replaced Gray, sparking somewhat of a comeback (she went on to perform her own one-woman show at The Shaftesbury Theatre to sell-out houses for three weeks from 18 March 1989 after \"Follies\" closed). Other cast replacements included Millicent Martin as Phyllis. Julia McKenzie returned to the production for the final four performances.\nThe book \"was extensively reworked by James Goldman, with Sondheim's cooperation and also given an intermission.\" The producer Cameron Mackintosh did not like \"that there was no change in the characters from beginning to end...In the London production...the characters come to understand each other.\" Sondheim \"did not think the London script was as good as the original.\" However, he thought that it was \"wonderful\" that, at the end of the first act, \"the principal characters recognized their younger selves and were able to acknowledge them throughout the last thirty minutes of the piece.\" Sondheim wrote four new songs: \"Country House\" (replacing \"The Road You Didn't Take\"), \"Loveland\" (replacing the song of the same title), \"Ah, But Underneath\" (replacing \"The Story of Lucy and Jessie\", for the non-dancer Diana Rigg), and \"Make the Most of Your Music\" (replacing \"Live, Laugh, Love\").\nCritics who had seen the production in New York (such as Frank Rich) found it substantially more \"upbeat\" and lacking in the atmosphere it had originally possessed. According to the Associated Press (AP) reviewer, \"A revised version of the Broadway hit \"Follies\" received a standing ovation from its opening-night audience and raves from British critics, who stated the show was worth a 16-year wait.\" The AP quoted Michael Coveney of \"The Financial Times\", who wrote: \"\"Follies\" is a great deal more than a camp love-in for old burlesque buffs and Sondheim aficionados.\" In \"The New York Times\", the critic Francis X. Clines wrote: \"The initial critics' reviews ranged from unqualified raves to some doubts whether the reworked book of James Goldman is up to the inventiveness of Sondheim's songs. 'A truly fantastic evening,' \"The Financial Times\" concluded, while the London \"Daily News\" stated 'The musical is inspired,' and \"The Times\" described the evening as 'a wonderful idea for a show which has failed to grow into a story.'\" The \"Times\" critic Irving Wardle stated \"It is not much of a story, and whatever possibilities it may have had in theory are scuppered by James Goldman\u2019s book...a blend of lifeless small-talk, bitching and dreadful gags\". Clines further commented: \"In part, the show is a tribute to musical stage history, in which the 57-year-old Mr Sondheim is steeped, for he first learned song writing at the knee of Oscar Hammerstein II and became the acknowledged master songwriter who bridged past musical stage romance into the modern musical era of irony and neurosis. \"Follies\" is a blend of both, and the new production is rounded out with production numbers celebrating love's simple hope for young lovers, its extravagant fantasies for Ziegfeld aficionados, and its fresh lesson for the graying principals.\"\nThis production was also recorded on two CDs and was the first full recording.\n\"Follies\" was voted ninth in a BBC Radio 2 listener poll of the UK's \"Nation's Number One Essential Musicals.\"\nU.S. regional productions.\nMichigan Opera Theatre (MOT) was the first major American opera company to present \"Follies\" as part of their main stage repertoire, running from October 21, 1988 through November 6. The MOT production starred Nancy Dussault (Sally), John-Charles Kelly (Buddy), Juliet Prowse (Phyllis) and Ron Raines (Ben), Edie Adams (Carlotta), Thelma Lee (Hattie), and Dennis Grimaldi (Vincent).\nA production also ran from March to April 1995 at the Theatre Under the Stars, Houston, Texas and in April to May 1995 at the 5th Avenue Theatre, Seattle with Constance Towers (Phyllis), Judy Kaye (Sally), Edie Adams, Denise Darcel, Virginia Mayo and Karen Morrow (Carlotta). The 1998 Paper Mill Playhouse production (Millburn, New Jersey) was directed by Robert Johanson with choreography by Jerry Mitchell and starred Donna McKechnie (Sally), Dee Hoty (Phyllis), Laurence Guittard (Ben), Tony Roberts (Buddy), Kaye Ballard (Hattie ), Eddie Bracken (Weismann), and Ann Miller (Carlotta). Phyllis Newman and Liliane Montevecchi reprised the roles they played in the Lincoln Center production. \"Ah, but Underneath\" was substituted for \"The Story of Lucy and Jessie\" in order to accommodate non-dancer Hoty. This production received a full-length recording on two CDs, including not only the entire score as originally written but a lengthy appendix of songs cut from the original production in tryouts.\nJulianne Boyd directed a fully staged version of \"Follies\" in 2005 by the Barrington Stage Company (Massachusetts) in June\u2013July 2005. The principal cast included Kim Crosby (Sally), Leslie Denniston (Phyllis), Jeff McCarthy (Ben), Lara Teeter (Buddy), Joy Franz (Solange), Marni Nixon (Heidi), and Donna McKechnie (Carlotta). Stephen Sondheim attended one of the performances.\n1996 and 1998 concerts.\nThe Dublin Concert was held in May 1996 at the National Concert Hall. Directed by Michael Scott, the cast included Lorna Luft, Millicent Martin, Mary Millar, Dave Willetts, Trevor Jones Bryan Smyth, Alex Sharpe, Christine Scarry, Aidan Conway and Enda Markey.\nA concert was held at Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, London, on December 8, 1996, and broadcast on BBC Radio 2 on February 15, 1997. The cast starred Julia McKenzie (Sally), Donna McKechnie (Phyllis), Denis Quilley (Ben) and Ron Moody (Buddy). This show recreated the original Broadway score.\n\"Follies\" was performed in concert at the Sydney Opera House with the Sydney Symphony Orchestra in February 1998 as the highlight of the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras and had three performances. It was directed and staged by Stephen Lloyd Helper and produced by Helper and Alistair Thomson for Mardi Gras. It starred Toni Lamond (Sally), Jill Perryman(Carlotta), Judi Connelli (Phyllis), Terence Donovan (Ben), Nancye Hayes (Hattie), Glenn Butcher (Buddy), Ron Haddrick (Dimitri), Susan Johnston (Heidi), and Leonie Page, Maree Johnson, Mitchell Butel, Maureen Howard. The Sydney Symphony was conducted by Maestro Tommy Tycho. It followed a similar presentation at the 1995 Melbourne Festival of Arts with a different cast and orchestra.\n2001 Broadway revival.\nA Broadway revival opened at the Belasco Theatre on April 5, 2001, and closed on July 14, 2001, after 117 performances and 32 previews. This Roundabout Theatre limited engagement had been expected to close on September 30, 2001. Directed by Matthew Warchus with choreography by Kathleen Marshall, it starred Blythe Danner (Phyllis), Judith Ivey (Sally), Treat Williams (Buddy), Gregory Harrison (Ben), Marge Champion, Polly Bergen (Carlotta), Joan Roberts (Laurey from the original Broadway production of \"Oklahoma!\"; later replaced by Marni Nixon), Larry Raiken (Roscoe) and an assortment of famous names from the past. Former MGM and onetime Broadway star Betty Garrett, best known to younger audiences for her television work, played Hattie. It was significantly stripped down (earlier productions had featured extravagant sets and costumes) and was not a success critically.\nAccording to an article in \"The Hollywood Reporter\", \"almost every performance of the show played to a full house, more often than not to standing-room-only. Tickets always were tough to come by. The reason the final curtain came down Saturday was that being a production by the Roundabout Theatre Company \u2013 a subscription-based 'not-for-profit' theatre company \u2013 it was presented under special Equity terms, with its actors paid a minimal fee. To extend the show, it would have been necessary to negotiate new contracts with the entire company...because of the Belasco's limited seating, it wasn't deemed financially feasible to do so.\"\nTheatre writer and historian John Kenrick wrote \"the bad news is that this \"Follies\" is a dramatic and conceptual failure. The good news is that it also features some of the most exciting musical moments Broadway has seen in several seasons. Since you don't get those moments from the production, the book or the leads, that leaves the featured ensemble, and in \"Follies\" that amounts to a small army...Marge Champion and Donald Saddler are endearing as the old hoofers...I dare you not to fall in love with Betty Garrett's understated \"Broadway Baby\" \u2013 you just want to pick her up and hug her. Polly Bergen stops everything cold with \"I\u2019m Still Here,\" bringing a rare degree of introspection to a song that is too often a mere belt-fest...[T]he emotional highpoint comes when Joan Roberts sings 'One More Kiss'.\"\n2002 London revival.\nA production was mounted at London's Royal Festival Hall in a limited engagement. After previews from August 3, 2002, it opened officially on August 6, and closed on August 31, 2002. Paul Kerryson directed, and the cast starred David Durham as Ben, Kathryn Evans as Sally, Louise Gold as Phyllis, Julia Goss as Heidi and Henry Goodman as Buddy. Variety singer and performer Joan Savage sang \"Broadway Baby\". This production conducted by Julian Kelly featured the original Broadway score.\n2002 Los Angeles.\n\"Follies\" was part of L.A.'s Reprise series, and it was housed at the Wadsworth Theatre, presented as a staged concert, running from June 15 to June 23, 2002. The production was directed by Arthur Allan Seidelman, set design by Ray Klausen, lighting design by Tom Ruzika, costumes by Randy Gardell, sound design by Philip G. Allen, choreography by Kay Cole, musical director Gerald Sternbach.\nThe production starred Bob Gunton (Ben), Warren Berlinger (Dimitri Weismann), Patty Duke (Phyllis), Vikki Carr (Sally), Harry Groener (Buddy), Carole Cook (Hattie), Carol Lawrence (Vanessa), Ken Page (Roscoe), Liz Torres (Stella), Amanda McBroom (Solange), Grover Dale (Vincent), Donna McKechnie (Carlotta), Carole Swarbrick (Christine), Stella Stevens (Dee Dee), Mary Jo Catlett (Emily), Justine Johnston (Heidi), Jean Louisa Kelly (Young Sally), Austin Miller (Young Buddy), Tia Riebling (Young Phyllis), Kevin Earley (Young Ben), Abby Feldman (Young Stella), Barbara Chiofalo (Young Heidi), Trevor Brackney (Young Vincent), Melissa Driscoll (Young Vanessa), Stephen Reed (Kevin), and Billy Barnes (Theodore). Hal Linden originally was going to play Ben, but left because he was cast in the Broadway revival of \"Cabaret\" as Herr Schultz. Tom Bosley originally was cast as Dimitri Weismann.\n2003 Ann Arbor.\nA concert production at the Michigan Theater in January 2003 reunited the four principal young ghosts of the original Broadway cast: Kurt Peterson, Harvey Evans, Virginia Sandifur, and Marti Rolph. Having originated the young ghosts over 30 years prior, the actors portrayed the older versions of their Broadway roles. Donna McKechnie enjoyed top billing as Carlotta.\n2007 New York City Center Encores!\nNew York City Center's Encores! \"Great American Musicals in Concert\" series featured \"Follies\" as its 40th production for six performances in February 2007 in a sold out semi-staged concert. The cast starred Donna Murphy (Phyllis), Victoria Clark (Sally), Victor Garber (Ben) and Michael McGrath (Buddy). Christine Baranski played Carlotta, and Lucine Amara sang Heidi. The cast included Anne Rogers, Jo Anne Worley and Philip Bosco. The director and choreographer was Casey Nicholaw. This production used the original text and the \"Loveland\" lyrics performed in the 1987 London production.\n2011 Kennedy Center and Broadway.\nThe Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts production at the Eisenhower Theatre started previews on May 7, 2011, with an official opening on May 21, and closed on June 19, 2011. The cast starred Bernadette Peters as Sally, Jan Maxwell as Phyllis, Elaine Paige as Carlotta, Linda Lavin as Hattie, Ron Raines as Ben and Danny Burstein as Buddy. The production was directed by Eric Schaeffer, with choreography by Warren Carlyle, costumes by Gregg Barnes, set by Derek McLane and lighting by Natasha Katz. Also featured were Rosalind Elias as Heidi, R\u00e9gine as Solange, Susan Watson as Emily, and Terri White as Stella. The budget was reported to be $7.3 million. The production played to 95% capacity.\nReviews were mixed, with Ben Brantley of \"The New York Times\" writing \"It wasn't until the second act that I fell in love all over again with \"Follies\"\". Peter Marks of \"The Washington Post\" wrote that the revival \"takes an audience halfway to paradise.\" He praised a \"broodingly luminous Jan Maxwell\" and Burstein's \"hapless onetime stage-door Johnny\", as well as \"the show's final 20 minutes, when we ascend with the main characters into an ironic vaudeville dreamscape of assorted neuroses - the most intoxicating articulation of the musical's 'Loveland' sequence that I've ever seen.\" \"Variety\" gave a very favorable review to the \"lavish and entirely satisfying production\", saying that Schaeffer directs \"in methodical fashion, building progressively to a crescendo exactly as Sondheim does with so many of his stirring melodies. Several show-stopping routines are provided by choreographer Warren Carlyle.\" Terry Teachout of the \"Wall Street Journal\" noted that \"One of the signal achievements of this \"Follies\" is that it succeeds in untangling each and every strand of the show's knotty plot...Mr. Schaeffer is clearly unafraid of the darkness of \"Follies\", so much so that the first act is bitter enough to sting. Yet he and Warren Carlyle...just as clearly revel in the richness of the knowing pastiche songs with which Mr. Sondheim evokes the popular music of the prerock era.\"\nThe production transferred to Broadway at the Marquis Theatre in a limited engagement starting previews on August 7, 2011, with the official opening on September 12, and closing on January 22, 2012, after 151 performances and 38 previews. The four principal performers reprised their roles, as well as Paige as Carlotta. Jayne Houdyshell as Hattie, Mary Beth Peil as Solange LaFitte, and Don Correia as Theodore joined the Broadway cast. A two-disc cast album of this production was recorded by PS Classics and was released on November 29, 2011.\nBrantley reviewed the Broadway revival for \"The New York Times\", writing: \"Somewhere along the road from Washington to Broadway, the Kennedy Center production of \"Follies\" picked up a pulse...I am happy to report that since then, Ms Peters has connected with her inner frump, Mr. Raines has found the brittle skeleton within his solid flesh, and Ms. Maxwell and Mr. Burstein have only improved. Two new additions to the cast, Jayne Houdyshell and Mary Beth Peil, are terrific. This production has taken on the glint of crystalline sharpness.\" The production's run was extended, and its grosses exceeded expectations, but it did not recoup its investment.\nThe Broadway production won the Drama League Award, Distinguished Production of a Musical Revival for 2011-2012 and the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Revival of a Musical, Outstanding Actor in a Musical (Burstein) and Outstanding Costume Design (Barnes). Out of seven Tony Award nominations, including Best Revival of a Musical, it won only one, for Barnes' costumes.\n2012 Los Angeles.\nThe 2011 Broadway and Kennedy Center production transferred to the Ahmanson Theatre, Los Angeles, California, in a limited engagement, from May 3, 2012 through June 9. The majority of the Broadway cast reprised their roles, with the exception of Bernadette Peters, who had prior concert commitments and was replaced by Victoria Clark in the role of Sally, a role she has previously played in New York. Other new cast members included Carol Neblett as Heidi, Sammy Williams as Theodore and Obba Babatunde as Max.\n2013 Toulon Opera House (France).\nFor its first production in France, \"Follies \"was presented at the Toulon Opera House in March, 2013. This English-language production, using the full original orchestration, was directed by Olivier B\u00e9n\u00e9zech and conducted by David Charles Abell. The cast featured Charlotte Page (Sally), Liz Robertson (Phyllis), Graham Bickley (Ben), J\u00e9r\u00f4me Pradon (Buddy), Nicole Croisille (Carlotta), Julia Sutton (Hattie) and Fra Fee (Young Buddy).\n2016 Australian Concert Version.\nA concert version at the Melbourne Recital Centre, staged with a full 23-piece orchestra and Australian actors Philip Quast (Ben), David Hobson (Buddy), Lisa McCune (Sally), Anne Wood (Phyllis), Rowan Witt (Young Buddy), Sophie Wright (Young Sally), Nancy Hayes (Hattie), Debra Byrne (Carlotta), and Queenie van de Zandt (Stella). The production was directed by Tyran Parke and produced by StoreyBoard Entertainment.\n2017 London revival.\nA London revival was performed in the Olivier Theatre at the National Theatre (22 August until 4 November 2017 - later extended to 3 January 2018, as extensions are common practice at the National Theatre). The production was directed by Dominic Cooke, choreographed by Bill Deamer and starred Peter Forbes as Buddy, Imelda Staunton as Sally, Janie Dee as Phyllis, Philip Quast as Ben and Tracie Bennett as Carlotta. This production notably goes back to the original run of a one-act performance. The production was broadcast live to cinemas worldwide on 16 November through the National Theatre Live programme.\nThe production returned to the Olivier Theatre on 14 February 2019, playing until 11 May. Janie Dee and Peter Forbes returned as Phyllis and Buddy, while Joanna Riding and Alexander Hanson replaced Staunton and Quast as Sally and Ben. Bennett also reprised her Olivier-nominated performance. A recording of the National Theatre production was released on 18 January 2019.\nThe 2017 production was nominated for 10 Laurence Olivier Awards and won 2 for Best Musical Revival and Best Costume Design (by Vicki Mortimer).\nCharacters and original cast.\nThe characters and original cast:\nCritical response.\nIn the foreword to \"Everything Was Possible\", Frank Rich wrote: \"From the start, critics have been divided about \"Follies\", passionately pro or con but rarely on the fence...Is it really a great musical, or merely the greatest of all cult musicals?\" (Chapin, p. xi) Ted Chapin wrote, \"Taken as a whole, the collection of reviews \"Follies\" received was as rangy as possible.\" (Chapin, p.\u00a0300) In his \"The New York Times\" review of the original Broadway production, Clive Barnes wrote: \"it is stylish, innovative, it has some of the best lyrics I have ever encountered, and above all it is a serious attempt to deal with the musical form.\" Barnes also called the story shallow and Sondheim's words a joy \"...even when his music sends shivers of indifference up your spine.\"\nWalter Kerr wrote in \"The New York Times\" about the original production: \"\"Follies\" is intermissionless and exhausting, an extravaganza that becomes so tedious...because its extravaganzas have nothing to do with its pebble of a plot.\" On the other hand, Martin Gottfried wrote: \"\"Follies\" is truly awesome and, if it is not consistently good, it is always great.\"\n\"Time Magazine\" wrote about the original Broadway production: \"At its worst moments, \"Follies\" is mannered and pretentious, overreaching for Significance. At its best moments\u2014and there are many\u2014it is the most imaginative and original new musical that Broadway has seen in years.\"\nFrank Rich, in reviewing the 1985 concert in \"The New York Times\", wrote: \"Friday's performance made the case that this Broadway musical...can take its place among our musical theater's very finest achievements.\" Ben Brantley, reviewing the 1998 Paper Mill Playhouse production in \"The New York Times\", concluded that it was a \"fine, heartfelt production, which confirms \"Follies\" as a landmark musical and a work of art...\"\nThe \"Time Magazine\" reviewer wrote of the 2001 Broadway revival: \"Even in its more modest incarnation, \"Follies\" has, no question, the best score on Broadway.\" He noted, though, that \"I'm sorry the cast was reduced from 52 to 38, the orchestra from 26 players to 14...To appreciate the revival, you must buy into James Goldman's book, which is peddling a panoramically bleak take on marriage.\" Finally, he wrote: \"But \"Follies\" never makes fun of the honorable musical tradition to which it belongs. The show and the score have a double vision: simultaneously squinting at the messes people make of their lives and wide-eyed at the lingering grace and lift of the music they want to hear. Sondheim's songs aren't parodies or deconstructions; they are evocations that recognize the power of a love song. In 1971 or 2001, \"Follies\" validates the legend that a Broadway show can be an event worth dressing up for.\"\nBrantley, reviewing the 2007 Encores! concert for \"The New York Times\", wrote: \"I have never felt the splendid sadness of \"Follies\" as acutely as I did watching the emotionally transparent concert production...At almost any moment, to look at the faces of any of the principal performers...is to be aware of people both bewitched and wounded by the contemplation of who they used to be. When they sing, in voices layered with ambivalence and anger and longing, it is clear that it is their past selves whom they are serenading.\"\nRecordings.\nThere have been six recordings of \"Follies\" released: the original 1971 Broadway cast album; \"Follies in Concert\", Avery Fisher Hall (1985); the original London production (1987); and the Paper Mill Playhouse (1998). The cast recording of the 2011 Broadway revival, by PS Classics, was released officially on November 29, 2011, and was in pre-sale before the store release. PS Classics co-founder Tommy Krasker stated \"We've never had the kind of reaction that we've had for \"Follies\". Not only has it already outsold every other album at our website, but the steady stream of emails from customers has been amazing.\" This recording includes \"extended segments of the show's dialogue.\" The theatermania.com reviewer wrote that \"The result is an album that, more so than any of the other existing recordings, allows listeners to re-experience the heartbreaking collision of past and present that's at the core of the piece.\" The recording of the 2011 revival was nominated for a Grammy Award in the Musical Theater Album category. The 2017 London revival cast was recorded after the production closed in January 2018, and was released in early 2019.\nFilm adaptation.\nIn January 2015, it was reported that Rob Marshall is set to direct the movie, and Meryl Streep was rumored to star in it. Tony Award-winning playwright and Oscar-nominated screenwriter John Logan has expressed interest in writing a film adaptation of \"Follies\".\nIn November 2019, it was announced that Dominic Cooke will adapt the screenplay and direct the film, after having directed the successful 2017 revival in the National Theatre in London, which returned in 2019 because of popular demand."}
{"id": "11669", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11669", "title": "Functional linguistics", "text": "Functional linguistics is an approach to the study of language characterized by taking systematically into account the speaker's and the hearer's side, and the communicative needs of the speaker and of the given language community. It is contrasted with linguistic formalism, which instead attempts to isolate syntax and consider it autonomously from meaning (semantic and pragmatics). Both functionalism and formalism spawned from the 1920s-1930s from Ferdinand de Saussure's systematic structuralist approach to language (1916).\nFunctionalism sees functionality of language and its elements to be the key to understanding linguistic processes and structures. Functional theories of language propose that since language is fundamentally a tool, it is reasonable to assume that its structures are best analyzed and understood with reference to the functions they carry out. These include the tasks of conveying meaning and contextual information. \nFunctional theories of grammar belong to structural and humanistic linguistics, considering language as a rational human construction. They take into account the context where linguistic elements are used and study the way they are instrumentally useful or functional in the given environment. This means that functional theories of grammar tend to pay attention to the way language is actually used in communicative context. The formal relations between linguistic elements are assumed to be functionally-motivated.\nSimon Dik characterises the functional approach as follows:\nHistory.\n1920s to 1970s: early developments.\nThe establishment of functional linguistics follows from a shift from structural to functional explanation in 1920s sociology. Prague, at the crossroads of western European structuralism and Russian formalism, became an important centre for functional linguistics.\nThe shift was related to the organic analogy exploited by \u00c9mile Durkheim and Ferdinand de Saussure. Saussure had argued in his \"Course in General Linguistics\" that the 'organism' of language should be studied anatomically, and not in respect with its environment, to avoid the false conclusions made by August Schleicher and other social Darwinists. The post-Saussurean functionalist movement sought ways to account for the 'adaptation' of language to its environment while still remaining strictly anti-Darwinian.\nRussian \u00e9migr\u00e9s Roman Jakobson and Nikolai Trubetzkoy disseminated insights of Russian grammarians in Prague, but also the evolutionary theory of Lev Berg, arguing for teleology of language change. As Berg's theory failed to gain popularity outside the Soviet Union, the organic aspect of functionalism was diminished, and Jakobson adopted a standard model of functional explanation from Ernst Nagel's philosophy of science. It is, then, the same mode of explanation as in biology and social sciences; but it became emphasised that the word 'adaptation' is not to be understood in linguistics in the same meaning as in biology.\nWork on functionalist linguistics by the Prague school resumed in the 1950s after a hiatus caused by World War II and Stalinism. In North America, Joseph Greenberg published his 1963 seminal paper on language universals that not only revived the field of linguistic typology, but coined the approach of seeking functional explanations for typological patterns. Greenberg's approach has been highly influential for the movement of North American functionalism that formed from the early 1970s, which has since been characterized by a profound interest in typology. Greenberg's paper was influenced by the Prague School and in particular it was written in response to Roman Jakobson's call for an 'implicational typology'. While North American functionalism was initially influenced by the functionalism of the Prague school, such influence has been later discontinued.\n1980s onward: name controversy.\nThe term 'functionalism' or 'functional linguistics' became controversial in the 1980s with the rise of a new wave of evolutionary linguistics. Johanna Nichols argued that the meaning of 'functionalism' had changed, and the terms formalism and functionalism, respectively, should be taken as referring to generative grammar, and the emergent linguistics of Paul Hopper and Sandra Thompson; and that the term structuralism should be reserved for frameworks derived from the Prague linguistic circle. William Croft argued subsequently that it is a fact to be agreed by all linguists that form does not follow from function. He proposed autonomous linguistics, opposing the idea that language arises functionally from the need to express meaning:\n\"The notion of autonomy emerges from an undeniable fact of all languages, 'the curious lack of accord ... between form and function'\"\nCroft explains that, until the 1970s, functionalism related to semantics and pragmatics, or the 'semiotic function'. But around 1980s the notion of function changed from semiotics to \"external function\". Croft has also explained that he advocates a neo-Darwinian view of language change as based on natural selection. Croft proposes that 'structuralism' and 'formalism' should both be taken as referring to generative grammar; and 'functionalism' to usage-based and cognitive linguistics; while neither Andr\u00e9 Martinet, Systemic functional linguistics nor Functional discourse grammar properly represents any of the three concepts.\nThe situation was further complicated by the arrival of evolutionary psychological thinking in linguistics, with Steven Pinker, Ray Jackendoff and others hypothesising that the human language faculty, or universal grammar, could have developed through normal evolutionary processes, thus defending an adaptational explanation of the origin and evolution of the language faculty. This brought about a functionalism versus formalism debate, with Frederick Newmeyer arguing that the evolutionary psychological approach to linguistics should also be considered functionalist.\nThe terms functionalism and functional linguistics nonetheless continue to be used by the Prague linguistic circle and its derivatives, including SILF, Danish functional school, Systemic functional linguistics and Functional discourse grammar; and the American framework Role and reference grammar which sees itself as the midway between formal and functional linguistics.\nFunctional analysis.\nSince the earliest work of the Prague School, language was conceived as a \"functional system\", where term \"system\" references back to De Saussure structuralist approach. The term function seems to have been introduced by Vil\u00e9m Mathesius, possibily influenced from works in sociology. Functional analysis is the examination of how linguistic elements function on different layers of linguistic structure, and how the levels interact with each other. Functions exist on all levels of grammar, even in phonology, where the phoneme has the function of distinguishing between lexical material.\nFunctional explanation.\nIn the functional mode of explanation, a linguistic structure is explained with an appeal to its function. Functional linguistics takes as its starting point the notion that communication is the primary purpose of language. Therefore, general phonological, morphosyntactic and semantic phenomena are thought of as being motivated by the needs of people to communicate successfully with each other. Thus, the perspective is taken that the organisation of language reflects its use value.\nEconomy.\nThe concept of economy is metaphorically transferred from a social or economical context to a linguistic level. It is considered as a regulating force in language maintenance. Controlling the impact of language change or internal and external conflicts of the system, the economy principle means that systemic coherence is maintained without increasing energy cost. This is why all human languages, no matter how different they are, have high functional value as based on a compromise between the competing motivations of speaker-easiness (simplicity or \"inertia\") versus hearer-easiness (clarity or \"energeia\").\nThe principle of economy was elaborated by the French structural\u2013functional linguist Andr\u00e9 Martinet. Martinet's concept is similar to Zipf's principle of least effort; although the idea had been discussed by various linguists in the late 19th and early 20th century. The functionalist concept of economy is not to be confused with economy in generative grammar.\nInformation structure.\n \nSome key adaptations of functional explanation are found in the study of information structure. Based on earlier linguists' work, Prague Circle linguists Vil\u00e9m Mathesius, Jan Firbas and others elaborated the concept of theme\u2013rheme relations (topic and comment) to study pragmatic concepts such as sentence focus, and givenness of information, to successfully explain word-order variation. The method has been used widely in linguistics to uncover word-order patterns in the languages of the world. Its importance, however, is limited to within-language variation, with no apparent explanation of cross-linguistic word order tendencies.\nFunctional principles.\nSeveral principles from pragmatics have been proposed as functional explanations of linguistic structures, often in a typological perspective.\nFrameworks.\nThere are several distinct grammatical frameworks that employ a functional approach."}
{"id": "11671", "revid": "17068775", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11671", "title": "Fick's laws of diffusion", "text": "Fick's laws of diffusion describe diffusion and were derived by Adolf Fick in 1855. They can be used to solve for the diffusion coefficient, . Fick's first law can be used to derive his second law which in turn is identical to the diffusion equation.\nA diffusion process that obeys Fick's laws is called normal or Fickian diffusion; otherwise, it is called anomalous diffusion or non-Fickian diffusion.\nHistory.\nIn 1855, physiologist Adolf Fick first reported his now well-known laws governing the transport of mass through diffusive means. Fick's work was inspired by the earlier experiments of Thomas Graham, which fell short of proposing the fundamental laws for which Fick would become famous. Fick's law is analogous to the relationships discovered at the same epoch by other eminent scientists: Darcy's law (hydraulic flow), Ohm's law (charge transport), and Fourier's Law (heat transport).\nFick's experiments (modeled on Graham's) dealt with measuring the concentrations and fluxes of salt, diffusing between two reservoirs through tubes of water. It is notable that Fick's work primarily concerned diffusion in fluids, because at the time, diffusion in solids was not considered generally possible. Today, Fick's Laws form the core of our understanding of diffusion in solids, liquids, and gases (in the absence of bulk fluid motion in the latter two cases). When a diffusion process does \"not\" follow Fick's laws (which happens in cases of diffusion through porous media and diffusion of swelling penetrants, among others), it is referred to as \"non-Fickian\".\nFick's first law.\nFick's first law relates the diffusive flux to the gradient of the concentration. It postulates that the flux goes from regions of high concentration to regions of low concentration, with a magnitude that is proportional to the concentration gradient (spatial derivative), or in simplistic terms the concept that a solute will move from a region of high concentration to a region of low concentration across a concentration gradient. In one (spatial) dimension, the law can be written in various forms, where the most common form (see) is in a molar basis:\nwhere\n is proportional to the squared velocity of the diffusing particles, which depends on the temperature, viscosity of the fluid and the size of the particles according to the Stokes\u2013Einstein relation. In dilute aqueous solutions the diffusion coefficients of most ions are similar and have values that at room temperature are in the range of . For biological molecules the diffusion coefficients normally range from 10\u221211 to 10\u221210\u00a0m2/s.\nIn two or more dimensions we must use , the del or gradient operator, which generalises the first derivative, obtaining\nwhere denotes the diffusion flux vector.\nThe driving force for the one-dimensional diffusion is the quantity , which for ideal mixtures is the concentration gradient.\nAlternative formulations of the first law.\nAnother form for the first law is to write it with the primary variable as mass fraction (, given for example in kg/kg), then the equation changes to:\nwhere\nNote that the formula_4 is outside the gradient operator. This is because:\nwhere is the partial density of the th species.\nBeyond this, in chemical systems other than ideal solutions or mixtures, the driving force for diffusion of each species is the gradient of chemical potential of this species. Then Fick's first law (one-dimensional case) can be written\nwhere\nThe driving force of Fick's law can be expressed as a fugacity difference:\nFugacity formula_8 has Pa units. formula_8 is a partial pressure of component i in a vapor formula_10 or liquid formula_11 phase. At vapor liquid equilibrium the evaporation flux is zero because formula_12.\nDerivation of Fick's first law for gases.\nFour versions of Fick's law for binary gas mixtures are given below. These assume: thermal diffusion is negligible; the body force per unit mass is the same on both species; and either pressure is constant or both species have the same molar mass. Under these conditions, Ref. shows in detail how the diffusion equation from the kinetic theory of gases reduces to this version of Fick's law:\nformula_13 ,\nwhere is the diffusion velocity of species . In terms of species flux this is\nformula_3 .\nIf, additionally, formula_15, this reduces to the most common form of Fick's law,\nformula_16 .\nIf (instead of or in addition to formula_15) both species have the same molar mass, Fick's law becomes\nformula_18,\nwhere formula_19 is the mole fraction of species .\nFick's second law.\nFick's second law predicts how diffusion causes the concentration to change with respect to time. It is a partial differential equation which in one dimension reads:\nwhere\nIn two or more dimensions we must use the Laplacian , which generalises the second derivative, obtaining the equation\nFick's second law has the same mathematical form as the Heat equation and its fundamental solution is the same as the Heat kernel, except switching thermal conductivity formula_22 with diffusion coefficient formula_23:\nformula_24\nDerivation of Fick's second law.\nFick's second law can be derived from Fick's first law and the mass conservation in absence of any chemical reactions:\nAssuming the diffusion coefficient to be a constant, one can exchange the orders of the differentiation and multiply by the constant:\nand, thus, receive the form of the Fick's equations as was stated above.\nFor the case of diffusion in two or more dimensions Fick's second law becomes\nwhich is analogous to the heat equation.\nIf the diffusion coefficient is not a constant, but depends upon the coordinate or concentration, Fick's second law yields\nAn important example is the case where is at a steady state, i.e. the concentration does not change by time, so that the left part of the above equation is identically zero. In one dimension with constant , the solution for the concentration will be a linear change of concentrations along . In two or more dimensions we obtain\nwhich is Laplace's equation, the solutions to which are referred to by mathematicians as harmonic functions.\nExample solutions and generalization.\nFick's second law is a special case of the convection\u2013diffusion equation in which there is no advective flux and no net volumetric source. It can be derived from the continuity equation:\nwhere is the total flux and is a net volumetric source for . The only source of flux in this situation is assumed to be diffusive flux:\nPlugging the definition of diffusive flux to the continuity equation and assuming there is no source (), we arrive at Fick's second law:\nIf flux were the result of both diffusive flux and advective flux, the convection\u2013diffusion equation is the result.\nExample solution 1: constant concentration source and Diffusion length.\nA simple case of diffusion with time in one dimension (taken as the -axis) from a boundary located at position , where the concentration is maintained at a value is\nwhere is the complementary error function. This is the case when corrosive gases diffuse through the oxidative layer towards the metal surface (if we assume that concentration of gases in the environment is constant and the diffusion space \u2013 that is, the corrosion product layer \u2013 is \"semi-infinite\", starting at 0 at the surface and spreading infinitely deep in the material). If, in its turn, the diffusion space is \"infinite\" (lasting both through the layer with , and that with , ), then the solution is amended only with coefficient in front of (as the diffusion now occurs in both directions). This case is valid when some solution with concentration is put in contact with a layer of pure solvent. (Bokstein, 2005) The length is called the \"diffusion length\" and provides a measure of how far the concentration has propagated in the -direction by diffusion in time (Bird, 1976).\nAs a quick approximation of the error function, the first 2 terms of the Taylor series can be used:\nIf is time-dependent, the diffusion length becomes\nThis idea is useful for estimating a diffusion length over a heating and cooling cycle, where varies with temperature.\nExample solution 2: Brownian particle and Mean squared displacement.\nAnother simple case of diffusion is the Brownian motion of one particle. The particle's Mean squared displacement from its original position is:\nformula_36\nwhere formula_37 is the dimension of the particle's Brownian motion. For example, the diffusion of a molecule across a cell membrane 8\u00a0nm thick is 1-D diffusion because of the spherical symmetry; However, the diffusion of a molecule from the membrane to the center of a eukaryotic cell is a 3-D diffusion. For a cylindrical cactus, the diffusion from photosynthetic cells on its surface to its center (the axis of its cylindrical symmetry) is a 2-D diffusion.\nThe square root of MSD, formula_38, is often used as a characterization of how far has the particle moved after time formula_39 has elapsed. The MSD is symmetrically distributed over the 1D, 2D, and 3D space. Thus, the probability distribution of the magnitude of MSD in 1D is Gaussian and 3D is Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.\nGeneralizations.\nThe Chapman\u2013Enskog formulae for diffusion in gases include exactly the same terms. These physical models of diffusion are different from the test models which are valid for very small deviations from the uniform equilibrium. Earlier, such terms were introduced in the Maxwell\u2013Stefan diffusion equation.\nFor anisotropic multicomponent diffusion coefficients one needs a rank-four tensor, for example , where refer to the components and correspond to the space coordinates.\nApplications.\nEquations based on Fick's law have been commonly used to model transport processes in foods, neurons, biopolymers, pharmaceuticals, porous soils, population dynamics, nuclear materials, plasma physics, and semiconductor doping processes. The theory of voltammetric methods is based on solutions of Fick's equation. On the other hand, in some cases a \"Fickian\" description is inadequate. For example, in polymer science and food science a more general approach is required to describe transport of components in materials undergoing a glass transition. One more general framework is the Maxwell\u2013Stefan diffusion equations\nof multi-component mass transfer, from which Fick's law can be obtained as a limiting case, when the mixture is extremely dilute and every chemical species is interacting only with the bulk mixture and not with other species. To account for the presence of multiple species in a non-dilute mixture, several variations of the Maxwell\u2013Stefan equations are used. See also non-diagonal coupled transport processes (Onsager relationship). \nFick's flow in liquids.\nWhen two miscible liquids are brought into contact, and diffusion takes place, the macroscopic (or average) concentration evolves following Fick's law. On a mesoscopic scale, that is, between the macroscopic scale described by Fick's law and molecular scale, where molecular random walks take place, fluctuations cannot be neglected. Such situations can be successfully modeled with Landau-Lifshitz fluctuating hydrodynamics. In this theoretical framework, diffusion is due to fluctuations whose dimensions range from the molecular scale to the macroscopic scale.\nIn particular, fluctuating hydrodynamic equations include a Fick's flow term, with a given diffusion coefficient, along with hydrodynamics equations and stochastic terms describing fluctuations. When calculating the fluctuations with a perturbative approach, the zero order approximation is Fick's law. The first order gives the fluctuations, and it comes out that fluctuations contribute to diffusion. This represents somehow a tautology, since the phenomena described by a lower order approximation is the result of a higher approximation: this problem is solved only by renormalizing the fluctuating hydrodynamics equations.\nSorption rate and collision frequency of diluted solute.\nThe adsorption or absorption rate of a dilute solute to a surface or interface in a (gas or liquid) solution can be calculated using Fick's laws of diffusion. The accumulated number of molecules adsorbed on the surface is expressed by the Langmuir-Schaefer equation at the short-time limit by integrating the diffusion equation over time:\nwhere formula_47 is the surface area and formula_48 is the number concentration of the molecule in the bulk solution.\nThe Langmuir-Schaefer equation can be extended to the Ward-Tordai Equation to account for the \"back-diffusion\" of rejected molecules from the surface:\nwhere formula_48 is the bulk concentration, formula_51 is the sub-surface concentration (which is a function of time depending on the reaction model of the adsorption), and formula_52 is a dummy variable. \nIn the ultrashort time limit, in the order of the diffusion time \"a\"2/\"D\", where \"a\" is the particle radius, the diffusion is described by the Langevin equation. At a longer time, the Langevin equation merges into the Stokes\u2013Einstein equation. The latter is appropriate for the condition of the diluted solution, where long-range diffusion is considered. According to the fluctuation-dissipation theorem based on the Langevin equation in the long-time limit and when the particle is significantly denser than the surrounding fluid, the time-dependent diffusion constant is:\nwhere\nFor a single molecule such as organic molecules or biomolecules (e.g. proteins) in water, the exponential term is negligible due to the small product of \"m\u03bc\" in the picosecond region.\nWhen the area of interest is the size of a molecule (specifically, a \"long cylindrical molecule\" such as DNA), the adsorption rate equation represents the collision frequency of two molecules in a diluted solution, with one molecule a specific side and the other no steric dependence, i.e., a molecule (random orientation) hit one side of the other. The diffusion constant need to be updated to the relative diffusion constant between two diffusing molecules. This estimation is especially useful in studying the interaction between a small molecule and a larger molecule such as a protein. The effective diffusion constant is dominated by the smaller one whose diffusion constant can be used instead.\nThe above hitting rate equation is also useful to predict the kinetics of molecular self-assembly on a surface. Molecules are randomly oriented in the bulk solution. Assuming 1/6 of the molecules has the right orientation to the surface binding sites, i.e. 1/2 of the z-direction in x, y, z three dimensions, thus the concentration of interest is just 1/6 of the bulk concentration. Put this value into the equation one should be able to calculate the theoretical adsorption kinetic curve using the Langmuir adsorption model. In a more rigid picture, 1/6 can be replaced by the steric factor of the binding geometry.\nBiological perspective.\nThe first law gives rise to the following formula:\nin which,\nFick's first law is also important in radiation transfer equations. However, in this context it becomes inaccurate when the diffusion constant is low and the radiation becomes limited by the speed of light rather than by the resistance of the material the radiation is flowing through. In this situation, one can use a flux limiter.\nThe exchange rate of a gas across a fluid membrane can be determined by using this law together with Graham's law.\nUnder the condition of a diluted solution when diffusion takes control, the membrane permeability mentioned in the above section can be theoretically calculated for the solute using the equation mentioned in the last section (use with particular care because the equation is derived for dense solutes, while biological molecules are not denser than water):\nwhere\nSemiconductor fabrication applications.\nIntegrated circuit fabrication technologies, model processes like CVD, thermal oxidation, wet oxidation, doping, etc. use diffusion equations obtained from Fick's law.\nIn certain cases, the solutions are obtained for boundary conditions such as constant source concentration diffusion, limited source concentration, or moving boundary diffusion (where junction depth keeps moving into the substrate)."}
{"id": "11672", "revid": "33870361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11672", "title": "Far East", "text": "The Far East is a geographical region that includes East and Southeast Asia as well as the Russian Far East. South Asia is sometimes also included for economic and cultural reasons. The term \"Far East\" came into use in European geopolitical discourse in the 12th century, denoting the Far East as the \"farthest\" of the three \"easts\", beyond the Near East and the Middle East. Likewise, in Qing Dynasty of the 19th and early 20th centuries the term \"T\u00e0ix\u012b ()\" \u2013 i.e., anything further west than the Arab world \u2013 was used to refer to the Western countries.\nSince the 1960s, East Asia has become the most common term for the region in international mass media outlets.\nAs in relating to the remoteness of the territory from Europe, the term \"Far East\" informs of an Eurocentric worldview.\nPopularization.\nAmong Western Europeans, prior to the colonial era, \"Far East\" referred to anything further east than the Middle East. In the 16th century, King John III of Portugal called India a \"rich and interesting country in the Far East (\"Extremo Oriente\").\" The term was popularized during the period of the British Empire as a blanket term for lands to the east of British India.\nIn pre-World War I European geopolitics, the \"Near East\" referred to the relatively nearby lands of the Ottoman Empire, the \"Middle East\" denoted northwestern South Asia and Central Asia, and the \"Far East\" meant countries along the western Pacific Ocean and eastern Indian Ocean. Many European languages have analogous terms, such as the French ('), Spanish ('), Portuguese ('), German ('), Italian ('), Polish ('), Norwegian (') and Dutch (').\nCultural as well as geographic meaning.\nSignificantly, the term evokes cultural as well as geographic separation; the \"Far East\" is not just geographically distant, but also culturally exotic. It never refers, for instance, to the culturally Western nations of Australia and New Zealand, which lie even farther to the east of Europe than East Asia itself. This combination of cultural and geographic subjectivity was well illustrated in 1939 by Robert Menzies, a Prime Minister of Australia. Reflecting on his country's geopolitical concerns with the onset of war, Menzies commented that: \n The problems of the Pacific are different. What Great Britain calls the Far East is to us the Near North. \n\"Far East\" in its usual sense is comparable to terms such as \"the Orient\", which means East; the \"Eastern world\"; or simply the \"East\". Southeast Asia, the Russian Far East, and occasionally South Asia might be included in the Far East to some extent.\nConcerning the term, John K. Fairbank and Edwin O. Reischauer, professors of East Asian Studies at Harvard University, wrote (in \"East Asia: The Great Tradition\"):\nToday, the term remains in the names of some longstanding institutions, including the Far Eastern Federal University in Vladivostok, Far Eastern University in Manila, the Far East University in South Korea, and \"Far East\", the periodical magazine of the Missionary Society of St. Columban. Furthermore, the United States and United Kingdom have historically used \"Far East\" for several military units and commands in the region; the Royal Navy's Far East Fleet, for instance."}
{"id": "11673", "revid": "4458498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11673", "title": "Fawlty Towers", "text": "Fawlty Towers is a British television sitcom written by John Cleese and Connie Booth, broadcast on BBC2 in 1975 and 1979. Two series of six episodes each were made. The show was ranked first on a list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes drawn up by the British Film Institute in 2000 and, in 2019, it was named the 'greatest ever British TV sitcom' by a panel of comedy experts compiled by the \"Radio Times\".\nThe series is set in Fawlty Towers, a fictional hotel in the seaside town of Torquay on the English Riviera. The plots centre on the tense, rude and put-upon owner Basil Fawlty (Cleese), his bossy wife Sybil (Prunella Scales), the sensible chambermaid Polly (Booth) who often is the peacemaker and voice of reason, and the hapless and English-challenged Spanish waiter Manuel (Andrew Sachs). They show their attempts to run the hotel amidst farcical situations and an array of demanding and eccentric guests and tradespeople.\nThe idea of the show came from Cleese after he stayed at the Gleneagles Hotel in Torquay, Devon in 1970 (along with the rest of the Monty Python troupe), where he encountered the eccentric hotel owner Donald Sinclair. Stuffy and snobbish, Sinclair treated guests as though they were a hindrance to his running of the hotel (a waitress who worked for him stated \"it was as if he didn't want the guests to be there\"). Sinclair was the inspiration for Cleese's character Basil Fawlty.\nIn 1980, Cleese received the BAFTA for Best Entertainment Performance and, in a 2001 poll conducted by Channel 4, Basil Fawlty was ranked second on their list of the 100 Greatest TV Characters. The popularity of \"Fawlty Towers\" has endured, and it is often re-broadcast. The BBC profile for the series states that \"the British sitcom by which all other British sitcoms must be judged, \"Fawlty Towers\" withstands multiple viewings, is eminently quotable (\"don't mention the war\") and stands up to this day as a jewel in the BBC's comedy crown.\"\nOrigins.\nIn May 1970, the Monty Python comedy group stayed at the now demolished Gleneagles Hotel in Torquay, Devon while filming on location in Paignton. John Cleese was fascinated with the behaviour of the owner, Donald Sinclair, later describing him as \"the rudest man I've ever come across in my life\". Among such behaviour by Sinclair was his criticism of Terry Gilliam's \"too American\" table etiquette and tossing Eric Idle's briefcase out of a window \"in case it contained a bomb\". Asked why would anyone want to bomb the hotel, Sinclair replied, \"We've had a lot of staff problems\". Michael Palin states Sinclair \"seemed to view us as a colossal inconvenience\". Rosemary Harrison, a waitress at the Gleneagles under Sinclair, described him as \"bonkers\" and lacking in hospitality, deeming him wholly unsuitable for a hotel proprietor. \"It was as if he didn't want the guests to be there.\" Cleese and his then wife Connie Booth stayed on at the hotel after filming, furthering their research of its owner.\nCleese was a writer on the 1970s British TV sitcom \"Doctor in the House\" for London Weekend Television. An early prototype of the character that became known as Basil Fawlty was developed in an episode (\"No Ill Feeling\") of the third \"Doctor\" series (titled \"Doctor at Large\"). In this edition, the main character checks into a small-town hotel, his very presence seemingly winding up the aggressive and incompetent manager (played by Timothy Bateson) with a domineering wife. The show was broadcast on 30 May 1971.\nCleese said in 2008 that the first \"Fawlty Towers\" script he and Booth wrote was rejected by the BBC. At a 30th anniversary event honouring the show, Cleese said,\nCleese was paid \u00a36,000 for 43 weeks' work and supplemented his income by appearing in television advertisements. He states, \"I have to thank the advertising industry for making this possible. Connie and I used to spend six weeks writing each episode and we didn't make a lot of money out of it. If it hadn't been for the commercials I wouldn't have been able to afford to spend so much time on the script.\"\nProduction.\nAlthough the series is set in Torquay, no part of it was shot in South West England. For the exterior filming, the Wooburn Grange Country Club in Buckinghamshire was used instead of a hotel. In several episodes of the series (notably \"The Kipper and the Corpse\", \"The Anniversary\", and \"Basil the Rat\"), the entrance gate at the bottom of the drive states the real name of the location. This listed building later served for a short time as a nightclub named \"Basil's\" after the series ended, before being destroyed by a fire in March 1991. The remnants of the building were demolished and a housing estate was built on the site. Very little trace of the original site exists today.\nOther location filming was done mostly around Harrow: firstly the 'damn good thrashing' scene in \"Gourmet Night\" in which Basil loses his temper and attacks his broken-down car with a tree branch. It was filmed at the T-junction of Lapstone Gardens and Mentmore Close (51.5811\u00b0N, 0.3091\u00b0W). Secondly the episode \"The Germans\", the opening shot is of Northwick Park Hospital. Thirdly \"Gourmet Night\"'s exterior of Andr\u00e9's restaurant was at Preston Road (51.5734\u00b0N, 0.2944\u00b0W). It is a Chinese and Indian restaurant \"Wings\" next to a launderette.\nBoth Cleese and Booth were keen on every script being perfect, and some episodes took four months and required as many as ten drafts until they were satisfied.\nPlot directions and examples.\nThe series focuses on the exploits and misadventures of short-fused hotelier Basil Fawlty and his acerbic wife Sybil, as well as their employees: waiter Manuel, Polly Sherman, and, in the second series, chef Terry. The episodes typically revolve around Basil's efforts to \"raise the tone\" of his hotel and his increasing frustration at numerous complications and mistakes, both his own and those of others, which prevent him from doing so.\nMuch of the humour comes from Basil's overly aggressive manner, engaging in angry but witty arguments with guests, staff and, in particular, Sybil, whom he addresses (in a faux-romantic way) with insults such as \"that golfing puff adder\", \"my little piranha fish\" and \"my little nest of vipers\". Despite this, Basil frequently feels intimidated, Sybil being able to cow him at any time, usually with a short, sharp cry of \"Basil!\" At the end of some episodes, Basil succeeds in annoying (or at least bemusing) the guests and frequently gets his comeuppance.\nThe plots occasionally are intricate and always farcical, involving coincidences, misunderstandings, cross-purposes and meetings both missed and accidental. The innuendo of the bedroom farce is sometimes present (often to the disgust of the socially conservative Basil) but it is his eccentricity, not his lust, that drives the plots. The events test to the breaking point what little patience Basil has, sometimes causing him to have a near breakdown by the end of the episode.\nThe guests at the hotel typically are comic foils to Basil's anger and outbursts. Guest characters in each episode provide different characteristics (working class, promiscuous, foreign) that he cannot stand. Requests both reasonable and impossible test his temper. Even the afflicted annoy him, as for example in the episode \"Communication Problems\", revolving around the havoc caused by the frequent misunderstandings between the staff and the hard-of-hearing Mrs. Richards. Near the end, Basil pretends to faint just at the mention of her name. This episode is typical of the show's careful weaving of humorous situations through comedy cross-talk. The show also uses mild black humour at times, notably when Basil is forced to hide a dead body and in his comments about Sybil (\"Did you ever see that film, \"How to Murder Your Wife\"? ... Awfully good. I saw it six times.\") and to the guests (\"May I suggest that you consider moving to a hotel closer to the sea? Or preferably in it.\").\nBasil's physical outbursts are primarily directed at Manuel, an emotional but largely innocent Spaniard whose confused English vocabulary causes him to make elementary mistakes. At times, Basil beats Manuel with a frying pan and smacks his forehead with a spoon. The violence towards Manuel caused rare negative criticism of the show. Sybil and Polly, on the other hand, are more patient and understanding toward Manuel; everyone's usual excuse for his behaviour to guests is, \"He's from Barcelona\"; Manuel even once used the excuse for himself.\nBasil longs for a touch of class, sometimes playing recordings of classical music. In the first episode he is playing music by Brahms when Sybil remarks, after pestering him asking to do different tasks: \"You could have them both done by now if you hadn't spent the whole morning skulking in there listening to that racket.\" Basil replies, with exasperation, \"Racket?? That's Brahms! Brahms' Third Racket!\" Basil often displays blatant snobbishness as he attempts to climb the social ladder, frequently expressing disdain for the \"riff-raff\", \"cretins\" and \"yobbos\" that he believes regularly populate his hotel. His desperation is readily apparent as he makes increasingly hopeless manoeuvres and painful faux pas in trying to curry favour with those he perceives as having superior social status. Yet he finds himself forced to serve those individuals that are \"beneath\" him. As such, Basil's efforts tend to be counter-productive, with guests leaving the hotel in disgust and his marriage (and sanity) stretching to breaking point.\nCharacters.\nBasil Fawlty.\nBasil Fawlty, played by John Cleese, is a cynical and snobbish misanthrope who is desperate to belong to a higher social class. He sees a successful hotel as a means of achieving this, yet his job forces him to be polite to people he despises.\nHe is intimidated by his wife Sybil Fawlty. He yearns to stand up to her, but his plans frequently conflict with her demands. She is often verbally abusive (describing him as \"an ageing, brilliantined stick insect\") but although he towers over her, he often finds himself on the receiving end of her temper, verbally and physically (as in \"The Builders\").\nBasil usually turns to Manuel or Polly to help him with his schemes, while trying his best to keep Sybil from discovering them. However, Basil occasionally laments the time when there was passion in their relationship, now seemingly lost. Also, it appears he still does care for her, and actively resists the flirtations of a French guest in one episode. The penultimate episode, \"The Anniversary\", is about his efforts to put together a surprise anniversary party involving their closest friends. Things go wrong as Basil pretends the anniversary date does not remind him of anything though he pretends to have a stab at it by reeling off a list of random anniversaries, starting with the Battle of Agincourt, for which he receives a slap from Sybil, who becomes increasingly frustrated and angry. He continues guessing even after Sybil is out of earshot, and mentions other anniversaries (none of which happened on 17 April), including the Battle of Trafalgar and Yom Kippur, just to enhance the surprise. Sybil believes he really has forgotten, and leaves in a huff. In an interview in the DVD box set, Cleese claims this episode deliberately takes a slightly different tone from the others, fleshing out their otherwise inexplicable status as a couple.\nIn keeping with the lack of explanation about the marriage, not much is revealed of the characters' back-stories. It is known that Basil served in the British Army and saw action in the Korean War, possibly as part of his National Service. (John Cleese himself was only 13 when the Korean War ended, making the character of Basil at least five or six years older than he.) Basil exaggerates this period of his life, proclaiming to strangers, \"I killed four men.\" To this Sybil jokes that \"He was in the Catering Corps. He used to poison them.\" Basil often is seen wearing regimental and old boy-style ties, perhaps spuriously, one of which in the colours of the Army Catering Corps. He also claims to have sustained a shrapnel injury to his leg; it tends to flare up at suspiciously convenient times. The only person towards whom Basil consistently exhibits tolerance and good manners is the old and senile Major Gowen, a veteran of one of the world wars (which one is never specified, though he once mentions to Mrs Peignoir that he was in France in 1918) who permanently resides at the hotel. When interacting with Manuel, Basil displays a rudimentary knowledge of Spanish (Basil states that he \"learned classical Spanish, not the strange dialect he [Manuel] seems to have picked up\"); this knowledge is also ridiculed, as in the first episode in which a guest, whom Basil has immediately dismissed as working-class, communicates fluently with Manuel in Spanish after Basil is unable to do so.\nCleese described Basil as thinking that \"he could run a first-rate hotel if he didn't have all the guests getting in the way\" and as being \"an absolutely awful human being\" but says that in comedy if an awful person makes people laugh they unaccountably feel affectionate towards him. Indeed, he is not entirely unsympathetic. The \"Hotel Inspectors\" and \"Gourmet Night\" episodes feature guests who are shown to be deeply annoying, with constant and unreasonable demands. In \"Gourmet Night\" the chef gets drunk and is unable to cook dinner, leaving Basil to scramble in an attempt to salvage the evening. Much of the time, Basil is an unfortunate victim of circumstance.\nSybil Fawlty.\nSybil Fawlty, played by Prunella Scales, is Basil's wife. Energetic and petite, she prefers a working wardrobe of tight skirt-suits in shiny fabrics and sports a tower of permed hair augmented with hairpieces and wigs and necessitating the use of overnight curlers. She often is a more effective manager of the hotel, making sure Basil gets certain jobs done or stays out of the way when she is handling difficult guests. Typically when Basil is on the verge of meltdown due to a crisis (usually of his own making), it is Sybil who steps in to clear up the mess and bring some sense to the situation. Despite this, she rarely participates directly in the running of the hotel. During busy check-in sessions or meal times, while everyone else is busy working, Sybil is frequently talking on the phone to one of her friends with her phrase \"Oohhh, I knoooooooow\" or chatting to customers. She has a distinctive conversational tone and braying laugh, which Basil compares to \"someone machine-gunning a seal\". Being his wife, she is the only regular character who refers to Basil by his first name. When she barks his name at him, he flinchingly freezes in his tracks.\nBasil refers to her by a number of epithets, occasionally to her face, including \"that golfing puff-adder\", \"the dragon\", \"toxic midget\", \"the sabre-toothed tart\", \"my little kommandant\", \"my little piranha fish\", \"my little nest of vipers\" and \"you rancorous, coiffured old sow\". Despite these nasty nicknames, Basil is terrified of her. The 1979 episode \"The Psychiatrist\" contains the only time he loses patience and snaps at her (Basil: \"Shut up, I'm fed up.\" Sybil: \"Oh, you've done it now.\").\nPrunella Scales speculated in an interview for \"The Complete Fawlty Towers\" DVD box set that Sybil married Basil because his origins were of a higher social class than hers.\nPolly Sherman.\nPolly Sherman, played by Connie Booth, is a waitress and general assistant at the hotel with artistic aspirations. She is the most competent of the staff and the voice of sanity during chaotic moments, but is frequently embroiled in ridiculous masquerades as she loyally attempts to aid Basil in trying to cover a mistake or keep something from Sybil.\nIn \"The Anniversary\" she snaps and refuses to help Basil out when he wants her to impersonate Sybil in the semi-darkness of her bedroom in front of the Fawltys' friends, Basil having dug himself into a hole by claiming Sybil was ill instead of admitting she had stormed out earlier in annoyance with him. Polly finally agrees, but only on condition that Basil lends her money to purchase a car, which he has previously refused to do.\nPolly generally is good-natured but sometimes shows her frustration, and has odd moments of malice. In \"The Kipper and the Corpse\", the pampered shih-tzu dog of an elderly guest bites Polly and Manuel. As revenge, Polly laces the dog's sausages with black pepper and Tabasco sauce (\"bangers \u00e0 la bang\"), making it ill.\nDespite her part-time employment (during meal times), Polly frequently is saddled with many other duties, including as manager in \"The Germans\" when Sybil and Basil are incapacitated. In the first series, Polly is said to be an art student who, according to Basil, has spent three years at college. In \"Gourmet Night\", she is seen to draw a sketch (presumably of Manuel), which everyone but Basil immediately recognises and she sells to the chef for 50p. Polly is not referred to as a student in the second series, although in both series she is shown to have a flair for languages, displaying ability in both Spanish and German. In \"The Germans\", Basil alludes to Polly's polyglot inclination by saying that she does her work \"while learning two Oriental languages\". Like Manuel, she has a room of her own at the hotel.\nManuel.\nManuel, a waiter played by Andrew Sachs, is a well-meaning but disorganised and confused Spaniard from Barcelona with a poor grasp of the English language and customs. He is verbally and physically abused by his boss. When told what to do, he often responds, \"\u00bfQu\u00e9?\" (\"What?\"). Manuel's character is used to demonstrate Basil's instinctive lack of sensitivity and tolerance. Every episode involves Basil becoming enraged at Manuel's confusion at his boss's bizarre demands and even basic requests. Manuel is afraid of Fawlty's quick temper and violent assaults, yet often expresses his appreciation for being given employment. He is relentlessly enthusiastic and is proud of what little English he knows.\nDuring the series, Sachs was seriously injured twice. Cleese describes using a real metal pan to knock Manuel unconscious in \"The Wedding Party\", although he would have preferred to use a rubber one. The original producer and director, John Howard Davies, said that he made Basil use a metal one and that he was responsible for most of the violence on the show, which he felt was essential to the type of comical farce they were creating. Later, when Sachs's clothes were treated to give off smoke after he escapes the burning kitchen in \"The Germans\", the corrosive chemicals ate through them and gave Sachs severe burns.\nManuel's exaggerated Spanish accent is part of the humour of the show. In fact, Sachs's original language was German; he emigrated to Britain as a child.\nThe character's nationality was switched to Italian (and the name to Paolo) for the Spanish dub of the show, while in Catalonia and France, Manuel is a Mexican.\nEpisodes.\nThe first episode of \"Fawlty Towers\" was recorded as a pilot on 24 December 1974, the rest of the series being recorded later in 1975. It was then originally broadcast on 19 September. The 12th and final episode was first shown on 25 October 1979. The first series was directed by John Howard Davies, the second by Bob Spiers. Both had their premieres on BBC2.\nWhen originally transmitted, the individual episodes had no on-screen titles. The ones in common currency were first used for the VHS release of the series in the 1980s. There were working titles, such as \"USA\" for \"Waldorf Salad\", \"Death\" for \"The Kipper and the Corpse\" and \"Rat\" for \"Basil the Rat\", which have been printed in some programme guides. In addition, some of the early BBC audio releases of episodes on vinyl and cassette included other variations, such as \"Mrs. Richards\" and \"The Rat\" for \"Communication Problems\" and \"Basil the Rat\" respectively.\nIt has long been rumoured that a 13th episode of the series was written and filmed, but never progressed further than a rough cut. Lars Holger Holm, author of the book \"Fawlty Towers: A Worshipper's Companion,\" has made detailed claims about the episode's content, but he provides no concrete evidence of its existence.\nOn the subject of whether more episodes would be produced, Cleese said (in an interview for the complete DVD box set, which was republished in the book \"Fawlty Towers Fully Booked\") that he once had the genesis of a feature-length special \u2013 possibly sometime during the mid-1990s. The plot, never fleshed out beyond his initial idea, would have revolved around the chaos that a now-retired Basil typically caused as he and Sybil flew to Barcelona to visit their former employee Manuel and his family. Of the idea, Cleese said:\nWe had an idea for a plot which I loved. Basil was finally invited to Spain to meet Manuel's family. He gets to Heathrow and then spends about 14 frustrating hours waiting for the flight. Finally, on the plane, a terrorist pulls a gun and tries to hijack the thing. Basil is so angry he overcomes the terrorist, and when the pilot says, 'We have to fly back to Heathrow' Basil says, 'No, fly us to Spain or I'll shoot you.' He arrives in Spain, is immediately arrested, and spends the entire holiday in a Spanish jail. He is released just in time to go back on the plane with Sybil.\nIt was very funny, but I couldn't do it at the time. Making 'Fawlty Towers' work at 90 minutes was a very difficult proposition. You can build up the comedy for 30 minutes, but at that length there has to be a trough and another peak. It doesn't interest me. I don't want to do it.\nCleese also may have been reticent because of Connie Booth's unwillingness to be involved. She had practically retreated from public life after the show finished (and had been initially unwilling to collaborate on a second series, which explains the four-year gap between productions).\nThe decision by Cleese and Booth to quit before a third series has often been lauded as it ensured the show's successful status would not be weakened with later, lower-quality work. Subsequently, it has inspired the makers of other shows to do likewise. Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant refused to make a third series of either \"The Office\" or \"Extras\" (both also limited to 12 episodes), citing \"Fawlty Towers' \" short lifespan. Rik Mayall, Ben Elton and Lise Mayer, the writers behind \"The Young Ones\", which also ran for only two series (each with six episodes), used this explanation as well. Victoria Wood also indicated this influenced her decision to limit \"dinnerladies\" to 16 episodes over two series.\nThe origins, background and eventual cancellation of the series would later be humorously referenced in 1987's \"The Secret Policeman's Third Ball\" in a sketch in which Hugh Laurie and Stephen Fry present Cleese \u2014 whom they comically misname \"Jim Cleese\" \u2014 with a Dick Emery Lifetime Achievement Award (\"Silver Dick\") for his contributions to comedy, then launch into a comical series of questions regarding the show, including Cleese's marriage and divorce from Booth, innocently ridiculing Cleese and reducing him to tears, to a point at which he gets on his knees and crawls off the stage while crying.\nSeries 2 (1979).\nThe second series was transmitted three-and-a-half years later, with the first episode being broadcast on 19 February 1979. Due to an industrial dispute at the BBC, which resulted in a strike, the final episode was not completed until well after the others, being finally shown as a one-off instalment on 25 October 1979. The cancelled episode on 19 March was replaced with a repeat of \"Gourmet Night\" from series 1. In the second series the anagrams were created by Ian McClane, Bob Spier's assistant floor manager.\nReception.\nCritical reaction.\nAt first, the series was not held in particularly high esteem. The \"Daily Mirror\" review of the show in 1975 had the headline \"Long John Short On Jokes\". Eventually though, as the series began to gain popularity, critical acclaim followed. Clive James writing in \"The Observer\" said the second episode had him \"retching with laughter.\"\nOne critic of the show was Richard Ingrams, then television reviewer for \"The Spectator\", who wrote a caustic piece, condemning the programme. Cleese got his revenge by naming one of the guests in the second series \"Mr. Ingrams\", who is caught in his room with a blow-up doll.\nIn an interview for the \"TV Characters\" edition of Channel 4's 'talking heads' strand 100 Greatest (in which Basil placed second, between Homer Simpson and Edmund Blackadder), TV critic A. A. Gill theorised that the initially muted response may have been caused by Cleese seemingly ditching his label as a comic revolutionary \u2013 earned through his years with Monty Python \u2013 to do something more traditional.\nIn a list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes drawn up by the British Film Institute in 2000, voted for by industry professionals, \"Fawlty Towers\" was placed first. It was also voted fifth in the \"Britain's Best Sitcom\" poll in 2004, and second only to \"Frasier\" in The Ultimate Sitcom poll of comedy writers in January 2006. Basil Fawlty came top of the \"Britain's Funniest Comedy Character\" poll, held by Five on 14 May 2006. In 1997, \"The Germans\" was ranked No. 12 on TV Guide's 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time. Named in \"Empire\" magazine's 2016 list of the greatest TV shows of all time, the entry states,\nAwards and accolades.\nThree British Academy Television Awards (BAFTAs) were awarded to people for their involvement with the series. Both of the series were awarded the BAFTA in the category Best Scripted Comedy, the first being won by John Howard Davies in 1976, and the second by Douglas Argent and Bob Spiers in 1980. In 1980, Cleese received the BAFTA for Best Entertainment Performance.\nIn a list drawn up by the British Film Institute in 2000, voted by industry professionals, \"Fawlty Towers\" was named the best British television series of all time.\nLegacy.\nJohn Lennon was a fan of the show. He said in 1980: \"I love \"Fawlty Towers\". I'd like to be in that. [It's] the greatest show I've seen in years... what a masterpiece, a beautiful thing.\" Filmmaker Martin Scorsese has remarked he is a great fan of \"Fawlty Towers\" and named \"The Germans\" as his favourite episode. He described the scene with Basil impersonating Hitler as \"so tasteless, it's hilarious\".\nRemakes, adaptations and reunions.\nThree attempted remakes of \"Fawlty Towers\" were started for the American market, with two making it into production. The first, \"Chateau Snavely\" starring Harvey Korman and Betty White, was produced by ABC for a pilot in 1978, but the transfer from coastal hotel to highway motel proved too much and the series never was produced. The second, also by ABC, was \"Amanda's,\" starring Bea Arthur, notable for switching the sexes of its Basil and Sybil equivalents. It also failed to pick up a major audience and was dropped after ten episodes had been aired, although 13 episodes were shot. A third remake, called \"Payne\" (produced by and starring John Larroquette), was produced in 1999, but was cancelled shortly after. Nine episodes were produced of which eight aired on American television (though the complete run was broadcast overseas). A German pilot based on the sitcom was made in 2001, named \"Zum letzten Kliff,\" but further episodes were not made after its first series.\nThe popular sitcoms \"3rd Rock from the Sun\" and \"Cheers\" (in both of which Cleese made guest appearances) have cited \"Fawlty Towers\" as an inspiration, especially regarding its depiction of a dysfunctional workplace \"family\". Arthur Mathews and Graham Linehan have cited \"Fawlty Towers\" as a major influence on their sitcom \"Father Ted.\" \"Guest House\" on Pakistan's PTV also resembled the series.\nSeveral of the characters have made other appearances, as spinoffs or in small cameo roles. In 1981, in character as Manuel, Andrew Sachs recorded his own version of the Joe Dolce cod-Italian song \"Shaddap You Face\" (with the B-side \"Waiter, There's a Spanish Flea in My Soup\") but the record was not released because Joe Dolce took out an injunction: he was about to issue his version in Britain. Sachs also portrayed a Manuel-like character in a series of British TV advertisements for life insurance. Gilly Flower and Renee Roberts, who played the elderly ladies Miss Tibbs and Miss Gatsby in the series, reprised their roles in a 1983 episode of \"Only Fools and Horses.\" In 2006, Cleese played Basil Fawlty for the first time in 27 years, for an unofficial England 2006 World Cup song, \"Don't Mention the World Cup\", taking its name from the phrase, \"Don't mention the war,\" which Basil used in the episode \"The Germans\". In 2007, Cleese and Sachs reprised their roles for a six-episode corporate business video for the Norwegian oil company Statoil. In the video, Fawlty is running a restaurant called \"Basil's Brasserie\" while Manuel owns a Michelin-starred restaurant in London. In the 2008 gala performance \"We Are Most Amused,\" Cleese breaks into character as Basil for a cameo appearance by Sachs as an elderly Manuel.\nIn November 2007, Prunella Scales returned to the role of Sybil Fawlty in a series of sketches for the BBC's annual \"Children in Need\" charity telethon. The character was seen taking over the management of the eponymous hotel from the BBC drama series \"Hotel Babylon,\" interacting with characters from that programme as well as other 1970s sitcom characters. The character of Sybil was used by permission of John Cleese.\nIn 2007, the Los Angeles Film School produced seven episodes of \"Fawlty Tower Oxnard\" starring Robert Romanus as Basil Fawlty.\nIn 2016, Cleese reprised his role as Basil in a series of TV adverts for High Street optician chain Specsavers. The same year, Cleese and Booth reunited to create and co-write the official theatrical adaptation of \"Fawlty Towers\", which premiered in Melbourne at the Comedy Theatre. It was critically well received, subsequently embarking on a successful tour of Australia. Cleese was intimately involved in the creation of the stage version from the beginning, including in the casting. He visited Australia to promote the adaptation, as well as oversee its success. Melbourne was chosen to premiere the adaptation due to \"Fawlty Towers' \" enduring popularity in Australia, and also because it has become a popular international test market for large-scale theatrical productions in recent years, having recently been the city where the revised \"Love Never Dies\" and the new \"King Kong\" were also premiered. Cleese also noted he did not believe the London press would give the adaptation fair, unbiased reviews, so he deliberately chose to premiere it elsewhere.\n\"Fawlty Towers: Re-Opened\".\nIn 2009, Tiger Aspect Productions produced a two-part documentary for the digital comedy channel Gold, called \"Fawlty Towers: Re-Opened.\" The documentary features interviews with all four main cast members, including Connie Booth, who had refused to talk about the series for 30 years. John Cleese confirmed at the 30-year reunion in May 2009 that they will never make another episode of the comedy because they are \"too old and tired\" and expectations would be too high. In a television interview (shown in Australia on Seven Network and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation) on 7 May 2009, Cleese also commented that he and Booth took six weeks to write each episode.\nOverseas.\nIn 1977 and 1978 alone, the original TV show was sold to 45 stations in 17 countries and was the BBC's best-selling overseas programme for that year. \"Fawlty Towers\" became a huge success in almost all countries in which it aired. Although it initially was a flop in Spain, largely because of the portrayal of the Spanish waiter Manuel, it was successfully resold with the Manuel character's nationality changed to Italian except in Spain's Catalan region where Manuel was Mexican. To show how badly it translated, Clive James picked up a clip containing Manuel's \"\u00bfQu\u00e9?\" phrase to show on \"Clive James on Television\" in 1982. The series also briefly was broadcast in Italy in the 1990s on the satellite channel Canal Jimmy, in the original English with Italian subtitles.\nIn Australia, the show originally was broadcast on ABC Television, the first series in 1976 and the second series in 1980. The show then was sold to the Seven Network where it has been repeated numerous times.\nHome media and merchandise.\nTwo record albums were released by BBC Records. The first album, simply titled \"Fawlty Towers\", was released in 1979 and contained the audio from \"Communication Problems\" (as \"Mrs Richards\") and \"Hotel Inspectors\". The second album, titled \"Second Sitting\", was released in 1981 and contained audio from \"Basil the Rat\" (as \"The Rat\") and \"The Builders\".\n\"Fawlty Towers\" was originally released by BBC Video in 1984, with three episodes on each of four tapes. Each tape was edited with the credits from all three episodes put at the end of the tape. A LaserDisc containing all episodes spliced together as a continuous episode was released in the U.S. on 23 June 1993. It was re-released in 1994, unedited but digitally remastered. It also was re-released in 1998 with a special interview with John Cleese. \"Fawlty Towers \u2013 The Complete Series\" was released on DVD on 16 October 2001, available in regions 1, 2 and 4. A \"Collector's Edition\" is available in region 2.\nSeries one of the show was released on UMD Video for PSP. In July 2009, BBC America announced a DVD re-release of the \"Fawlty Towers\" series. The DVD set was released on 20 October 2009. The reissue, titled \"Fawlty Towers Remastered: Special Edition,\" contains commentary by John Cleese on every episode as well as remastered video and audio. All episodes are available as streamed video-on-demand via Britbox, Netflix and Amazon Prime Video. Additionally, both series are available for download on iTunes. In 2021 all episodes were made available on the BBC iPlayer.\nComputer game.\nA \"Fawlty Towers\" game was released on PC in 2000 and featured a number of interactive games, desktop-customizing content and clips from the show."}
{"id": "11675", "revid": "22016219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11675", "title": "False friend", "text": "In linguistics, a false friend is either of a pair of words in different languages that look or sound similar, but differ significantly in meaning. An example is the English \"embarrassed\" and the Spanish \"embarazada\" (which means \"pregnant\"), the word \"parents\" and the Portuguese \"parentes\" and Italian \"parenti\" (both meaning \"relatives\"), or the word \"sensible\", which means \"reasonable\" in English, but \"sensitive\" in French, German, Italian and Spanish.\nThe term originates from a book by French linguists describing the phenomenon, which was translated in 1928 and entitled, \"false friend of a translator\".\nAs well as producing completely false friends, the use of loanwords often results in the use of a word in a restricted context, which may then develop new meanings not found in the original language. For example, \"angst\" means \"fear\" in a general sense (as well as \"anxiety\") in German, but when it was borrowed into English in the context of psychology, its meaning was restricted to a particular type of fear described as \"a neurotic feeling of anxiety and depression\". Also, \"gymnasium\" meant both 'a place of education' and 'a place for exercise' in Latin, but its meaning was restricted to the former in German and to the latter in English, making the expressions into false friends in those languages as well as in Greek, where it started out as 'a place for naked exercise'.\nDefinition and origin.\nFalse friends, or bilingual homophones are words in two or more languages that look or sound similar, but differ significantly in meaning.\nThe origin of the term is as a shortened version of the expression \"false friend of a translator\", the English translation of a French expression () introduced by linguists Maxime K\u0153ssler and Jules Derocquigny in their 1928 book, with a sequel, \"Autres Mots anglais perfides\".\nCauses.\nFrom the etymological point of view, false friends can be created in several ways.\nShared etymology.\nIf language A borrowed a word from language B, or both borrowed the word from a third language or inherited it from a common ancestor, and later the word shifted in meaning or acquired additional meanings in at least one of these languages, a native speaker of one language will face a false friend when learning the other. Sometimes, presumably both senses were present in the common ancestor language, but the cognate words got different restricted senses in Language A and Language B.\n\"Actual\", which in English is usually a synonym of \"real\", has a different meaning in other European languages, in which it means 'current' or 'up-to-date', and has the logical derivative as a verb, meaning 'to make current' or 'to update'. \"Actualise\" (or 'actualize') in English means 'to make a reality of'.\nThe word \"friend\" itself has cognates in the other Germanic languages; but the Scandinavian ones (like Swedish \"fr\u00e4nde\", Danish \"fr\u00e6nde\") predominantly mean 'relative'. The original Proto-Germanic word meant simply 'someone whom one cares for' and could therefore refer to both a friend and a relative, but lost various degrees of the 'friend' sense in Scandinavian languages, while it mostly lost the sense of 'relative' in English. (The plural \"friends\" is still rarely used for \"kinsfolk\", as in the Scottish proverb \"Friends agree best at a distance\", quoted in 1721.)\nThe Estonian and Finnish languages are closely related, which gives rise to false friends:\nOr Estonian \"vaimu\" \u2018spirit; ghost\u2019 and Finnish \"vaimo\" \u2018wife\u2019; or Estonian \"huvitav\" \u2018interesting\u2019 and Finnish \"huvittava\" \u2018amusing\u2019.\nA high level of lexical similarity exists between German and Dutch, but shifts in meaning of words with a shared etymology have in some instances resulted in 'bi-directional false friends':\nIn Belgium, similarities between Dutch and French words often lead to confusion when several different meanings of the same word are mixed up and thus mistranslated. In the satirical sketch comedy \"Sois Belge et tais-toi!\", performed by Jo\u00ebl Riguelle in 2009, the following examples are given:\nThe Italian word \"confetti\" \u2018sugared almonds\u2019 has acquired a new meaning in English, French and Dutch; in Italian, the corresponding word is \"coriandoli\".\nEnglish and Spanish, both of which have borrowed from Greek and Latin, have multiple false friends, such as:\n-Sp. \"darse cuenta\" - Engl. realize / Sp. realizar - Engl. \"carry out\"\n-Sp. \"realmente\" - Engl. actually / Sp. actualmente - Engl. \"currently\"\n-Sp. \"publicidad\" - Engl. advertisement / Sp. advertencia - Engl. \"warning\".\n-Sp. \"extra\u00f1o\" - Engl. bizarre / Sp. bizarro - Engl. \"brave\".\nEnglish and Japanese also have diverse false friends, many of them being \"wasei-eigo\" and \"gairaigo\" words.\nHomonyms.\nIn Swedish, the word \"rolig\" means 'fun': \"ett roligt sk\u00e4mt\" (\"a funny joke\"), while in the closely related languages Danish and Norwegian it means 'calm' (as in \"he was calm despite all the commotion around him\"). However, the Swedish original meaning of 'calm' is retained in some related words such as \"ro\", 'calmness', and \"orolig\", 'worrisome, anxious', literally 'un-calm'. The Danish and Norwegian word \"semester\" means term (as in school term), but the Swedish word \"semester\" means holiday. The Danish word \"frokost\" means lunch, the Norwegian word \"frokost\" means breakfast.\nIn French, the word \"Hure\" refers to the head of a boar, while in German \"\" means prostitute.\nPseudo-anglicisms.\nPseudo-anglicisms are new words formed from English morphemes independently from an analogous English construct and with a different intended meaning.\nJapanese is replete with pseudo-anglicisms, known as \"wasei-eigo\" (\"Japan-made English\").\nSemantic change.\nIn bilingual situations, false friends often result in a semantic change\u2014a real new meaning that is then commonly used in a language. For example, the Portuguese \"humoroso\" ('capricious') changed its referent in American Portuguese to 'humorous', owing to the English surface-cognate \"humorous.\"\nThe American Italian \"fattoria\" lost its original meaning 'farm' in favor of 'factory' owing to the phonetically similar surface-cognate English \"factory\" (cf. Standard Italian \"fabbrica\" 'factory'). Instead of the original \"fattoria\", the phonetic adaptation American Italian \"farma\" became the new signifier for 'farm' (Weinreich 1963: 49; see \"one-to-one correlation between signifiers and referents\").\nThis phenomenon is analyzed by Ghil'ad Zuckermann as \"(incestuous) phono-semantic matching\"."}
{"id": "11676", "revid": "26320201", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11676", "title": "False cognate", "text": "False cognates are pairs of words that seem to be cognates because of similar sounds and meaning, but have different etymologies; they can be within the same language or from different languages, even within the same family. For example, the English word \"dog\" and the Mbabaram word \"dog\" have exactly the same meaning and very similar pronunciations, but by complete coincidence. Likewise, English \"much\" and Spanish \"mucho\" came by their similar meanings via completely different Proto-Indo-European roots. This is different from false friends, which are similar-sounding words with different meanings, but which may in fact be etymologically related. \nEven though false cognates lack a common root, there may still be an indirect connection between them (for example by phono-semantic matching or folk etymology).\nPhenomenon.\nThe term \"false cognate\" is sometimes misused to refer to false friends, but the two phenomena are distinct. False friends occur when two words in different languages or dialects look similar, but have different meanings. While some false friends are also false cognates, many are genuine cognates (see False friends \u00a7 Causes). For example, English \"pretend\" and French \"pr\u00e9tendre\" are false friends, but not false cognates, as they have the same origin.\n\"Mama and papa\" type.\nThe basic kinship terms mama and papa comprise a special case of false cognates.\nExamples.\n\"Note: Some etymologies may be simplified to avoid overly long descriptions\".\nFalse cognates used in the coinage of new words.\nThe coincidental similarity between false cognates can sometimes be used in the creation of new words (neologization). For example, the Hebrew word \"dal\" (\"poor\") (which is a false cognate of the phono-semantically similar English word \"dull\") is used in the new Israeli Hebrew expression \u05d0\u05d9\u05df \u05e8\u05d2\u05e2 \u05d3\u05dc \"en rega dal\" (literally \"There is no poor moment\") as a phono-semantic matching for the English expression \"Never a dull moment\".\nSimilarly, the Hebrew word \u05d3\u05d9\u05d1\u05d5\u05d1 \"dib\u00fav\" (\"speech, inducing someone to speak\"), which is a false cognate of (and thus etymologically unrelated to) the phono-semantically similar English word \"dubbing\", is then used in the Israeli phono-semantic matching for \"dubbing\". The result is that in today's Israel, \u05d3\u05d9\u05d1\u05d5\u05d1 \"dib\u00fav\" means \"dubbing\"."}
{"id": "11678", "revid": "80866", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11678", "title": "False claims law", "text": ""}
{"id": "11681", "revid": "146242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11681", "title": "Feudal society", "text": ""}
{"id": "11682", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11682", "title": "Fermions", "text": ""}
{"id": "11683", "revid": "1215485", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11683", "title": "Fergus McDuck", "text": ""}
{"id": "11684", "revid": "20155962", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11684", "title": "Fundamental analysis", "text": "Fundamental analysis, in accounting and finance, is the analysis of a business's financial statements (usually to analyze the business's assets, liabilities, and earnings); health; and competitors and markets. It also considers the overall state of the economy and factors including interest rates, production, earnings, employment, GDP, housing, manufacturing and management. There are two basic approaches that can be used: bottom up analysis and top down analysis. These terms are used to distinguish such analysis from other types of investment analysis, such as quantitative and technical.\nFundamental analysis is performed on historical and present data, but with the goal of making financial forecasts. There are several possible objectives: \nThe two analytical models.\nThere are two basic methodologies investors rely upon when the objective of the analysis is to determine what stock to buy and at what price:\nInvestors can use one or both of these complementary methods for stock picking. For example, many fundamental investors use technical indicators for deciding entry and exit points. Similarly, a large proportion of technical investors use fundamental indicators to limit their pool of possible stocks to \"good\" companies.\nThe choice of stock analysis is determined by the investor's belief in the different paradigms for \"how the stock market works\". For explanations of these paradigms, see the discussions at efficient-market hypothesis, random walk hypothesis, capital asset pricing model, Fed model Theory of Equity Valuation, market-based valuation, and behavioral finance.\nFundamental analysis includes:\nThe intrinsic value of the shares is determined based upon these three analyses. It is this value that is considered the true value of the share. If the intrinsic value is higher than the market price, buying the share is recommended. If it is equal to market price, it is recommended to hold the share; and if it is less than the market price, then one should sell the shares.\nUse by different portfolio styles.\nInvestors may also use fundamental analysis within different portfolio management styles.\nTop-down and bottom-up approaches.\nInvestors using fundamental analysis can use either a top-down or bottom-up approach.\nProcedures.\nThe analysis of a business's health starts with a financial statement analysis that includes financial ratios. It looks at dividends paid, operating cash flow, new equity issues and capital financing. The earnings estimates and growth rate projections published widely by Thomson Reuters and others can be considered either \"fundamental\" (they are facts) or \"technical\" (they are investor sentiment) based on perception of their validity.\nDetermined growth rates (of income and cash) and risk levels (to determine the discount rate) are used in various valuation models. The foremost is the discounted cash flow model, which calculates the present value of the future:\nThe amount of debt a company possesses is also a major consideration in determining its health. It can be quickly assessed using the debt-to-equity ratio and the \"current ratio\" (current assets/current liabilities).\nThe simple model commonly used is the P/E ratio (price-to-earnings ratio). Implicit in this model of a perpetual annuity (time value of money) is that the inverse, or the E/P rate, is the discount rate appropriate to the risk of the business. This model does not incorporate earnings growth.\nGrowth estimates are incorporated into the PEG ratio. Its validity depends on the length of time analysts believe the growth will continue. IGAR models can be used to impute expected changes in growth from current P/E and historical growth rates for the stocks relative to a comparison index.\nAutomation.\nThe process of fundamental analysis has significantly dropped in difficulty over the past 10 years. Ever since computers became a household product, people have built software designed to make the investor's life easier. Fundamental analysis is one of the most time-consuming forms of analysis. Furthermore, with the fast-paced trading style of the 21st century, where markets are dominated by HFT firms and day traders, it is difficult to keep up with the market in a timely fashion. One way to go about cutting down analysis time, is to subscribe to either free or paid screening services. Screening services will allow you to search the entire market for stocks that match the quantitative fields you are looking for. These types of software then automatically give you results, hence cutting down on time spent sifting through SEC filings.\nReference - Fundamental Analysis Software for more information on fundamental analysis software.\nCriticisms.\nEconomists such as Burton Malkiel suggest that neither fundamental analysis nor technical analysis is useful in outperforming the markets."}
{"id": "11685", "revid": "1022196621", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11685", "title": "Frasier", "text": "Frasier () is an American television sitcom that was broadcast on NBC for 11 seasons, premiering on September 16, 1993, and concluding on May 13, 2004. The program was created and produced by David Angell, Peter Casey, and David Lee (as Grub Street Productions) in association with Grammnet (2004) and Paramount Network Television.\nThe series was created as a spin-off of \"Cheers\", continuing the story of psychiatrist Frasier Crane as he returned to his hometown of Seattle and started building a new life as a radio advice show host while reconnecting with his father and brother and making new friends. \"Frasier\" starred Kelsey Grammer as the eponymous character, as well as Jane Leeves, David Hyde Pierce, Peri Gilpin, and John Mahoney.\nThe show was critically acclaimed, with the show itself and the cast winning thirty-seven Primetime Emmy Awards, a record at the time for a scripted series. It also won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series for five consecutive years.\nA revival has been greenlit and is expected to be released in 2022 on Paramount+.\nOverview.\nHarvard-trained psychiatrist Frasier Crane (Grammer) returns to his hometown of Seattle, Washington, following the end of his marriage and his life in Boston (as seen in \"Cheers\"). His plans for a new life as a single man are challenged when he is obliged to take in his father, Martin (Mahoney), a retired Seattle Police Department detective, who has mobility problems after being shot in the line of duty during a robbery.\nFrasier hires Daphne Moon (Leeves) as Martin's live-in physical therapist and caregiver, and tolerates Martin's dog Eddie. Frasier frequently spends time with his younger brother Niles (Pierce), a fellow psychiatrist. Niles becomes attracted to Daphne and eventually marries her.\nFrasier hosts \"The Dr. Frasier Crane Show\", a call-in psychiatry show on talk radio station KACL. His producer Roz Doyle (Gilpin) is very different from Frasier in many ways. She is earthy, direct, and, at least early in the series, has superficial relationships with many men. However, Roz and Frasier share a professional respect and a wry sense of humor, and over time, become close friends. Frasier and the others often visit the local coffee shop, Caf\u00e9 Nervosa.\nThe Crane brothers, who have expensive tastes, intellectual interests, and high opinions of themselves, frequently clash with their blue-collar worker, average Joe father. The brothers' close relationship is often tense, and their sibling rivalry intermittently results in chaos. For a pair who make a living solving others' problems, they are often inept at dealing with each other's hangups. Other recurring themes include Niles's relationship with his unseen first wife (who he later divorces) Maris, Frasier's search for love, Martin's new life after retirement, and the various attempts by the two brothers to gain acceptance into le tout Seattle.\nCharacters.\nNotes.\nThe main cast remained unchanged for all 11 years. When the series ended in 2004, Grammer had portrayed the character of Frasier Crane for a total of 20 years, including his nine seasons on \"Cheers\" plus a one time performance as the character on the series \"Wings\" which earned Grammer an Emmy nomination; at the time, he tied James Arness' portrayal of Matt Dillon on \"Gunsmoke\" for the longest-running character on primetime television. The record has since been surpassed in animation by the voice cast of \"The Simpsons\", and in live action by Richard Belzer's portrayal of John Munch and Mariska Hargitay's portrayal of Olivia Benson (both on \"\", among several other series). Grammer was briefly the highest-paid television actor in the United States for his portrayal of Frasier, while Jane Leeves was the highest-paid British actress.\nIn addition to those of the ensemble, additional story lines included characters from Frasier's former incarnation on \"Cheers\", such as his ex-wife Lilith Sternin, played by Bebe Neuwirth, and their son Frederick, played by Trevor Einhorn.\nReunions.\nGrammer had been the voice of Sideshow Bob on \"The Simpsons\" since 1990. In a 1997 episode (while \"Frasier\" was still in production), the character's brother, Cecil Terwilliger, was introduced, played by Pierce, as per the reference in the episode title, \"Brother from Another Series\". The episode contained numerous \"Frasier\" references, including a \"Frasier\"-style version of \"The Simpsons\" theme for a transition and its iconic title card for the same thing. Pierce returned as Cecil for the second time (the first since \"Frasier\" had concluded) alongside Grammer in the 2007 episode \"Funeral for a Fiend\". The episode introduced the brothers' father, Dr. Robert Terwilliger, who was portrayed by Mahoney.\nCast reunions also occurred on four episodes of \"Hot in Cleveland\", which featured Leeves in the main cast along with Wendie Malick (who played Martin's girlfriend towards the end of \"Frasier\"). In the season-two episode \"Unseparated at Birth\" and season-three episode \"Funeral Crashers\", Mahoney guest-starred as a waiter smitten with Betty White's character. Gilpin appeared in the episode \"I Love Lucci (Part 1)\", and Tom McGowan (who played Kenny Daly) appeared in \"Love Thy Neighbor\" as a casting director. \"Hot in Cleveland\" was created and produced by Suzanne Martin, who wrote multiple episodes of \"Frasier\".\nProduction.\nCreation.\nDuring the eighth season of \"Cheers\", Grammer made a deal with former \"Cheers\" producers David Angell, Peter Casey, and David Lee (who were moving on to produce \"Wings\") that they would do a new series together once \"Cheers\" ended. Once it became clear during the 10th season that the 11th would be the last, the group began working on their next series together.\nGrammer did not originally want to continue playing Frasier Crane, and Angell, Casey, and Lee did not want the new show to be compared to \"Cheers\", which they had worked on before \"Wings\". The three proposed that the actor play a wealthy, Malcolm Forbes-like paraplegia publisher who operated his business from his apartment. The main show featured a \"street-smart\" Hispanic live-in nurse who would clash with the main character. While Grammer liked the concept, Paramount Television disliked it, and suggested that the best route would be to spin off the Frasier Crane character. Grammer ultimately agreed to star in a \"Cheers\" spin-off, but the producers set the new show as far from Boston as possible to prevent NBC from demanding that other characters from the old show make guest appearances on the new show during its first season. After first choosing Denver, Angell, Casey, and Lee ultimately chose Seattle as the setting.\nThe creators did not want Frasier in private practice, which would make the show resemble \"The Bob Newhart Show\". From an unused idea they had for a \"Cheers\" episode, they conceived the concept of the psychiatrist working in a radio station surrounded by \"wacky, yet loveable\" characters. After realizing that such a setting was reminiscent of \"WKRP in Cincinnati\", the creators decided to emphasize Frasier's home life, which \"Cheers\" had rarely explored. Lee considered his own experience with \"the relationship between an aging father and the grown-up son he never understood\" and thought it would be a good theme for \"Frasier\". Although Frasier had mentioned on \"Cheers\" (in two episodes) that his father, a research scientist, had died, Angell, Casey, and Lee did not realize this was the case, as they were not working on \"Cheers\" during the season those two episodes were filmed. The creative team was already well into the development process when Grammer pointed out the discontinuity; they decided to overlook it, initially retroactive continuity the character's backstory. In a second-season episode, the discrepancy was resolved, as Frasier revealed he had lied to the \"Cheers\" gang about his father.\nOne element of the original concept that was carried over was the live-in health-care provider for Frasier's father. Grammer points out that very little of the Frasier Crane of \"Cheers\" carried over to \"Frasier\", as his family history was changed (though this was later adjusted); the setting, his job, and even the character himself changed from the \"Cheers\" predecessor, having to be more grounded as the central character of the show so the other supporting characters could be more eccentric.\nCasting.\nMartin Crane was based on creator Casey's father, who spent 34 years with the San Francisco Police Department. The creators suggested to NBC that they would like to cast someone like Mahoney, to which NBC told them if they could get Mahoney, they could hire him without auditions. Both Grammer and the producers contacted Mahoney, with the producers flying to Chicago to show Mahoney the pilot script over dinner. Upon reading it, Mahoney accepted. Grammer, who had lost his father as a child, and the childless Mahoney immediately built a close father-son relationship.\nIn discussing Martin's nurse, Warren Littlefield of NBC suggested she be English instead of Hispanic and suggested Leeves for the role. Grammer was initially reluctant, as he thought the casting made the show resemble \"Nanny and the Professor\", but approved Leeves after a meeting and read-through with her. Mahoney and Leeves quickly bonded over their shared English heritage; Mahoney was originally from Manchester where Leeves's character is from.\nThe character of Niles was not part of the original concept for the show. Frasier had told his bar friends on \"Cheers\" that he was an only child. However, Sheila Guthrie, the assistant casting director on \"Wings\", brought the producers a photo of Pierce (whom she knew from his work on \"The Powers That Be\") and noted his resemblance to Grammer when he first appeared on \"Cheers\". She recommended him should they ever want Frasier to have a brother. The creators were \"blown away\" both by his resemblance to Grammer and by his acting ability. They decided to ignore Frasier's statement on \"Cheers\" and created the role for Pierce. Pierce accepted the role before realizing he had not read a script. Once he was given a script, he was initially concerned that his character was essentially a duplicate of Frasier, thinking that it would not work.\nThe first table reading of the pilot script was notable because the producers had never heard either Pierce or Mahoney read lines because they were cast without auditions.\nThe only main role that required an audition was Roz Doyle, who was named in memory of a producer of \"Wings\". The producers auditioned around 300 actresses with no particular direction in mind. Women of all ethnicities were considered. Lisa Kudrow was originally cast in the role, but during rehearsals, the producers decided they needed someone who could appear more assertive in her job and take control over Frasier at KACL, and Kudrow did not fit that role. The creators quickly hired Gilpin, their second choice.\nThe original focus of the series was intended to be the relationship between Frasier and Martin, and it was the focus of most of the first-season episodes. Once the show began airing, Niles became a breakout character, and more focus was added to the brothers' relationship, and other plots centering on Niles, starting in the second season. The producers initially did not want to make Niles's wife Maris an unseen character because they did not want to draw parallels to Vera, Norm's wife on \"Cheers\". They originally intended that she would appear after several episodes, but were so enjoying writing excuses for her absence that eventually they decided she would remain unseen, and after the increasingly eccentric characteristics ascribed to her, no real actress could portray her.\nSets and settings.\nFrasier's apartment was designed to be ultra-modern in an eclectic style (as Frasier himself points out in the pilot). One of the show's signature elements that it became well known for was the apartment's design which included elements such as a slightly split-level design, doors with triangular wooden inlay features, numerous pieces of well-known high-end furniture (such as a replica of Coco Chanel's sofa, and both Eames Lounge Chair and Wassily Chair) and a notable view from the terrace which was frequently complimented by visitors. The main set consisted of the open-concept living area with a sitting/TV space and dining area on the lower level and a piano exit to the terrace on the rear upper level. The set also included the kitchen through an open archway. A small section of the building corridor and elevator doors was built, as was a powder room near the front entrance. Two corridors off the living area ostensibly led to the apartment's three bedrooms. Sets for each of these rooms were built as separate sets on an as-needed basis.\nNo building or apartment in Seattle really has the view from Frasier's residence. It was created so the Space Needle, the most iconic landmark of Seattle, would appear more prominently. According to the season-one DVD bonus features, the photograph used on the set was taken from atop a cliff, possibly the ledge at Kerry Park, a frequent photography location. Despite this, \"Frasier\" has been said to have contributed to the emergence of an upscale urban lifestyle in 1990s Seattle, with buyers seeking properties in locations resembling that depicted in the show, in search of \"that cosmopolitan feel of Frasier\".\nAnother of the primary sets was the radio studio at KACL from which Frasier broadcasts his show. The studio itself consists of two rooms: the broadcast booth and the control room. A section of the corridor outside of the booth was also built (visible through the windows at the back of the studio) and could be shot from the side to view the corridor itself. The set was designed based on ABC's then-brand-new radio studios in Los Angeles which the production designer visited. Technical elements such as the microphones were regularly updated to conform with the latest technology. Although the studio set lacked a \"front\" wall (the fourth wall), one was built for occasional use in episodes with certain moments shot from behind the broadcast desk, rather than in front of it as usual.\nThe producers wanted to have a gathering place outside of home and work where the characters could meet. After a trip to Seattle, and seeing the many burgeoning coffee shops, the production designer suggested to producers that they use a coffee shop. Unlike many of the relatively modern coffee shop designs prevalent in Seattle, the production designer opted for a more warm and inviting style which would appear more established and traditional. Stools were specifically omitted to avoid any similarity to the bar on \"Cheers\". Several Los Angeles coffee shops were used for reference. A bookcase was added on the back wall, suggesting patrons could grab a book and read while they enjoyed their coffee. The show used three versions of the interior set depending on how much space other sets for each episode required. If space for the full set was not available, a smaller version that omitted the tables closest to the audience could be used. If space for that set was lacking, a small section of the back of the cafe at the top of the steps could be set up under the audience bleachers. A set was also used on occasion for the exterior patio.\nFilming.\nThe cast had an unusual amount of freedom to suggest changes to the script. Grammer used an acting method he called \"requisite disrespect\" and did not rehearse with the others, instead learning and rehearsing his lines once just before filming each scene in front of a live studio audience. Although effective, the system often caused panic among guest stars.\nIn 1996, Grammer's recurrent alcoholism led to a car accident. The cast and crew performed an intervention that persuaded him to enter the Betty Ford Center, delaying production for a month.\nOnly one episode, \"The 1000th Show\", was filmed in Seattle. As with \"Cheers\", most episodes were filmed on Stage 25, Paramount Studios, or at various locations in and around Los Angeles.\nThe KACL callers' lines were read by anonymous voice-over actors during filming in front of a live audience, and during post-production, the lines were replaced by celebrities, who actually phoned in their parts without having to come into the studio. The end credits of season finales show greyscale headshots of celebrities who had \"called in\" that season. Celebrities providing voices as callers include Gillian Anderson, Kevin Bacon, Halle Berry, Mel Brooks, Cindy Crawford, Billy Crystal, Phil Donahue, David Duchovny, Hilary Duff, Olympia Dukakis, Carrie Fisher, Jodie Foster, Art Garfunkel, Macaulay Culkin, Elijah Wood, Linda Hamilton, Daryl Hannah, Ron Howard, Eric Idle, Stephen King, Jay Leno, Laura Linney, John Lithgow, Yo-Yo Ma, William H. Macy, Henry Mancini, Reba McEntire, Helen Mirren, Estelle Parsons, Freddie Prinze Jr., Christopher Reeve, Carly Simon, Gary Sinise, Mary Steenburgen, Ben Stiller, Marlo Thomas, Lily Tomlin, and Eddie Van Halen. Some \"callers\" also guest-starred, such as Parsons and Linney, who played Frasier's final love interest in the last season.\nCredits.\nThe show's theme song, \"Tossed Salads and Scrambled Eggs\", is sung by Grammer and is played over the closing credits of each episode. Composer Bruce Miller, who had also composed for \"Wings\", was asked to avoid explicitly mentioning any subjects related to the show such as radio or psychiatry. After Miller finished the music, lyricist Darryl Phinnesse suggested the title as they were things that were, like Frasier Crane's patients, \"mixed up\". The lyrics indirectly refer to Crane's radio show; \"I hear the blues a-callin\", for example, refers to troubled listeners who call the show. Grammer recorded several variations of the final spoken line of the theme, which were rotated for each of the episodes. Other than season finales, a short, silent scene, often revisiting a small subplot aside from the central story of the episode, appears with the credits and song, which the actors performed without written dialogue based on the scriptwriter's suggestion.\nThe title card at the start of each episode shows a white line being drawn in the shape of the Seattle skyline on a black background above the show's title. In most episodes, once the skyline and title appear, the skyline is augmented in some way, such as windows lighting up or a helicopter lifting off. The color of the title text changed for each season (respectively: blue, red, green, purple, gold, orange, yellow, light green, light orange, silver, and metallic gold). Over the title card, one of about 25 brief musical cues evoking the closing theme is played.\nRevival.\nTalks of a revival began in 2016, but were initially denied by Grammer, though they resurfaced in mid- to late 2018, with Grammer confirming they were looking into it. In February and March 2019, he said in several interviews that a reboot was likely. Grammer has said the revival will be a \"third act\" for the Frasier Crane character and is likely to be in a new setting other than Seattle. He has also indicated a new series will pay tribute to John Mahoney, who died in 2018.\nIn late 2019, Grammer said \"we've hatched a plan for \"Frasier\" reboot\", and it was originally reported that it would air in 2020. In February 2021, it was reported that the revival was being discussed at Paramount+, formerly CBS All Access, possibly for a ten-episode season order for 2022.\nOn February 24, 2021, the revival was greenlit for exclusive debut on Paramount+. Grammer said he \"gleefully\" anticipated \"sharing the next chapter in the continuing journey of Dr. Frasier Crane\" as he had \"spent over 20 years\" of his \"creative life on the Paramount lot.\"\nAs Grammer has other commitments with another upcoming show, the revival is not expected to get underway until 2022. No other cast members have been announced as of yet, but it is understood that David Hyde Pierce has been approached. Jane Leeves and Peri Gilpin have previously discussed the possibility of a revival.\nRelationship to \"Cheers\".\nWith the exception of Rebecca Howe (Kirstie Alley), all the surviving main regular cast members of \"Cheers\" made appearances on \"Frasier\". Lilith Sternin (Bebe Neuwirth) was the only one to become a recurring character, appearing in a total of twelve episodes.\nIn the eighth-season \"Cheers\" episode \"Two Girls for Every Boyd\", Frasier tells Sam Malone (played by Ted Danson) that his father, a research scientist, had died. In the \"Frasier\" season-two episode \"The Show Where Sam Shows Up\", when Sam meets Martin, Frasier explains that at the time, he was angry after an argument with his father on the phone. However, in \"The Show Where Woody Shows Up\", when meeting Martin, Woody says he remembers hearing about him.\nIn the ninth-season episode of \"Frasier\", \"Cheerful Goodbyes\" in 2002, Frasier returns to Boston to give a speech and Niles, Daphne, and Martin come along to see the city. Frasier runs into Cliff Clavin (played by John Ratzenberger) at the airport and learns that Cliff is retiring and moving to Florida. Frasier and company attend Cliff's retirement party, where Frasier reunites with the rest of the gang from \"Cheers\" (minus Sam, Woody, Diane and Rebecca), including bar regular Norm Peterson (played by George Wendt), waitress Carla Tortelli (played by Rhea Perlman), barflies Paul Krapence (played by Paul Willson) and Phil (played by Philip Perlman), and Cliff's old post-office nemesis Walt Twitchell (played by Raye Birk).\nIn the 11th-season episode of \"Frasier\", \"Caught in the Act\", Frasier's married ex-wife, children's entertainer Nanny G, comes to town and invites him backstage for a rendezvous. Nanny G appeared on the \"Cheers\" episode \"One Hugs, The Other Doesn't\" (1992) and was portrayed by Emma Thompson. In this episode of \"Frasier\", she is portrayed by Laurie Metcalf. A younger version of the character (this time played by Dina Waters) appears in the second episode of season 9 of \"Frasier\", \"Don Juan in Hell: Part 2\", along with Neuwirth and Shelley Long reprising their roles of Lilith and Diane Chambers, respectively. In this episode, Rita Wilson also reprises her role as Frasier's mother, Hester, which she briefly debuted in the season 7 premiere, \"Momma Mia\"; in \"Don Juan in Hell: Part 2\", Diane also references the season 3 episode of \"Cheers\", \"Diane Meets Mom\", in which Hester (then portrayed by Nancy Marchand) threatens Diane's life. Diane (again portrayed by Long) plays a central role in \"The Show Where Diane Comes Back\" (season 3, episode 14) and had a brief cameo in the season 2 episode \"Adventures in Paradise: Part 2\".\nSome cast members of \"Frasier\" had appeared previously in minor roles on \"Cheers\". In the episode \"Do Not Forsake Me, O' My Postman\" (1992), John Mahoney played Sy Flembeck, an over-the-hill jingle writer hired by Rebecca to write a jingle for the bar. In it, Grammer and Mahoney exchanged a few lines. Peri Gilpin appeared in a \"Cheers\" episode titled \"Woody Gets an Election\" playing a reporter who interviews Woody when he runs for office.\nThe set of \"Frasier\" was built over the set of \"Cheers\" on the same stage after it had finished filming.\nReception.\nCritical reaction.\n\"Frasier\" is one of the most critically acclaimed comedy series of all time and one of the most successful spin-off series in television history. Critics and commentators have broadly held the show in high regard.\nCaroline Frost said that the series overall showed a high level of wit, but noted that many critics felt that the marriage of Daphne and Niles in season 10 had removed much of the show's comic tension. Ken Tucker felt that their marriage made the series seem desperate for storylines, while Robert Bianco felt that it was symptomatic of a show that had begun to dip in quality after so much time on the air. Kelsey Grammer acknowledged the creative lull, saying that over the course of two later seasons, the show \"took itself too seriously\". Commentators acknowledged that there was an improvement following the return of the writers Christopher Lloyd and Joe Keenan, although not necessarily to its earlier high standards.\nWriting about the first season, John O'Connor described \"Frasier\" as being a relatively unoriginal concept, but said that it was generally a \"splendid act\", while Tucker thought that the second season benefited greatly from a mix of \"high and low humor.\u201d Tucker's comment is referring to what Grammer described as a rule of the series that the show should not play down to its audience. Kevin Cherry believes that \"Frasier\" was able to stay fresh by not making any contemporary commentary, therefore allowing the show to be politically and socially neutral. Other commentators, such as Haydn Bush disagree, believing the success of \"Frasier\" can be attributed to the comedic timing and the rapport between the characters. Joseph J. Darowski and Kate Darowski praise the overall message of the series, which across eleven seasons sees several lonely, broken individuals develop warm, caring relationships. While individual episodes vary in quality, the series as a whole carries with it a definitive theme and evolution from pilot to finale. The Economist would devote an article to the 25th anniversary of the show's premiere stating, \"it is clear that audiences still demand the sort of intelligent and heartfelt comedy that \u201cFrasier\u201d provided.\"\nIn spite of the criticisms of the later seasons, these critics were unanimous in praising at least the early seasons, with varied commentary on the series' demise ranging from believing, like Bianco, that the show had run its course to those like Dana Stevens, who bemoaned the end of \"Frasier\" as the \"end of situation comedy for adults\". Critics compared the farcical elements of the series, especially in later seasons, to the older sitcom \"Three's Company\". NBC News contributor Wendell Wittler described the moments of misunderstanding as \"inspired by the classic comedy of manners as were the frequent deflations of Frasier\u2019s pomposity.\"\nIn 2017, 13 years after the show ended, \"Frasier\" was said to have experienced a \"renaissance\" on Netflix and \"achieved a second life as one of the streaming service's most soothing offerings\".\nAwards.\nThe series won a total of 37 Primetime Emmy Awards during its 11-year run, breaking the record long held by CBS' \"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\" (29). It held the record until 2016 when \"Game of Thrones\" won 38. Grammer and Pierce each won four, including one each for the fifth and eleventh seasons. The series is tied with ABC's \"Modern Family\" for the most consecutive wins for Outstanding Comedy Series, winning five from 1994 to 1998.\nGrammer has been Emmy-nominated for playing Frasier Crane on \"Cheers\" and \"Frasier\", as well as a 1992 crossover appearance on \"Wings\", making him the only performer to be nominated for playing the same role on three different shows. The first year Grammer did not receive an Emmy nomination for \"Frasier\" was in 2003 for the 10th season. However, Pierce was nominated every year of the show's run, breaking the record for nominations in his category, with his eighth nomination in 2001; he was nominated a further three times after this.\nIn 1994, the episode \"The Matchmaker\" was ranked number 43 on \"TV Guide\"s 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time. In 2000, the series was named the greatest international programme of all time by a panel of 1,600 industry experts for the British Film Institute as part of BFI TV 100. In 2002, \"Frasier\" was ranked number 34 on \"TV Guide\"s 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time. In a 2006 poll taken by Channel 4 of professionals in the sitcom industry, \"Frasier\" was voted the best sitcom of all time.\nFandom and cultural impact.\n\"Frasier\" began airing in off-network syndication on September 15, 1997. It is available on Cozi TV, Hallmark Channel, Amazon Prime Video, Hulu, Paramount+, Peacock and Crave in select countries. Netflix stopped offering the show from 2020.\nThe show's popularity has resulted in several fan sites, podcasts, and publications. Podcasts that look primarily at the show include \"Talk Salad and Scrambled Eggs\" with Kevin Smith and Matt Mira, \"Frasierphiles,\" \"The Frasier Analysis\".\nA soundtrack to the series was released in 2001.\nMerchandising.\nHome media.\nParamount Home Entertainment and (from 2006 onward) CBS DVD COZI TV have released all 11 seasons of \"Frasier\" on DVD in Region 1, 2 and 4. A 44-disc package containing the entire 11 seasons has also been released.\nOn April 7, 2015, CBS DVD released \"Frasier: The Complete Series\" on DVD in Region 1.\nThe first four seasons were also released on VHS along with a series of 'Best Of' tapes. These tapes consisted of four episodes taken from seasons 1\u20134. No more video releases have been announced.\nOne \"Frasier\" CD has been released featuring a number of songs taken from the show: \"Tossed Salads &amp; Scrambled Eggs\" was released on October 24, 2000.\nBooks.\nSeveral books about \"Frasier\" have been released, including:"}
{"id": "11686", "revid": "578047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11686", "title": "Fethry Duck", "text": ""}
{"id": "11687", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11687", "title": "Fuel-air explosive", "text": ""}
{"id": "11688", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11688", "title": "Fascist", "text": ""}
{"id": "11689", "revid": "37170478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11689", "title": "Francais", "text": ""}
{"id": "11690", "revid": "687852", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11690", "title": "Fantasy Games Unlimited", "text": "Fantasy Games Unlimited (FGU) is a publishing house for tabletop and role-playing games. The company has no in-house design teams and relies on submitted material from outside talent.\nHistory.\nFounded in the summer of 1975 in Jericho, New York by Scott Bizar, the company's first publications were the wargames \"Gladiators\" and \"Royal Armies of the Hyborean Age\". Upon the sudden appearance and massive popularity of \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" from TSR, the company turned its attentions to role-playing games, seeking out and producing systems created by amateurs and freelancers. Rather than focusing on any one line and supporting it with subsequent supplements, FGU produced a continuous stream of new games. Because of the disparate authors, the rules systems were mutually incompatible. FGU Incorporated published dozens of different role-playing games.\nFantasy Games Unlimited won the All Time Best Ancient Medieval Rules for 1979 H.G. Wells Award at Origins 1980 for \"Chivalry &amp; Sorcery\".\nIn 1991, Fantasy Games Unlimited Inc. was dissolved as a New York corporation. Bizar continues to publish in Arizona as a sole proprietorship called Fantasy Games Unlimited.\nA new FGU website appeared in July 2006 offering the company's back catalog. It said that new products would be \"coming soon\". New \"Aftermath!\" products began to appear in 2008. By 2010 much of the company's back catalog was available. At that time FGU was seeking submissions to allow the publication of new adventures for some of their existing titles, primarily \"Aftermath!, Space Opera, and Villains and Vigilantes\"."}
{"id": "11691", "revid": "134016", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11691", "title": "Functional decomposition", "text": "In mathematics, functional decomposition is the process of resolving a functional relationship into its constituent parts in such a way that the original function can be reconstructed (i.e., recomposed) from those parts by function composition.\nThis process of decomposition may be undertaken to gain insight into the identity of the constituent components which may reflect individual physical processes of interest. Also functional decomposition may result in a compressed representation of the global function, a task which is feasible only when the constituent processes possess a certain level of \"modularity\" (i.e., independence or non-interaction).\n between the components are critical to the function of the collection. All interactions may not be , but possibly deduced through repetitive , synthesis, validation and verification of composite behavior.\nBasic mathematical definition.\nFor a multivariate function formula_1, functional decomposition generally refers to a process of identifying a set of functions formula_2 such that\nwhere formula_4 is some other function. Thus, we would say that the function formula_5 is decomposed into functions formula_2. This process is intrinsically hierarchical in the sense that we can (and often do) seek to further decompose the functions formula_7 into a collection of constituent functions formula_8 such that\nwhere formula_10 is some other function. Decompositions of this kind are interesting and important for a wide variety of reasons. In general, functional decompositions are worthwhile when there is a certain \"sparseness\" in the dependency structure; that is, when constituent functions are found to depend on approximately disjoint sets of variables. Thus, for example, if we can obtain a decomposition of formula_11 into a hierarchical composition of functions formula_12 such that formula_13, formula_14, formula_15, as shown in the figure at right, this would probably be considered a highly valuable decomposition.\nExample: Arithmetic.\nA basic example of functional decomposition is expressing the four binary arithmetic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division in terms of the two binary operations of addition formula_16 and multiplication formula_17 and the two unary operations of additive inversion formula_18 and multiplicative inversion formula_19 Subtraction can then be realized as the composition of addition and additive inversion, formula_20 and division can be realized as the composition of multiplication and multiplicative inverse, formula_21 This simplifies the analysis of subtraction and division, and also makes it easier to axiomatize these operations in the notion of a field, as there are only two binary and two unary operations, rather than four binary operations.\nExtending these primitive operations, there is a rich literature on the topic of polynomial decomposition.\nMotivation for decomposition.\nAs to \"why\" the decomposition is valuable, the reason is twofold. Firstly, decomposition of a function into non-interacting components generally permits more economical representations of the function. For example, on a set of quaternary (i.e., 4-ary) variables, representing the full function formula_22 requires storing formula_23 values, the value of the function for each element in the Cartesian product formula_24, i.e., each of the 1024 possible combinations for formula_24. However, if the decomposition into formula_12 given above is possible, then formula_27 requires storing 4 values, formula_28 requires storing formula_29 values, and formula_30 again requires storing just 4 values. So in virtue of the decomposition, we need store only formula_31 values rather than 1024 values, a dramatic savings.\nIntuitively, this reduction in representation size is achieved simply because each variable depends only on a subset of the other variables. Thus, variable formula_32 only depends directly on variable formula_33, rather than depending on the \"entire set\" of variables. We would say that variable formula_33 \"screens off\" variable formula_32 from the rest of the world. Practical examples of this phenomenon surround us, as discussed in the \"Philosophical Considerations\" below, but let's just consider the particular case of \"northbound traffic on the West Side Highway.\" Let us assume this variable (formula_36) takes on three possible values of {\"moving slow\", \"moving deadly slow\", \"not moving at all\"}. Now let's say variable formula_36 depends on two other variables, \"weather\" with values of {\"sun\", \"rain\", \"snow\"}, and \"GW Bridge traffic\" with values {\"10mph\", \"5mph\", \"1mph\"}. The point here is that while there are certainly many secondary variables that affect the weather variable (e.g., low pressure system over Canada, butterfly flapping in Japan, etc.) and the Bridge traffic variable (e.g., an accident on I-95, presidential motorcade, etc.) all these other secondary variables are not directly relevant to the West Side Highway traffic. All we need (hypothetically) in order to predict the West Side Highway traffic is the weather and the GW Bridge traffic, because these two variables \"screen off\" West Side Highway traffic from all other potential influences. That is, all other influences act \"through\" them.\nOutside of purely mathematical considerations, perhaps the greatest value of functional decomposition is the insight it provides into the structure of the world. When a functional decomposition can be achieved, this provides ontological information about what structures actually exist in the world, and how they can be predicted and manipulated. For example, in the illustration above, if it is learned that formula_36 depends directly only on formula_39, this means that for purposes of prediction of formula_36, it suffices to know only formula_39. Moreover, interventions to influence formula_36 can be taken directly on formula_39, and nothing additional can be gained by intervening on variables formula_44, since these only act through formula_39 in any case.\nPhilosophical considerations.\nThe philosophical antecedents and ramifications of functional decomposition are quite broad, as functional decomposition in one guise or another underlies all of modern science. Here we review just a few of these philosophical considerations.\nReductionist tradition.\nOne of the major distinctions that is often drawn between Eastern philosophy and Western Philosophy is that the Eastern philosophers tended to espouse ideas favoring holism while the Western thinkers tended to espouse ideas favoring reductionism. This distinction between East and West is akin to other philosophical distinctions (such as realism vs. anti-realism). Some examples of the Eastern holistic spirit:\nThe Western tradition, from its origins among the Greek philosophers, preferred a position in which drawing correct distinctions, divisions, and contrasts was considered the very pinnacle of insight. In the Aristotelian/Porphyrian worldview, to be able to distinguish (via strict proof) which qualities of a thing represent its essence vs. property vs. accident vs. definition, and by virtue of this formal description to segregate that entity into its proper place in the taxonomy of nature \u2014 this was to achieve the very height of wisdom.\nCharacteristics of hierarchy and modularity.\nIn natural or artificial systems that require components to be integrated in some fashion, but where the number of components exceeds what could reasonably be fully interconnected (due to square wise growth in number of connections (= n over two or = n * (n - 1) / 2)), one often finds that some degree of hierarchicality must be employed in the solution. The general advantages of sparse hierarchical systems over densely connected systems\u2014and quantitative estimates of these advantage\u2014are presented by . In prosaic terms, a hierarchy is \"a collection of elements that combine lawfully into complex wholes which depend for their properties upon those of their constituent parts,\" and wherein novelty is \"fundamentally combinatorial, iterative, and transparent\" .\nAn important notion that always arises in connection with hierarchies is modularity, which is effectively implied by the sparseness of connections in hierarchical topologies. In physical systems, a module is generally a set of interacting components that relates to the external world via a very limited interface, thus concealing most aspects of its internal structure. As a result, modifications that are made to the internals of a module (to improve efficiency for example) do not necessarily create a ripple effect through the rest of the system . This feature makes the effective use of modularity a centerpiece of all good software and hardware engineering.\nInevitability of hierarchy and modularity.\nThere are many compelling arguments regarding the prevalence and necessity of hierarchy/modularity in nature . points out that among evolving systems, only those that can manage to obtain and then reuse stable subassemblies (modules) are likely to be able to search through the fitness landscape with a reasonably quick pace; thus, Simon submits that \"among possible complex forms, hierarchies are the ones that have the time to evolve.\" This line of thinking has led to the even stronger claim that although \"we do not know what forms of life have evolved on other planets in the universe, ... we can safely assume that 'wherever there is life, it must be hierarchically organized'\" . This would be a fortunate state of affairs since the existence of simple and isolable subsystems is thought to be a precondition for successful science . In any case, experience certainly seems to indicate that much of the world possesses hierarchical structure.\nIt has been proposed that perception itself is a process of hierarchical decomposition , and that phenomena which are not essentially hierarchical in nature may not even be \"theoretically intelligible\" to the human mind (,). In Simon's words,\nApplications.\nPractical applications of functional decomposition are found in Bayesian networks, structural equation modeling, linear systems, and database systems.\nKnowledge representation.\nProcesses related to functional decomposition are prevalent throughout the fields of knowledge representation and machine learning. Hierarchical model induction techniques such as Logic circuit minimization, decision trees, grammatical inference, hierarchical clustering, and quadtree decomposition are all examples of function decomposition. A review of other applications and function decomposition can be found in , which also presents methods based on information theory and graph theory.\nMany statistical inference methods can be thought of as implementing a function decomposition process in the presence of noise; that is, where functional dependencies are only expected to hold \"approximately\". Among such models are mixture models and the recently popular methods referred to as \"causal decompositions\" or Bayesian networks.\nDatabase theory.\nSee database normalization.\nMachine learning.\nIn practical scientific applications, it is almost never possible to achieve perfect functional decomposition because of the incredible complexity of the systems under study. This complexity is manifested in the presence of \"noise,\" which is just a designation for all the unwanted and untraceable influences on our observations.\nHowever, while perfect functional decomposition is usually impossible, the spirit lives on in a large number of statistical methods that are equipped to deal with noisy systems. When a natural or artificial system is intrinsically hierarchical, the joint distribution on system variables should provide evidence of this hierarchical structure. The task of an observer who seeks to understand the system is then to infer the hierarchical structure from observations of these variables. This is the notion behind the hierarchical decomposition of a joint distribution, the attempt to recover something of the intrinsic hierarchical structure which generated that joint distribution.\nAs an example, Bayesian network methods attempt to decompose a joint distribution along its causal fault lines, thus \"cutting nature at its seams\". The essential motivation behind these methods is again that within most systems (natural or artificial), relatively few components/events interact with one another directly on equal footing . Rather, one observes pockets of dense connections (direct interactions) among small subsets of components, but only loose connections between these densely connected subsets. There is thus a notion of \"causal proximity\" in physical systems under which variables naturally precipitate into small clusters. Identifying these clusters and using them to represent the joint provides the basis for great efficiency of storage (relative to the full joint distribution) as well as for potent inference algorithms.\nSoftware architecture.\nFunctional Decomposition is a design method intending to produce a non-implementation, architectural description of a computer program. Rather than conjecturing Objects and adding methods to them (OOP), with each Object intending to capture some service of the program, the software architect first establishes a series of functions and types that accomplishes the main processing problem of the computer program, decomposes each to reveal common functions and types, and finally derives Modules from this activity.\nFor example, the design of the editor Emacs can initially be thought about in terms of functions:\nformula_46\n&lt;br&gt;\nformula_47\nformula_48\nAnd a possible function decomposition of \"f\":\nformula_49\nformula_50\nformula_51\nThis leads one to the plausible Module, Service, or Object, of an interpreter (containing the function \"fromExpr\"). Function Decomposition arguably yields insights about re-usability, such as if during the course of analysis, two functions produce the same type, it is likely that a common function/cross-cutting concern resides in both. To contrast, in OOP, it is a common practice to conjecture Modules prior to considering such a decomposition. This arguably results in costly refactoring later. FD mitigates that risk to some extent. Further, arguably, what separates FD from other design methods- is that it provides a concise high-level medium of architectural discourse that is end-to-end, revealing flaws in upstream requirements and beneficially exposing more design decisions in advance. And lastly, FD is known to prioritize development. Arguably, if the FD is correct, the most re-usable and cost-determined parts of the program are identified far earlier in the development cycle.\nSignal processing.\nFunctional decomposition is used in the analysis of many signal processing systems, such as LTI systems. The input signal to an LTI system can be expressed as a function, formula_52. Then formula_52 can be decomposed into a linear combination of other functions, called component signals:\nHere, formula_55 are the component signals. Note that formula_56 are constants. This decomposition aids in analysis, because now the output of the system can be expressed in terms of the components of the input. If we let formula_57 represent the effect of the system, then the output signal is formula_58, which can be expressed as:\nIn other words, the system can be seen as acting separately on each of the components of the input signal. Commonly used examples of this type of decomposition are the Fourier series and the Fourier transform.\nSystems engineering.\nFunctional decomposition in systems engineering refers to the process of defining a system in functional terms, then defining lower-level functions and sequencing relationships from these higher level systems functions. The basic idea is to try to divide a system in such a way that each block of a block diagram can be described without an \"and\" or \"or\" in the description.\nThis exercise forces each part of the system to have a pure function. When a system is designed as pure functions, they can be reused, or replaced. A usual side effect is that the interfaces between blocks become simple and generic. Since the interfaces usually become simple, it is easier to replace a pure function with a related, similar function.\nFor example, say that one needs to make a stereo system. One might functionally decompose this into speakers, amplifier, a tape deck and a front panel. Later, when a different model needs an audio CD, it can probably fit the same interfaces."}
{"id": "11693", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11693", "title": "First International Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Council", "text": ""}
{"id": "11695", "revid": "38082634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11695", "title": "Five Good Emperors", "text": ""}
{"id": "11696", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11696", "title": "Fossile", "text": ""}
{"id": "11697", "revid": "84417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11697", "title": "Fossils and the geological timescale", "text": ""}
{"id": "11698", "revid": "20050314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11698", "title": "Franz Boas", "text": "Franz Uri Boas (July 9, 1858 \u2013 December 21, 1942) was a German-born American anthropologist and a pioneer of modern anthropology who has been called the \"Father of American Anthropology\". His work is associated with the movements known as Historical Particularism and Cultural Relativism.\nStudying in Germany, Boas was awarded a doctorate in 1881 in physics while also studying geography. He then participated in a geographical expedition to northern Canada, where he became fascinated with the culture and language of the Baffin Island Inuit. He went on to do field work with the indigenous cultures and languages of the Pacific Northwest. In 1887 he emigrated to the United States, where he first worked as a museum curator at the Smithsonian, and in 1899 became a professor of anthropology at Columbia University, where he remained for the rest of his career. Through his students, many of whom went on to found anthropology departments and research programmes inspired by their mentor, Boas profoundly influenced the development of American anthropology. Among his most significant students were A.\u00a0L. Kroeber, Ruth Benedict, Edward Sapir, Margaret Mead, Zora Neale Hurston, Gilberto Freyre and many others.\nBoas was one of the most prominent opponents of the then-popular ideologies of scientific racism, the idea that race is a biological concept and that human behavior is best understood through the typology of biological characteristics. In a series of groundbreaking studies of skeletal anatomy he showed that cranial shape and size was highly malleable depending on environmental factors such as health and nutrition, in contrast to the claims by racial anthropologists of the day that held head shape to be a stable racial trait. Boas also worked to demonstrate that differences in human behavior are not primarily determined by innate biological dispositions but are largely the result of cultural differences acquired through social learning. In this way, Boas introduced culture as the primary concept for describing differences in behavior between human groups, and as the central analytical concept of anthropology.\nAmong Boas's main contributions to anthropological thought was his rejection of the then-popular evolutionary approaches to the study of culture, which saw all societies progressing through a set of hierarchic technological and cultural stages, with Western European culture at the summit. Boas argued that culture developed historically through the interactions of groups of people and the diffusion of ideas and that consequently there was no process towards continuously \"higher\" cultural forms. This insight led Boas to reject the \"stage\"-based organization of ethnological museums, instead preferring to order items on display based on the affinity and proximity of the cultural groups in question.\nBoas also introduced the idea of cultural relativism, which holds that cultures cannot be objectively ranked as higher or lower, or better or more correct, but that all humans see the world through the lens of their own culture, and judge it according to their own culturally acquired norms. For Boas, the object of anthropology was to understand the way in which culture conditioned people to understand and interact with the world in different ways and to do this it was necessary to gain an understanding of the language and cultural practices of the people studied. By uniting the disciplines of archaeology, the study of material culture and history, and physical anthropology, the study of variation in human anatomy, with ethnology, the study of cultural variation of customs, and descriptive linguistics, the study of unwritten indigenous languages, Boas created the four-field subdivision of anthropology which became prominent in American anthropology in the 20th century.\nEarly life and education.\nFranz Boas was born on July 9, 1858, in Minden, Westphalia, the son of Sophie Meyer and Meier Boas. Although his grandparents were observant Jews, his parents embraced Enlightenment values, including their assimilation into modern German society. Boas's parents were educated, well-to-do, and liberal; they did not like dogma of any kind. An important early influence was the avuncular Abraham Jacobi, his mother's brother-in-law and a friend of Karl Marx, and who was to advise him through Boas's career. Due to this, Boas was granted the independence to think for himself and pursue his own interests. Early in life, he displayed a penchant for both nature and natural sciences. Boas vocally opposed antisemitism and refused to convert to Christianity, but he did not identify himself as a Jew. This is disputed however by Ruth Bunzel, a prot\u00e9g\u00e9e of Boas, who called him \"the essential protestant; he valued autonomy above all things.\" According to his biographer, \"He was an 'ethnic' German, preserving and promoting German culture and values in America.\" In an autobiographical sketch, Boas wrote:\nThe background of my early thinking was a German home in which the ideals of the revolution of 1848 were a living force. My father, liberal, but not active in public affairs; my mother, idealistic, with a lively interest in public matters; the founder about 1854 of the kindergarten in my hometown, devoted to science. My parents had broken through the shackles of dogma. My father had retained an emotional affection for the ceremonial of his parental home, without allowing it to influence his intellectual freedom.\nFrom kindergarten on, Boas was educated in natural history, a subject he enjoyed. In gymnasium, he was most proud of his research on the geographic distribution of plants.\nWhen he started his university studies, Boas first attended Heidelberg University for a semester followed by four terms at Bonn University, studying physics, geography, and mathematics at these schools. In 1879, he hoped to transfer to Berlin University to study physics under Hermann von Helmholtz, but ended up transferring to the University of Kiel instead due to family reasons. At Kiel, Boas wanted to focus on the mathematical topic of C.F. Gauss's law of the normal distribution of errors for his dissertation, however ultimately he had to settle for a topic chosen for him by his doctoral advisor, physicist Gustav Karsten, on the optical properties of water. Boas completed his dissertation entitled \"Contributions to the Perception of the Color of Water,\" which examined the absorption, reflection, and polarization of light in water, and was awarded a PhD in physics in 1881. \nWhile at Bonn, Boas had attended geography classes taught by the geographer Theobald Fischer and the two established a friendship, with the coursework and friendship continuing after both relocated to Kiel at the same time. Fischer, a student of Carl Ritter, rekindled Boas' interest in geography and ultimately had more influence on him than did Karsten, and thus some biographers view Boas as more of a geographer than a physicist at this stage. In addition to the major in physics, Adams, citing Kroeber, states that \"[i]n accordance with German tradition at the time... he also had to defend six minor theses\", and Boas likely completed a minor in geography, which would explain why Fischer was one of Boas' degree examiners. Because of this close relationship between Fischer and Boas, some biographers have gone so far as to incorrectly state that Boas \"followed\" Fischer to Kiel, and that Boas received a PhD in geography with Fischer as his doctoral advisor. For his part, Boas self-identified as a geographer by the time he completed his doctorate, prompting his sister, Toni, to write in 1883, \"After long years of infidelity, my brother was re-conquered by geography, the first love of his boyhood.\"\nIn his dissertation research, Boas' methodology included investigating how different intensities of light created different colors when interacting with different types of water; however, he encountered difficulty in being able to objectively perceive slight differences in the color of water, and as a result became intrigued by this problem of perception and its influence on quantitative measurements. Boas, due to tone deafness, would later encounter difficulties also in studying tonal languages such as Laguna. Boas had already been interested in Kantian philosophy since taking a course on aesthetics with Kuno Fischer at Heidelberg. These factors led Boas to consider pursuing research in psychophysics, which explores the relationship between the psychological and the physical, after completing his doctorate, but he had no training in psychology. Boas did publish six articles on psychophysics during his year of military service (1882\u20131883), but ultimately he decided to focus on geography, primarily so he could receive sponsorship for his planned Baffin Island expedition.\nPost-graduate studies.\nBoas took up geography as a way to explore his growing interest in the relationship between subjective experience and the objective world. At the time, German geographers were divided over the causes of cultural variation. Many argued that the physical environment was the principal determining factor, but others (notably Friedrich Ratzel) argued that the diffusion of ideas through human migration is more important. In 1883, encouraged by Theobald Fischer, Boas went to Baffin Island to conduct geographic research on the impact of the physical environment on native Inuit migrations. The first of many ethnographic field trips, Boas culled his notes to write his first monograph titled \"The Central Eskimo\", which was published in 1888 in the 6th Annual Report from the Bureau of American Ethnology. Boas lived and worked closely with the Inuit peoples on Baffin Island, and he developed an abiding interest in the way people lived.\nIn the perpetual darkness of the Arctic winter, Boas reported, he and his traveling companion became lost and were forced to keep sledding for twenty-six hours through ice, soft snow, and temperatures that dropped below \u221246\u00a0\u00b0C. The following day, Boas penciled in his diary,\nBoas went on to explain in the same entry that \"all service, therefore, which a man can perform for humanity must serve to promote truth.\" Before his departure, his father had insisted he be accompanied by one of the family's servants, Wilhelm Weike who cooked for him and kept a journal of the expedition. Boas was nonetheless forced to depend on various Inuit groups for everything from directions and food to shelter and companionship. It was a difficult year filled with tremendous hardships that included frequent bouts of disease, mistrust, pestilence, and danger. Boas successfully searched for areas not yet surveyed and found unique ethnographic objects, but the long winter and the lonely treks across perilous terrain forced him to search his soul to find a direction for his life as a scientist and a citizen.\nBoas's interest in indigenous communities grew as he worked at the Royal Ethnological Museum in Berlin, where he was introduced to members of the Nuxalk Nation of British Columbia, which sparked a lifelong relationship with the First Nations of the Pacific Northwest.\nHe returned to Berlin to complete his studies. In 1886, Boas defended (with Helmholtz's support) his habilitation thesis, \"Baffin Land\", and was named \"privatdozent\" in geography.\nWhile on Baffin Island he began to develop his interest in studying non-Western cultures (resulting in his book, \"The Central Eskimo\", published in 1888). In 1885, Boas went to work with physical anthropologist Rudolf Virchow and ethnologist Adolf Bastian at the Royal Ethnological Museum in Berlin. Boas had studied anatomy with Virchow two years earlier while preparing for the Baffin Island expedition. At the time, Virchow was involved in a vociferous debate over evolution with his former student, Ernst Haeckel. Haeckel had abandoned his medical practice to study comparative anatomy after reading Charles Darwin's \"The Origin of Species\", and vigorously promoted Darwin's ideas in Germany. However, like most other natural scientists prior to the rediscovery of Mendelian genetics in 1900 and the development of the modern synthesis, Virchow felt that Darwin's theories were weak because they lacked a theory of cellular mutability. Accordingly, Virchow favored Lamarckian models of evolution. This debate resonated with debates among geographers. Lamarckians believed that environmental forces could precipitate rapid and enduring changes in organisms that had no inherited source; thus, Lamarckians and environmental determinists often found themselves on the same side of debates.\nBut Boas worked more closely with Bastian, who was noted for his antipathy to environmental determinism. Instead, he argued for the \"psychic unity of mankind\", a belief that all humans had the same intellectual capacity, and that all cultures were based on the same basic mental principles. Variations in custom and belief, he argued, were the products of historical accidents. This view resonated with Boas's experiences on Baffin Island and drew him towards anthropology.\nWhile at the Royal Ethnological Museum Boas became interested in the Native Americans in the Pacific Northwest, and after defending his habilitation thesis, he left for a three-month trip to British Columbia via New York. In January\u00a01887, he was offered a job as assistant editor of the journal \"Science\". Alienated by growing antisemitism and nationalism as well as the very limited academic opportunities for a geographer in Germany, Boas decided to stay in the United States. Possibly he received additional motivation for this decision from his romance with Marie Krackowizer, whom he married in the same year. With a family underway and under financial stress, Boas also resorted to pilfering bones and skulls from native burial sites to sell to museums.\nAside from his editorial work at \"Science\", Boas secured an appointment as \"docent\" in anthropology at Clark University, in 1888. Boas was concerned about university president G. Stanley Hall's interference in his research, yet in 1889 he was appointed as the head of a newly created department of anthropology at Clark University. In the early 1890s, he went on a series of expeditions which were referred to as the Morris K. Jesup Expedition. The primary goal of these expeditions was to illuminate Asiatic-American relations. In 1892 Boas, along with another member of the Clark faculty, resigned in protest of the alleged infringement by Hall on academic freedom.\nWorld's Columbian Exposition.\nAnthropologist Frederic Ward Putnam, director and curator of the Peabody Museum at Harvard University, who had been appointed as head of the Department of Ethnology and Archeology for the Chicago Fair in 1892, chose Boas as his first assistant at Chicago to prepare for the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition or Chicago World's Fair, the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus's arrival in the Americas. Boas had a chance to apply his approach to exhibits. Boas directed a team of about one hundred assistants, mandated to create anthropology and ethnology exhibits on the Indians of North America and South America that were living at the time Christopher Columbus arrived in America while searching for India. Putnam intended the World's Columbian Exposition to be a celebration of Columbus' voyage. Putnam argued that showing late nineteenth century Inuit and First Nations (then called Eskimo and Indians) \"in their natural conditions of life\" would provide a contrast and celebrate the four centuries of Western accomplishments since 1493.\nFranz Boas traveled north to gather ethnographic material for the Exposition. Boas had intended public science in creating exhibitions for the Exposition where visitors to the Midway could learn about other cultures. Boas arranged for fourteen Kwakwaka'wakw aboriginals from British Columbia to come and reside in a mock Kwakwaka'wakw village, where they could perform their daily tasks in context. Inuit were there with 12-foot-long whips made of sealskin, wearing sealskin clothing and showing how adept they were in sealskin kayaks. His experience with the Exposition provided the first of a series of shocks to Franz Boas' faith in public anthropology. The visitors were not there to be educated. By 1916, Boas had come to recognize with a certain resignation that \"the number of people in our country who are willing and able to enter into the modes of thought of other nations is altogether too small ... The American who is cognizant only of his own standpoint sets himself up as arbiter of the world.\"\nAfter the exposition, the ethnographic material collected formed the basis of the newly created Field Museum in Chicago with Boas as the curator of anthropology. He worked there until 1894, when he was replaced (against his will) by BAE archeologist William Henry Holmes.\nIn 1896, Boas was appointed Assistant Curator of Ethnology and Somatology of the American Museum of Natural History under Putnam. In 1897, he organized the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, a five-year-long field-study of the nations of the Pacific Northwest, whose ancestors had migrated across the Bering Strait from Siberia. He attempted to organize exhibits along contextual, rather than evolutionary, lines. He also developed a research program in line with his curatorial goals: describing his instructions to his students in terms of widening contexts of interpretation within a society, he explained that \"... they get the specimens; they get explanations of the specimens; they get connected texts that partly refer to the specimens and partly to abstract things concerning the people; and they get grammatical information\". These widening contexts of interpretation were abstracted into one context, the context in which the specimens, or assemblages of specimens, would be displayed: \"... we want a collection arranged according to tribes, in order to teach the particular style of each group\". His approach, however, brought him into conflict with the President of the Museum, Morris Jesup, and its director, Hermon Bumpus. By 1900 Boas had begun to retreat from American museum anthropology as a tool of education or reform (Hinsley 1992: 361). He resigned in 1905, never to work for a museum again.\nLate 19th century debates.\nScience versus history.\nSome scholars, like Boas's student Alfred Kroeber, believed that Boas used his research in physics as a model for his work in anthropology. Many others, however\u2014including Boas's student Alexander Lesser, and later researchers such as Marian W. Smith, Herbert S. Lewis, and Matti Bunzl\u2014have pointed out that Boas explicitly rejected physics in favor of history as a model for his anthropological research.\nThis distinction between science and history has its origins in 19th-century German academe, which distinguished between \"Naturwissenschaften\" (the sciences) and \"Geisteswissenschaften\" (the humanities), or between \"Gesetzwissenschaften\" (the law - giving sciences) and \"Geschichtswissenschaften\" (history). Generally, \"Naturwissenschaften\" and \"Gesetzwissenschaften\" refer to the study of phenomena that are governed by objective natural laws, while the latter terms in the two oppositions refer to those phenomena that have to mean only in terms of human perception or experience.\nIn 1884, Kantian philosopher Wilhelm Windelband coined the terms nomothetic and idiographic to describe these two divergent approaches. He observed that most scientists employ some mix of both, but in differing proportions; he considered physics a perfect example of a nomothetic science, and history, an idiographic science. Moreover, he argued that each approach has its origin in one of the two \"interests\" of reason Kant had identified in the \"Critique of Judgement\"\u2014one \"generalizing\", the other \"specifying\". (Winkelband's student Heinrich Rickert elaborated on this distinction in \"The Limits of Concept Formation in Natural Science : A Logical Introduction to the Historical Sciences\"; Boas's students Alfred Kroeber and Edward Sapir relied extensively on this work in defining their own approach to anthropology.)\nAlthough Kant considered these two interests of reason to be objective and universal, the distinction between the natural and human sciences was institutionalized in Germany, through the organization of scholarly research and teaching, following the Enlightenment. In Germany, the Enlightenment was dominated by Kant himself, who sought to establish principles based on universal rationality. In reaction to Kant, German scholars such as Johann Gottfried Herder (an influence to Boas) argued that human creativity, which necessarily takes unpredictable and highly diverse forms, is as important as human rationality. In 1795, the great linguist and philosopher Wilhelm von Humboldt called for an anthropology that would synthesize Kant's and Herder's interests. Humboldt founded the University of Berlin in 1809, and his work in geography, history, and psychology provided the milieu in which Boas's intellectual orientation matured.\nHistorians working in the Humboldtian tradition developed ideas that would become central in Boasian anthropology. Leopold von Ranke defined the task of the historian as \"merely to show as it actually was\", which is a cornerstone of Boas's empiricism. Wilhelm Dilthey emphasized the centrality of \"understanding\" to human knowledge, and that the lived experience of a historian could provide a basis for an empathic understanding of the situation of a historical actor. For Boas, both values were well-expressed in a quote from Goethe: \"A single action or event is interesting, not because it is explainable, but because it is true.\"\nThe influence of these ideas on Boas is apparent in his 1887 essay, \"The Study of Geography\", in which he distinguished between physical science, which seeks to discover the laws governing phenomena, and historical science, which seeks a thorough understanding of phenomena on their own terms. Boas argued that geography is and must be historical in this sense. In 1887, after his Baffin Island expedition, Boas wrote \"The Principles of Ethnological Classification\", in which he developed this argument in application to anthropology:\nThis formulation echoes Ratzel's focus on historical processes of human migration and culture contact and Bastian's rejection of environmental determinism. It also emphasizes culture as a context (\"surroundings\"), and the importance of history. These are the hallmarks of Boasian anthropology (which Marvin Harris would later call \"historical particularism\"), would guide Boas's research over the next decade, as well as his instructions to future students. (See Lewis 2001b for an alternative view to Harris'.)\nAlthough context and history were essential elements to Boas's understanding of anthropology as \"Geisteswissenschaften\" and \"Geschichtswissenschaften\", there is one essential element that Boasian anthropology shares with \"Naturwissenschaften\": empiricism. In 1949, Boas's student, Alfred Kroeber summed up the three principles of empiricism that define Boasian anthropology as a science:\nOrthogenetic versus Darwinian evolution.\nOne of the greatest accomplishments of Boas and his students was their critique of theories of physical, social, and cultural evolution current at that time. This critique is central to Boas's work in museums, as well as his work in all four fields of anthropology. As historian George Stocking noted, however, Boas's main project was to distinguish between biological and cultural heredity, and to focus on the cultural processes that he believed had the greatest influence over social life. In fact, Boas supported Darwinian theory, although he did not assume that it automatically applied to cultural and historical phenomena (and indeed was a lifelong opponent of 19th-century theories of cultural evolution, such as those of Lewis H. Morgan and Edward Burnett Tylor). The notion of evolution that the Boasians ridiculed and rejected was the then dominant belief in orthogenesis\u2014a determinate or teleological process of evolution in which change occurs progressively regardless of natural selection. Boas rejected the prevalent theories of social evolution developed by Edward Burnett Tylor, Lewis Henry Morgan, and Herbert Spencer not because he rejected the notion of \"evolution\" per se, but because he rejected orthogenetic notions of evolution in favor of Darwinian evolution.\nThe difference between these prevailing theories of cultural evolution and Darwinian theory cannot be overstated: the orthogeneticists argued that all societies progress through the same stages in the same sequence. Thus, although the Inuit with whom Boas worked at Baffin Island, and the Germans with whom he studied as a graduate student, were contemporaries of one another, evolutionists argued that the Inuit were at an earlier stage in their evolution, and Germans at a later stage. \nBoasians argued that virtually every claim made by cultural evolutionists was contradicted by the data, or reflected a profound misinterpretation of the data. As Boas's student Robert Lowie remarked, \"Contrary to some misleading statements on the subject, there have been no responsible opponents of evolution as 'scientifically proved', though there has been determined hostility to an evolutionary metaphysics that falsifies the established facts\". In an unpublished lecture, Boas characterized his debt to Darwin thus:\nAlthough the idea does not appear quite definitely expressed in Darwin's discussion of the development of mental powers, it seems quite clear that his main object has been to express his conviction that the mental faculties developed essentially without a purposive end, but they originated as variations, and were continued by natural selection. This idea was also brought out very clearly by Wallace, who emphasized that apparently reasonable activities of man might very well have developed without an actual application of reasoning.\nThus, Boas suggested that what appear to be patterns or structures in a culture were not a product of conscious design, but rather the outcome of diverse mechanisms that produce cultural variation (such as diffusion and independent invention), shaped by the social environment in which people live and act. Boas concluded his lecture by acknowledging the importance of Darwin's work: \"I hope I may have succeeded in presenting to you, however imperfectly, the currents of thought due to the work of the immortal Darwin which have helped to make anthropology what it is at the present time.\"\nEarly career: museum studies.\nIn the late 19th century anthropology in the United States was dominated by the Bureau of American Ethnology, directed by John Wesley Powell, a geologist who favored Lewis Henry Morgan's theory of cultural evolution. The BAE was housed at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, and the Smithsonian's curator for ethnology, Otis T. Mason, shared Powell's commitment to cultural evolution. (The Peabody Museum at Harvard University was an important, though lesser, center of anthropological research.)\nIt was while working on museum collections and exhibitions that Boas formulated his basic approach to culture, which led him to break with museums and seek to establish anthropology as an academic discipline.\nDuring this period Boas made five more trips to the Pacific Northwest. His continuing field research led him to think of culture as a local context for human action. His emphasis on local context and history led him to oppose the dominant model at the time, cultural evolution.\nBoas initially broke with evolutionary theory over the issue of kinship. Lewis Henry Morgan had argued that all human societies move from an initial form of matrilineal organization to patrilineal organization. First Nations groups on the northern coast of British Columbia, like the Tsimshian, and Tlingit, were organized into matrilineal clans. First Nations on the southern coast, like the Nootka and the Salish, however, were organized into patrilineal groups. Boas focused on the Kwakiutl, who lived between the two clusters. The Kwakiutl seemed to have a mix of features. Prior to marriage, a man would assume his wife's father's name and crest. His children took on these names and crests as well, although his sons would lose them when they got married. Names and crests thus stayed in the mother's line. At first, Boas\u2014like Morgan before him\u2014suggested that the Kwakiutl had been matrilineal like their neighbors to the north, but that they were beginning to evolve patrilineal groups. In 1897, however, he repudiated himself, and argued that the Kwakiutl were changing from a prior patrilineal organization to a matrilineal one, as they learned about matrilineal principles from their northern neighbors.\nBoas's rejection of Morgan's theories led him, in an 1887 article, to challenge Mason's principles of museum display. At stake, however, were more basic issues of causality and classification. The evolutionary approach to material culture led museum curators to organize objects on display according to function or level of technological development. Curators assumed that changes in the forms of artifacts reflect some natural process of progressive evolution. Boas, however, felt that the form an artifact took reflected the circumstances under which it was produced and used. Arguing that \"[t]hough like causes have like effects like effects have not like causes\", Boas realized that even artifacts that were similar in form might have developed in very different contexts, for different reasons. Mason's museum displays, organized along evolutionary lines, mistakenly juxtapose like effects; those organized along contextual lines would reveal like causes.\nMinik Wallace.\nIn his capacity as Assistant Curator at the American Museum of Natural History, Franz Boas requested that Arctic explorer Robert E. Peary bring one Inuk from Greenland to New York. Peary obliged and brought six Inuit to New York in 1897 who lived in the basement of the American Museum of Natural History. Four of them died from tuberculosis within a year of arriving in New York, one returned to Greenland, and a young boy, Minik Wallace, remained living in the museum. Boas staged a funeral for the father of the boy and had the remains dissected and placed in the museum. Boas has been widely critiqued for his role in bringing the Inuit to New York and his disinterest in them once they had served their purpose at the museum.\nLater career: academic anthropology.\nBoas was appointed a lecturer in physical anthropology at Columbia University in 1896, and promoted to professor of anthropology in 1899. However, the various anthropologists teaching at Columbia had been assigned to different departments. When Boas left the Museum of Natural History, he negotiated with Columbia University to consolidate the various professors into one department, of which Boas would take charge. Boas's program at Columbia was the first Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) program in anthropology in America.\nDuring this time Boas played a key role in organizing the American Anthropological Association (AAA) as an umbrella organization for the emerging field. Boas originally wanted the AAA to be limited to professional anthropologists, but William John McGee (another geologist who had joined the BAE under Powell's leadership) argued that the organization should have an open membership. McGee's position prevailed and he was elected the organization's first president in 1902; Boas was elected a vice-president, along with Putnam, Powell, and Holmes.\nAt both Columbia and the AAA, Boas encouraged the \"four-field\" concept of anthropology; he personally contributed to physical anthropology, linguistics, archaeology, as well as cultural anthropology. His work in these fields was pioneering: in physical anthropology he led scholars away from static taxonomical classifications of race, to an emphasis on human biology and evolution; in linguistics he broke through the limitations of classic philology and established some of the central problems in modern linguistics and cognitive anthropology; in cultural anthropology he (along with the Polish-English anthropologist Bronis\u0142aw Malinowski) established the contextualist approach to culture, cultural relativism, and the participant observation method of fieldwork.\nThe four-field approach understood not merely as bringing together different kinds of anthropologists into one department, but as reconceiving anthropology through the integration of different objects of anthropological research into one overarching object, was one of Boas's fundamental contributions to the discipline, and came to characterize American anthropology against that of\nEngland, France, or Germany. This approach defines as its object the human species as a totality. This focus did not lead Boas to seek to reduce all forms of humanity and human activity to some lowest common denominator; rather, he understood the essence of the human species to be the tremendous variation in human form and activity (an approach that parallels Charles Darwin's approach to species in general).\nIn his 1907 essay, \"Anthropology\", Boas identified two basic questions for anthropologists: \"Why are the tribes and nations of the world different, and how have the present differences developed?\" Amplifying these questions, he explained the object of anthropological study thus:\nWe do not discuss the anatomical, physiological, and mental characteristics of a man considered as an individual; but we are interested in the diversity of these traits in groups of men found in different geographical areas and in different social classes. It is our task to inquire into the causes that have brought about the observed differentiation and to investigate the sequence of events that have led to the establishment of the multifarious forms of human life. In other words, we are interested in the anatomical and mental characteristics of men living under the same biological, geographical, and social environment, and as determined by their past.\nThese questions signal a marked break from then-current ideas about human diversity, which assumed that some people have a history, evident in a historical (or written) record, while other people, lacking writing, also lack history. For some, this distinction between two different kinds of societies explained the difference between history, sociology, economics and other disciplines that focus on people with writing, and anthropology, which was supposed to focus on people without writing. Boas rejected this distinction between kinds of societies, and this division of labor in the academy. He understood all societies to have a history, and all societies to be proper objects of the anthropological society. In order to approach literate and non-literate societies the same way, he emphasized the importance of studying human history through the analysis of other things besides written texts. Thus, in his 1904 article, \"The History of Anthropology\", Boas wrote that\nThe historical development of the work of anthropologists seems to single out clearly a domain of knowledge that heretofore has not been treated by any other science. It is the biological history of mankind in all its varieties; linguistics applied to people without written languages; the ethnology of people without historical records; and prehistoric archeology.\nHistorians and social theorists in the 18th and 19th centuries had speculated as to the causes of this differentiation, but Boas dismissed these theories, especially the dominant theories of social evolution and cultural evolution as speculative. He endeavored to establish a discipline that would base its claims on a rigorous empirical study.\nOne of Boas's most important books, \"The Mind of Primitive Man\" (1911), integrated his theories concerning the history and development of cultures and established a program that would dominate American anthropology for the next fifteen years. In this study, he established that in any given population, biology, language, material, and symbolic culture, are autonomous; that each is an equally important dimension of human nature, but that no one of these dimensions is reducible to another. In other words, he established that culture does not depend on any independent variables. He emphasized that the biological, linguistic, and cultural traits of any group of people are the product of historical developments involving both cultural and non-cultural forces. He established that cultural plurality is a fundamental feature of humankind and that the specific cultural environment structures much individual behavior.\nBoas also presented himself as a role model for the citizen-scientist, who understand that even were the truth pursued as its own end, all knowledge has moral consequences. \"The Mind of Primitive Man\" ends with an appeal to humanism:\nI hope the discussions outlined in these pages have shown that the data of anthropology teach us a greater tolerance of forms of civilization different from our own, that we should learn to look on foreign races with greater sympathy and with a conviction that, as all races have contributed in the past to cultural progress in one way or another, so they will be capable of advancing the interests of mankind if we are only willing to give them a fair opportunity.\nPhysical anthropology.\nBoas's work in physical anthropology brought together his interest in Darwinian evolution with his interest in migration as a cause of change. His most important research in this field was his study of changes in the body from among children of immigrants in New York. Other researchers had already noted differences in height, cranial measurements, and other physical features between Americans and people from different parts of Europe. Many used these differences to argue that there is an innate biological difference between races. Boas's primary interest\u2014in symbolic and material culture and in language\u2014was the study of processes of change; he, therefore, set out to determine whether bodily forms are also subject to processes of change. Boas studied 17,821 people, divided into seven ethno-national groups. Boas found that average measures of the cranial size of immigrants were significantly different from members of these groups who were born in the United States. Moreover, he discovered that average measures of the cranial size of children born within ten years of their mothers' arrival were significantly different from those of children born more than ten years after their mothers' arrival. Boas did not deny that physical features such as height or cranial size were inherited; he did, however, argue that the environment has an influence on these features, which is expressed through change over time. This work was central to his influential argument that differences between races were not immutable. Boas observed:\nThe head form, which has always been one of the most stable and permanent characteristics of human races, undergoes far-reaching changes due to the transfer of European races to American soil. The East European Hebrew, who has a round head, becomes more long-headed; the South Italian, who in Italy has an exceedingly long head, becomes more short-headed; so that both approach a uniform type in this country, so far as the head is concerned.\nThese findings were radical at the time and continue to be debated. In 2002, the anthropologists Corey\u00a0S.\u00a0Sparks and Richard\u00a0L.\u00a0Jantz claimed that differences between children born to the same parents in Europe and America were very small and insignificant and that there was no detectable effect of exposure to the American environment on the cranial index in children. They argued that their results contradicted Boas's original findings and demonstrated that they may no longer be used to support arguments of plasticity in cranial morphology. However, Jonathan Marks\u2014a well-known physical anthropologist and former president of the General Anthropology section of the American Anthropological Association\u2014has remarked that this revisionist study of Boas's work \"has the ring of desperation to it (if not obfuscation), and has been quickly rebutted by more mainstream biological anthropology\". In 2003 anthropologists Clarence C. Gravlee, H. Russell Bernard, and William R. Leonard reanalyzed Boas's data and concluded that most of Boas's original findings were correct. Moreover, they applied new statistical, computer-assisted methods to Boas's data and discovered more evidence for cranial plasticity. In a later publication, Gravlee, Bernard and Leonard reviewed Sparks and Jantz's analysis. They argue that Sparks and Jantz misrepresented Boas's claims and that Sparks's and Jantz's data actually support Boas. For example, they point out that Sparks and Jantz look at changes in cranial size in relation to how long an individual has been in the United States in order to test the influence of the environment. Boas, however, looked at changes in cranial size in relation to how long the mother had been in the United States. They argue that Boas's method is more useful because the prenatal environment is a crucial developmental factor.\nA further publication by Jantz based on Gravlee et al. claims that Boas had cherry picked two groups of immigrants (Sicilians and Hebrews) which had varied most towards the same mean, and discarded other groups which had varied in the opposite direction. He commented, \"Using the recent reanalysis by Gravlee et al. (2003), we can observe in Figure 2 that the maximum difference in the cranial index due to immigration (in Hebrews) is much smaller than the maximum ethnic difference, between Sicilians and Bohemians. It shows that long-headed parents produce long headed offspring and vice versa. To make the argument that children of immigrants converge onto an \"American type\" required Boas to use the two groups that changed the most.\"\nAlthough some sociobiologists and evolutionary psychologists have suggested that Boas was opposed to Darwinian evolution, Boas, in fact, was a committed proponent of Darwinian evolutionary thought. In 1888, he declared that \"the development of ethnology is largely due to the general recognition of the principle of biological evolution\"; since Boas's times, physical anthropologists have established that the human capacity for culture is a product of human evolution. In fact, Boas's research on changes in body form played an important role in the rise of Darwinian theory. Boas was trained at a time when biologists had no understanding of genetics; Mendelian genetics became widely known only after 1900. Prior to that time biologists relied on the measurement of physical traits as empirical data for any theory of evolution. Boas's biometric studies, however, led him to question the use of this method and kind of data. In a speech to anthropologists in Berlin in 1912, Boas argued that at best such statistics could only raise biological questions, and not answer them. It was in this context that anthropologists began turning to genetics as a basis for any understanding of biological variation.\nLinguistics.\nBoas also contributed greatly to the foundation of linguistics as a science in the United States. He published many descriptive studies of Native American languages, and wrote on theoretical difficulties in classifying languages, and laid out a research program for studying the relations between language and culture which his students such as Edward Sapir, Paul Rivet, and Alfred Kroeber followed.\nHis 1889 article \"On Alternating Sounds\", however, made a singular contribution to the methodology of both linguistics and cultural anthropology. It is a response to a paper presented in 1888 by Daniel Garrison Brinton, at the time a professor of American linguistics and archeology at the University of Pennsylvania. Brinton observed that in the spoken languages of many Native Americans, certain sounds regularly alternated. Brinton argued that this pervasive inconsistency was a sign of linguistic and evolutionary inferiority.\nBoas had heard similar phonetic shifts during his research in Baffin Island and in the Pacific Northwest. Nevertheless, he argued that \"alternating sounds\" is not at all a feature of Native American languages\u2014indeed, he argued, they do not really exist. Rather than take alternating sounds as objective proof of different stages in cultural evolution, Boas considered them in terms of his longstanding interest in the subjective perception of objective physical phenomena. He also considered his earlier critique of evolutionary museum displays. There, he pointed out that two things (artifacts of material culture) that appear to be similar may, in fact, be quite different. In this article, he raises the possibility that two things (sounds) that appear to be different may, in fact, be the same.\nIn short, he shifted attention to the \"perception\" of different sounds. Boas begins by raising an empirical question: when people describe one sound in different ways, is it because they cannot perceive the difference, or might there be another reason? He immediately establishes that he is not concerned with cases involving perceptual deficit\u2014the aural equivalent of color-blindness. He points out that the question of people who describe one sound in different ways is comparable to that of people who describe different sounds in one way. This is crucial for research in descriptive linguistics: when studying a new language, how are we to note the pronunciation of different words? (in this point, Boas anticipates and lays the groundwork for the distinction between phonemics and phonetics.) People may pronounce a word in a variety of ways and still recognize that they are using the same word. The issue, then, is not \"that such sensations are not recognized in their individuality\" (in other words, people recognize differences in pronunciations); rather, it is that sounds \"are classified according to their similarity\" (in other words, that people classify a variety of perceived sounds into one category). A comparable visual example would involve words for colors. The English word \"green\" can be used to refer to a variety of shades, hues, and tints. But there are some languages that have no word for \"green\". In such cases, people might classify what we would call \"green\" as either \"yellow\" or \"blue\". This is not an example of color-blindness\u2014people can perceive differences in color, but they categorize similar colors in a different way than English speakers.\nBoas applied these principles to his studies of Inuit languages. Researchers have reported a variety of spellings for a given word. In the past, researchers have interpreted this data in a number of ways\u2014it could indicate local variations in the pronunciation of a word, or it could indicate different dialects. Boas argues an alternative explanation: that the difference is not in how Inuit pronounce the word, but rather in how English-speaking scholars perceive the pronunciation of the word. It is not that English speakers are physically incapable of perceiving the sound in question; rather, the phonetic system of English cannot accommodate the perceived sound.\nAlthough Boas was making a very specific contribution to the methods of descriptive linguistics, his ultimate point is far reaching: observer bias need not be personal, it can be cultural. In other words, the perceptual categories of Western researchers may systematically cause a Westerner to misperceive or to fail to perceive entirely a meaningful element in another culture. As in his critique of Otis Mason's museum displays, Boas demonstrated that what appeared to be evidence of cultural evolution was really the consequence of unscientific methods and a reflection of Westerners' beliefs about their own cultural superiority. This point provides the methodological foundation for Boas's cultural relativism: elements of a culture are meaningful in that culture's terms, even if they may be meaningless (or take on a radically different meaning) in another culture.\nCultural anthropology.\nThe essence of Boas's approach to ethnography is found in his early essay on \"The Study of Geography\". There he argued for an approach that\nThis orientation led Boas to promote a cultural anthropology characterized by a strong commitment to\nBoas argued that in order to understand \"what is\"\u2014in cultural anthropology, the specific cultural traits (behaviors, beliefs, and symbols)\u2014one had to examine them in their local context. He also understood that as people migrate from one place to another, and as the cultural context changes over time, the elements of a culture, and their meanings, will change, which led him to emphasize the importance of local histories for an analysis of cultures.\nAlthough other anthropologists at the time, such as Bronis\u0142aw Malinowski and Alfred Reginald Radcliffe-Brown focused on the study of societies, which they understood to be clearly bounded, Boas's attention to history, which reveals the extent to which traits diffuse from one place to another, led him to view cultural boundaries as multiple and overlapping, and as highly permeable. Thus, Boas's student Robert Lowie once described culture as a thing of \"shreds and patches\". Boas and his students understood that as people try to make sense of their world they seek to integrate its disparate elements, with the result that different cultures could be characterized as having different configurations or patterns. But Boasians also understood that such integration was always in tensions with diffusion, and any appearance of a stable configuration is contingent (see Bashkow 2004: 445).\nDuring Boas's lifetime, as today, many Westerners saw a fundamental difference between modern societies, which are characterized by dynamism and individualism, and traditional societies which are stable and homogeneous. Boas's empirical field research, however, led him to argue against this comparison. For example, his 1903 essay, \"Decorative Designs of Alaskan Needlecases: A History of Conventional Designs, Based on Materials in a U.S. Museum\", provides another example of how Boas made broad theoretical claims based on a detailed analysis of empirical data. After establishing formal similarities among the needlecases, Boas shows how certain formal features provide a vocabulary out of which individual artisans could create variations in design. Thus, his emphasis on culture as a context for meaningful action made him sensitive to individual variation within a society (William Henry Holmes suggested a similar point in an 1886 paper, \"Origin and development of form and ornament in ceramic art\", although unlike Boas he did not develop the ethnographic and theoretical implications).\nIn a programmatic essay in 1920, \"The Methods of Ethnology\", Boas argued that instead of \"the systematic enumeration of standardized beliefs and customs of a tribe\", anthropology needs to document \"the way in which the individual reacts to his whole social environment, and to the difference of opinion and of mode of action that occur in primitive society and which are the causes of far-reaching changes\". Boas argued that attention to individual agency reveals that \"the activities of the individual are determined to a great extent by his social environment, but in turn, his own activities influence the society in which he lives and may bring about modifications in a form\". Consequently, Boas thought of culture as fundamentally dynamic: \"As soon as these methods are applied, primitive society loses the appearance of absolute stability ... All cultural forms rather appear in a constant state of flux ...\" (see Lewis 2001b)\nHaving argued against the relevance of the distinction between literate and non-literate societies as a way of defining anthropology's object of study, Boas argued that non-literate and literate societies should be analyzed in the same way. Nineteenth-century historians had been applying the techniques of philology to reconstruct the histories of, and relationships between, literate societies. In order to apply these methods to non-literate societies, Boas argued that the task of fieldworkers is to produce and collect texts in non-literate societies. This took the form not only of compiling lexicons and grammars of the local language, but of recording myths, folktales, beliefs about social relationships and institutions, and even recipes for local cuisine. In order to do this, Boas relied heavily on the collaboration of literate native ethnographers (among the Kwakiutl, most often George Hunt), and he urged his students to consider such people valuable partners, inferior in their standing in Western society, but superior in their understanding of their own culture. (see Bunzl 2004: 438\u2013439)\nUsing these methods, Boas published another article in 1920, in which he revisited his earlier research on Kwakiutl kinship. In the late 1890s, Boas had tried to reconstruct transformation in the organization of Kwakiutl clans, by comparing them to the organization of clans in other societies neighboring the Kwakiutl to the north and south. Now, however, he argued against translating the Kwakiutl principle of kin groups into an English word. Instead of trying to fit the Kwakiutl into some larger model, he tried to understand their beliefs and practices in their own terms. For example, whereas he had earlier translated the Kwakiutl word \"numaym\" as \"clan\", he now argued that the word is best understood as referring to a bundle of privileges, for which there is no English word. Men secured claims to these privileges through their parents or wives, and there were a variety of ways these privileges could be acquired, used, and transmitted from one generation to the next. As in his work on alternating sounds, Boas had come to realize that different ethnological interpretations of Kwakiutl kinship were the result of the limitations of Western categories. As in his work on Alaskan needlecases, he now saw variation among Kwakiutl practices as the result of the play between social norms and individual creativity.\nBefore his death in 1942, he appointed Helen Codere to edit and publish his manuscripts about the culture of the Kwakiutl people.\nFranz Boas and folklore.\nFranz Boas was an immensely influential figure throughout the development of folklore as a discipline. At first glance, it might seem that his only concern was for the discipline of anthropology\u2014after all, he fought for most of his life to keep folklore as a part of anthropology. Yet Boas was motivated by his desire to see both anthropology and folklore become more professional and well-respected. Boas was afraid that if folklore was allowed to become its own discipline the standards for folklore scholarship would be lowered. This, combined with the scholarships of \"amateurs\", would lead folklore to be completely discredited, Boas believed.\nIn order to further professionalize folklore, Boas introduced the strict scientific methods which he learned in college to the discipline. Boas championed the use of exhaustive research, fieldwork, and strict scientific guidelines in folklore scholarship. Boas believed that a true theory could only be formed from thorough research and that even once you had a theory it should be treated as a \"work in progress\" unless it could be proved beyond doubt. This rigid scientific methodology was eventually accepted as one of the major tenets of folklore scholarship, and Boas's methods remain in use even today. Boas also nurtured many budding folklorists during his time as a professor, and some of his students are counted among the most notable minds in folklore scholarship.\nBoas was passionate about the collection of folklore and believed that the similarity of folktales amongst different folk groups was due to dissemination. Boas strove to prove this theory, and his efforts produced a method for breaking a folktale into parts and then analyzing these parts. His creation of \"catch-words\" allowed for categorization of these parts, and the ability to analyze them in relation to other similar tales. Boas also fought to prove that not all cultures progressed along the same path, and that non-European cultures, in particular, were not primitive, but different.\nBoas remained active in the development and scholarship of folklore throughout his life. He became the editor of the \"Journal of American Folklore\" in 1908, regularly wrote and published articles on folklore (often in the \"Journal of American Folklore\"). He helped to elect Louise Pound as president of the American Folklore Society in 1925.\nScientist as activist.\nBoas was known for passionately defending what he believed to be right. During his lifetime (and often through his work), Boas combated racism, berated anthropologists and folklorists who used their work as a cover for espionage, worked to protect German and Austrian scientists who fled the Nazi regime, and openly protested Hitlerism.\nMany social scientists in other disciplines often agonize over the legitimacy of their work as \"science\" and consequently emphasize the importance of detachment, objectivity, abstraction, and quantifiability in their work. Perhaps because Boas, like other early anthropologists, was originally trained in the natural sciences, he and his students never expressed such anxiety. Moreover, he did not believe that detachment, objectivity, and quantifiability was required to make anthropology scientific. Since the object of study of anthropologists is different from the object of study of physicists, he assumed that anthropologists would have to employ different methods and different criteria for evaluating their research. Thus, Boas used statistical studies to demonstrate the extent to which variation in data is context-dependent, and argued that the context-dependent nature of human variation rendered many abstractions and generalizations that had been passing as scientific understandings of humankind (especially theories of social evolution popular at the time) in fact unscientific. His understanding of ethnographic fieldwork began with the fact that the objects of ethnographic study (e.g.,\u00a0 the Inuit of Baffin Island) were not just objects, but subjects, and his research called attention to their creativity and agency. More importantly, he viewed the Inuit as his teachers, thus reversing the typical hierarchical relationship between scientist and object of study.\nThis emphasis on the relationship between anthropologists and those they study\u2014the point that, while astronomers and stars; chemists and elements; botanists and plants are fundamentally different, anthropologists and those they study are equally human\u2014implied that anthropologists themselves could be objects of anthropological study. Although Boas did not pursue this reversal systematically, his article on alternating sounds illustrates his awareness that scientists should not be confident about their objectivity, because they too see the world through the prism of their culture.\nThis emphasis also led Boas to conclude that anthropologists have an obligation to speak out on social issues. Boas was especially concerned with racial inequality, which his research had indicated is not biological in origin, but rather social. Boas is credited as the first scientist to publish the idea that all people\u2014including white and African Americans\u2014are equal. He often emphasized his abhorrence of racism, and used his work to show that there was no scientific basis for such a bias. An early example of this concern is evident in his 1906 commencement address to Atlanta University, at the invitation of W.\u00a0E.\u00a0B. Du\u00a0Bois. Boas began by remarking that \"If you did accept the view that the present weakness of the American Negro, his uncontrollable emotions, his lack of energy, are racially inherent, your work would still be noble one\". He then went on, however, to argue against this view. To the claim that European and Asian civilizations are, at the time, more advanced than African societies, Boas objected that against the total history of humankind, the past two thousand years is but a brief span. Moreover, although the technological advances of our early ancestors (such as taming fire and inventing stone tools) might seem insignificant when compared to the invention of the steam engine or control over electricity, we should consider that they might actually be even greater accomplishments. Boas then went on to catalogue advances in Africa, such as smelting iron, cultivating millet, and domesticating chickens and cattle, that occurred in Africa well before they spread to Europe and Asia (evidence now suggests that chickens were first domesticated in Asia; the original domestication of cattle is under debate). He then described the activities of African kings, diplomats, merchants, and artists as evidence of cultural achievement. From this, he concluded, any social inferiority of Negroes in the United States cannot be explained by their African origins:\nIf therefore, it is claimed that your race is doomed to economic inferiority, you may confidently look to the home of your ancestors and say, that you have set out to recover for the colored people the strength that was their own before they set foot on the shores of this continent. You may say that you go to work with bright hopes and that you will not be discouraged by the slowness of your progress; for you have to recover not only what has been lost in transplanting the Negro race from its native soil to this continent, but you must reach higher levels than your ancestors ever had attained.\nBoas proceeds to discuss the arguments for the inferiority of the \"Negro race\", and calls attention to the fact that they were brought to the Americas through force. For Boas, this is just one example of the many times conquest or colonialism has brought different peoples into an unequal relation, and he mentions \"the conquest of England by the Normans, the Teutonic invasion of Italy, [and] the Manchu conquest of China\" as resulting in similar conditions. But the best example, for Boas, of this phenomenon is that of the Jews in Europe:\nEven now there lingers in the consciousness of the old, sharper divisions which the ages had not been able to efface, and which is strong enough to find\u2014not only here and there\u2014expression as antipathy to the Jewish type. In France, that let down the barriers more than a hundred years ago, the feeling of antipathy is still strong enough to sustain an anti-Jewish political party.\nBoas's closing advice is that African Americans should not look to whites for approval or encouragement because people in power usually take a very long time to learn to sympathize with people out of power. \"Remember that in every single case in history the process of adaptation has been one of exceeding slowness. Do not look for the impossible, but do not let your path deviate from the quiet and steadfast insistence on full opportunities for your powers.\"\nDespite Boas's caveat about the intractability of white prejudice, he also considered it the scientist's responsibility to argue against white myths of racial purity and racial superiority and to use the evidence of his research to fight racism.\nBoas was also critical of one nation imposing its power over others. In 1916, Boas wrote a letter to \"The New York Times\" which was published under the headline, \"Why German-Americans Blame America\". Although Boas did begin the letter by protesting bitter attacks against German Americans at the time of the war in Europe, most of his letter was a critique of American nationalism. \"In my youth, I had been taught in school and at home not only to love the good of my own country, but also to seek to understand and to respect the individualities of other nations. For this reason, one-sided nationalism, that is so often found nowadays, is to be unendurable.\" He writes of his love for American ideals of freedom, and of his growing discomfort with American beliefs about its own superiority over others.\nI have always been of the opinion that we have no right to impose our ideals upon other nations, no matter how strange it may seem to us that they enjoy the kind of life they lead, how slow they may be in utilizing the resources of their countries, or how much opposed their ideas may be to ours\u00a0... Our intolerant attitude is most pronounced in regard to what we like to call \"our free institutions.\" Modern democracy was no doubt the most wholesome and needed reaction against the abuses of absolutism and of a selfish, often corrupt, bureaucracy. That the wishes and thoughts of the people should find expression, and that the form of government should conform to these wishes is an axiom that has pervaded the whole Western world, and that is even taking root in the Far East. It is a quite different question, however, in how far the particular machinery of democratic government is identical with democratic institutions\u00a0... To claim as we often do, that our solution is the only democratic and the ideal one is a one-sided expression of Americanism. I see no reason why we should not allow the Germans, Austrians, and Russians, or whoever else it may be, to solve their problems in their own ways, instead of demanding that they bestow upon themselves the benefactions of our regime.\nAlthough Boas felt that scientists have a responsibility to speak out on social and political problems, he was appalled that they might involve themselves in disingenuous and deceitful ways. Thus, in 1919, when he discovered that four anthropologists, in the course of their research in other countries, were serving as spies for the American government, he wrote an angry letter to \"The Nation\". It is perhaps in this letter that he most clearly expresses his understanding of his commitment to science:\nA soldier whose business is murder as a fine art, a diplomat whose calling is based on deception and secretiveness, a politician whose very life consists in compromises with his conscience, a businessman whose aim is personal profit within the limits allowed by a lenient law\u2014such may be excused if they set patriotic deception above common everyday decency and perform services as spies. They merely accept the code of morality to which modern society still conforms. Not so the scientist. The very essence of his life is the service of truth. We all know scientists who in private life do not come up to the standard of truthfulness, but who, nevertheless, would not consciously falsify the results of their researches. It is bad enough if we have to put up with these because they reveal a lack of strength of character that is liable to distort the results of their work. A person, however, who uses science as a cover for political spying, who demeans himself to pose before a foreign government as an investigator and asks for assistance in his alleged researches in order to carry on, under this cloak, his political machinations, prostitutes science in an unpardonable way and forfeits the right to be classed as a scientist.\nAlthough Boas did not name the spies in question, he was referring to a group led by Sylvanus G. Morley, who was affiliated with Harvard University's Peabody Museum. While conducting research in Mexico, Morley and his colleagues looked for evidence of German submarine bases, and collected intelligence on Mexican political figures and German immigrants in Mexico.\nBoas's stance against spying took place in the context of his struggle to establish a new model for academic anthropology at Columbia University. Previously, American anthropology was based at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington and the Peabody Museum at Harvard, and these anthropologists competed with Boas's students for control over the American Anthropological Association (and its flagship publication \"American Anthropologist\"). When the National Academy of Sciences established the National Research Council in 1916 as a means by which scientists could assist the United States government to prepare for entry into the war in Europe, competition between the two groups intensified. Boas's rival, W.\u00a0 H. Holmes (who had gotten the job of Director at the Field Museum for which Boas had been passed over 26 years earlier), was appointed to head the NRC; Morley was a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Holmes.\nWhen Boas's letter was published, Holmes wrote to a friend complaining about \"the Prussian control of anthropology in this country\" and the need to end Boas's \"Hun regime\". Opinion was influenced by anti-German and probably also by anti-Jewish sentiment. The Anthropological Society of Washington passed a resolution condemning Boas's letter for unjustly criticizing President Wilson; attacking the principles of American democracy; and endangering anthropologists abroad, who would now be suspected of being spies (a charge that was especially insulting, given that his concerns about this very issue were what had prompted Boas to write his letter in the first place). This resolution was passed on to the American Anthropological Association\u00a0(AAA) and the National Research Council. Members of the American Anthropological Association (among whom Boas was a founding member in 1902), meeting at the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology at Harvard (with which Morley, Lothrop, and Spinden were affiliated), voted by 20 to 10 to censure Boas. As a result, Boas resigned as the AAA's representative to the NRC, although he remained an active member of the AAA. The AAA's censure of Boas was not rescinded until 2005.\nBoas continued to speak out against racism and for intellectual freedom. When the Nazi Party in Germany denounced \"Jewish Science\" (which included not only Boasian Anthropology but Freudian psychoanalysis and Einsteinian physics), Boas responded with a public statement signed by over 8,000 other scientists, declaring that there is only one science, to which race and religion are irrelevant. After World War\u00a0I, Boas created the Emergency Society for German and Austrian Science. This organization was originally dedicated to fostering friendly relations between American and German and Austrian scientists and for providing research funding to German scientists who had been adversely affected by the war, and to help scientists who had been interned. With the rise of Nazi Germany, Boas assisted German scientists in fleeing the Nazi regime. Boas helped these scientists not only to escape but to secure positions once they arrived. Additionally, Boas addressed an open letter to Paul von Hindenburg in protest against Hitlerism. He also wrote an article in \"The American Mercury\" arguing that there were no differences between Aryans and non-Aryans and the German government should not base its policies on such a false premise.\nBoas, and his students such as Melville J. Herskovits, opposed the racist pseudoscience developed at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute of Anthropology, Human Heredity, and Eugenics under its director Eugen Fischer: \"Melville J. Herskovits (one of Franz Boas's students) pointed out that the health problems and social prejudices encountered by these children (Rhineland Bastards) and their parents explained what Germans viewed as racial inferiority was not due to racial heredity. This \"... provoked polemic invective against the latter [Boas] from Fischer. \"The views of Mr.\u00a0 Boas are in part quite ingenious, but in the field of heredity Mr.\u00a0Boas is by no means competent\" even though \"a great number of research projects at the KWI-A which had picked up on Boas' studies about immigrants in New York had confirmed his findings\u2014including the study by Walter Dornfeldt about Eastern European Jews in Berlin. Fischer resorted to polemic simply because he had no arguments to counter the Boasians' critique.\"\nStudents and influence.\nFranz Boas died suddenly at the Columbia University Faculty Club on December\u00a021, 1942, in the arms of Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss. By that time he had become one of the most influential and respected scientists of his generation.\nBetween 1901 and 1911, Columbia University produced seven PhDs in anthropology. Although by today's standards this is a very small number, at the time it was sufficient to establish Boas's Anthropology Department at Columbia as the preeminent anthropology program in the country. Moreover, many of Boas's students went on to establish anthropology programs at other major universities.\nBoas's first doctoral student at Columbia was Alfred L. Kroeber (1901), who, along with fellow Boas student Robert Lowie (1908), started the anthropology program at the University of California, Berkeley. He also trained William Jones (1904), one of the first Native American Indian anthropologists (the Fox nation) who was killed while conducting research in the Philippines in 1909, and Albert B. Lewis (1907). Boas also trained a number of other students who were influential in the development of academic anthropology: Frank Speck (1908) who trained with Boas but received his PhD from the University of Pennsylvania and immediately proceeded to found the anthropology department there; Edward Sapir (1909) and Fay-Cooper Cole (1914) who developed the anthropology program at the University of Chicago; Alexander Goldenweiser (1910), who, with Elsie Clews Parsons (who received her doctorate in sociology from Columbia in 1899, but then studied ethnology with Boas), started the anthropology program at the New School for Social Research; Leslie Spier (1920) who started the anthropology program at the University of Washington together with his wife Erna Gunther, also one of Boas's students, and Melville Herskovits (1923) who started the anthropology program at Northwestern University. He also trained John R. Swanton (who studied with Boas at Columbia for two years before receiving his doctorate from Harvard in 1900), Paul Radin (1911), Ruth Benedict (1923), Gladys Reichard (1925) who had begun teaching at Barnard College in 1921 and was later promoted to the rank of professor, Ruth Bunzel (1929), Alexander Lesser (1929), Margaret Mead (1929), and Gene Weltfish (who defended her dissertation in 1929, although she did not officially graduate until 1950 when Columbia reduced the expenses required to graduate), E. Adamson Hoebel (1934), Jules Henry (1935), George Herzog (1938),and Ashley Montagu (1938).\nHis students at Columbia also included Mexican anthropologist Manuel Gamio, who earned his Master of Arts degree after studying with Boas from 1909 to 1911, and became the founding director of Mexico's Bureau of Anthropology in 1917; Clark Wissler, who received his doctorate in psychology from Columbia University in 1901, but proceeded to study anthropology with Boas before turning to research Native Americans; Esther Schiff, later Goldfrank, worked with Boas in the summers of 1920 to 1922 to conduct research among the Cochiti and Laguna Pueblo Indians in New Mexico; Gilberto Freyre, who shaped the concept of \"racial democracy\" in Brazil; Viola Garfield, who carried forth Boas's Tsimshian work; Frederica de Laguna, who worked on the Inuit and the Tlingit; and anthropologist, folklorist and novelist Zora Neale Hurston, who graduated from Barnard College, the women's college associated with Columbia, in 1928, and who studied African American and Afro-Caribbean folklore.\nBoas and his students were also an influence on Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss, who interacted with Boas and the Boasians during his stay in New York in the 1940s.\nSeveral of Boas's students went on to serve as editors of the American Anthropological Association's flagship journal, \"American Anthropologist\": John R. Swanton (1911, 1921\u20131923), Robert Lowie (1924\u20131933), Leslie Spier (1934\u20131938), and Melville Herskovits (1950\u20131952). Edward Sapir's student John Alden Mason was editor from 1945 to 1949, and Alfred Kroeber and Robert Lowie's student, Walter Goldschmidt, was editor from 1956 to 1959.\nMost of Boas's students shared his concern for careful, historical reconstruction, and his antipathy towards speculative, evolutionary models. Moreover, Boas encouraged his students, by example, to criticize themselves as much as others. For example, Boas originally defended the cephalic index (systematic variations in head form) as a method for describing hereditary traits, but came to reject his earlier research after further study; he similarly came to criticize his own early work in Kwakiutl (Pacific Northwest) language and mythology.\nEncouraged by this drive to self-criticism, as well as the Boasian commitment to learn from one's informants and to let the findings of one's research shape one's agenda, Boas's students quickly diverged from his own research agenda. Several of his students soon attempted to develop theories of the grand sort that Boas typically rejected. Kroeber called his colleagues' attention to Sigmund Freud and the potential of a union between cultural anthropology and psychoanalysis. Ruth Benedict developed theories of \"culture and personality\" and \"national cultures\", and Kroeber's student, Julian Steward developed theories of \"cultural ecology\" and \"multilineal evolution\".\nLegacy.\nNevertheless, Boas has had an enduring influence on anthropology. Virtually all anthropologists today accept Boas's commitment to empiricism and his methodological cultural relativism. Moreover, virtually all cultural anthropologists today share Boas's commitment to field research involving extended residence, learning the local language, and developing social relationships with informants. Finally, anthropologists continue to honor his critique of racial ideologies. In his 1963 book, \"Race: The History of an Idea in America\", Thomas Gossett wrote that \"It is possible that Boas did more to combat race prejudice than any other person in history.\""}
{"id": "11699", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11699", "title": "Franz Bopp", "text": "Franz Bopp (; 14 September 1791\u00a0\u2013 23 October 1867) was a German linguist known for extensive and pioneering comparative work on Indo-European languages.\nEarly life.\nBopp was born in Mainz, but the political disarray in the Republic of Mainz caused his parents' move to Aschaffenburg, the second seat of the Archbishop of Mainz. There he received a liberal education at the Lyceum and Karl Joseph Hieronymus Windischmann drew his attention to the languages and literature of the East. (Windischmann, along with Georg Friedrich Creuzer, Joseph G\u00f6rres, and the brothers Schlegel, expressed great enthusiasm for Indian wisdom and philosophy.) Moreover, Karl Wilhelm Friedrich von Schlegel's book, \"\u00dcber die Sprache und Weisheit der Indier\" (\"On the Speech and Wisdom of the Indians\", Heidelberg, 1808), had just begun to exert a powerful influence on the minds of German philosophers and historians, and stimulated Bopp's interest in the sacred language of the Hindus.\nCareer.\nIn 1812, he went to Paris at the expense of the Bavarian government, with a view to devoting himself vigorously to the study of Sanskrit. There he enjoyed the society of such eminent men as Antoine-L\u00e9onard de Ch\u00e9zy (his primary instructor), Silvestre de Sacy, Louis Mathieu Langl\u00e8s, and, above all Alexander Hamilton (1762\u20131824), cousin of the American statesman of the same name , who had acquired an acquaintance with Sanskrit when in India and had brought out, along with Langl\u00e8s, a descriptive catalogue of the Sanskrit manuscripts of the Imperial Library.\nIn the library, Bopp had access not only to the rich collection of Sanskrit manuscripts (mostly brought from India by Jean Fran\u00e7ois Pons in the early 18th century), but also to the Sanskrit books that had been issued from the Calcutta and Serampore presses. He spent five years of laborious study, almost living in the libraries of Paris and unmoved by the turmoils that agitated the world around him, including Napoleon's escape, the Waterloo campaign and the Restoration.\nThe first paper from his years of study in Paris appeared in Frankfurt am Main in 1816, under the title of \"\u00dcber das Konjugationssystem der Sanskritsprache in Vergleichung mit jenem der griechischen, lateinischen, persischen und germanischen Sprache (On the Conjugation System of Sanskrit in comparison with that of Greek, Latin, Persian and Germanic)\", to which Windischmann contributed a preface. In this first book, Bopp entered at once the path on which he would focus the philological researches of his whole subsequent life. His task was not to point out the similarity of Sanskrit with Persian, Greek, Latin or German, for previous scholars had long established that, but he aimed to trace the postulated common origin of the languages' grammatical forms, of their inflections from composition. This was something no predecessor had attempted. By a historical analysis of those forms, as applied to the verb, he furnished the first trustworthy materials for a history of the languages compared.\nAfter a brief sojourn in Germany, Bopp travelled to London where he made the acquaintance of Sir Charles Wilkins and Henry Thomas Colebrooke. He also became friends with Wilhelm von Humboldt, the Prussian ambassador at the Court of St. James's, to whom he taught Sanskrit. He brought out, in the \"Annals of Oriental Literature\" (London, 1820), an essay entitled \"Analytical Comparison of the Sanskrit, Greek, Latin and Teutonic Languages\" in which he extended to all parts of grammar what he had done in his first book for the verb alone. He had previously published a critical edition, with a Latin translation and notes, of the story of Nala and Damayanti (London, 1819), the most beautiful episode of the \"Mahabharata\". Other episodes of the \"Mahabharata\", \"Indralok\u00e2gama\", and three others (Berlin, 1824); \"Diluvium\", and three others (Berlin, 1829); a new edition of Nala (Berlin, 1832) followed in due course, all of which, with August Wilhelm von Schlegel's edition of the \"Bhagavad Gita\" (1823), proved excellent aids in initiating the early student into the reading of Sanskrit texts. On the publication, in Calcutta, of the whole \"Mahabharata\", Bopp discontinued editing Sanskrit texts and confined himself thenceforth exclusively to grammatical investigations.\nAfter a short residence at G\u00f6ttingen, Bopp gained, on the recommendation of Humboldt, appointment to the chair of Sanskrit and comparative grammar at the University of Berlin in 1821, which he occupied for the rest of his life. He also became a member of the Royal Prussian Academy the following year.\nIn 1827, he published his \"Ausf\u00fchrliches Lehrgeb\u00e4ude der Sanskritsprache\" (\"Detailed System of the Sanskrit Language\"), on which he had worked since 1821. Bopp started work on a new edition in Latin, for the following year, completed in 1832; a shorter grammar appeared in 1834. At the same time he compiled a \"Sanskrit and Latin Glossary\" (1830), in which, more especially in the second and third editions (1847 and 1868\u201371), he also took account of the cognate languages. His chief activity, however, centered on the elaboration of his \"Comparative Grammar\", which appeared in six parts at considerable intervals (Berlin, 1833, 1835, 1842, 1847, 1849, 1852), under the title \"Vergleichende Grammatik des Sanskrit, Zend, Griechischen, Lateinischen, Litthauischen, Altslawischen, Gotischen und Deutschen\" (\"Comparative Grammar of Sanskrit, Zend [Avestan], Greek, Latin, Lithuanian, Old Slavonic, Gothic and German\").\nHow carefully Bopp matured this work emerges from the series of monographs printed in the \"Transactions of the Berlin Academy\" (1824\u20131831), which preceded it. They bear the general title \"Vergleichende Zergliederung des Sanskrits und der mit ihm verwandten Sprachen (Comparative Analysis of Sanskrit and its related Languages)\". Two other essays (on the \"Numerals\", 1835) followed the publication of the first part of the \"Comparative Grammar\". Old Slavonian began to take its stand among the languages compared from the second part onwards. E. B. Eastwick translated the work into English in 1845. A second German edition, thoroughly revised (1856\u20131861), also covered Old Armenian.\nIn his \"Comparative Grammar\" Bopp set himself a threefold task:\nThe first and second points remained dependent upon the third. As Bopp based his research on the best available sources and incorporated every new item of information that came to light, his work continued to widen and deepen in the making, as can be witnessed from his monographs on the vowel system in the Teutonic languages (1836), on the Celtic languages (1839), on the Old Prussian (1853) and Albanian languages (\"\u00dcber das Albanesische in seinen verwandtschaftlichen Beziehungen\", Vienna, 1854), on the accent in Sanskrit and Greek (1854), on the relationship of the Malayo-Polynesian to the Indo-European languages (1840), and on the Caucasian languages (1846). In the last two, the impetus of his genius led him on a wrong track. He is the first philologist to prove Albanian as a separate branch of Indo-European. Bopp was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1855 and an international member of the American Philosophical Society in 1863. \nCriticism.\nCritics have charged Bopp with neglecting the study of the native Sanskrit grammars, but in those early days of Sanskrit studies, the great libraries of Europe did not hold the requisite materials; if they had, those materials would have demanded his full attention for years, and such grammars as those of Charles Wilkins and Henry Thomas Colebrooke, from which Bopp derived his grammatical knowledge, had all used native grammars as a basis. The further charge that Bopp, in his \"Comparative Grammar\", gave undue prominence to Sanskrit is disproved by his own words; for, as early as 1820, he gave it as his opinion that frequently, the cognate languages serve to elucidate grammatical forms lost in Sanskrit (\"Annals of Or. Lit.\" i. 3), which he further developed in all his subsequent writings.\nThe \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" (11th edition of 1911) assesses Bopp and his work as follows:\nEnglish scholar Russell Martineau, who had studied under Bopp, gave the following tribute:\nMartineau also wrote:\nSources.\nAttribution"}
{"id": "11701", "revid": "41465721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11701", "title": "Full Metal Jacket", "text": "Full Metal Jacket is a 1987 war film directed, co-written, and produced by Stanley Kubrick and starring Matthew Modine, R. Lee Ermey, Vincent D'Onofrio and Adam Baldwin. The screenplay by Kubrick, Michael Herr, and Gustav Hasford was based on Hasford's 1979 novel \"The Short-Timers\".\nThe storyline follows a platoon of U.S. Marines through their boot camp training in Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island, South Carolina, primarily focusing on two privates, Joker and Pyle, who struggle under their abusive drill instructor, Gunnery Sergeant Hartman, and the experiences of two of the platoon's Marines in Vietnamese cities of Da Nang and Hu\u1ebf during the Tet Offensive of the Vietnam War. The film's title refers to the full metal jacket bullet used by military servicemen.\n\"Full Metal Jacket\" was released in the United States on June 26, 1987. The film received critical acclaim, grossed $46.4 million against a budget of $16 million, and earned an Oscar nomination for Best Adapted Screenplay for Kubrick, Herr, and Hasford. In 2001, the American Film Institute placed it at No. 95 in their \"AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills\" poll.\nPlot.\nDuring the United States' involvement in the Vietnam War, a group of recruits arrive at Parris Island. The ruthless drill instructor, Gunnery Sergeant Hartman, employs harsh methods to turn the recruits into combat-ready Marines. Among the recruits is the overweight and dim-witted Leonard Lawrence, whom Hartman nicknames \"Gomer Pyle\", as well as the wisecracking J.T. Davis, who receives the name \"Joker\" after interrupting Hartman's speech with an impression of John Wayne.\nWhen Pyle shows ineptitude in basic training, Hartman pairs him with Joker. Under Joker's supervision, Pyle starts to improve, but Hartman discovers a contraband jelly doughnut taken from the mess hall in Pyle's footlocker. Blaming the platoon for Pyle's infractions, Hartman adopts a collective punishment policy: he will punish the entire platoon, except for Pyle, for every mistake he makes. One night, the recruits haze Pyle with a blanket party in which Joker reluctantly participates. Following this, Pyle seems to reinvent himself as a model recruit, showing particular expertise in marksmanship. This pleases Hartman but worries Joker, who notices Pyle talking to his rifle and believes he may be suffering a mental breakdown.\nThe recruits graduate and receive their Military Occupational Specialty assignments. Joker is assigned to military journalism, while most of the others \u2013 including Pyle \u2013 are assigned to Infantry. During the platoon's final night on Parris Island, Joker discovers Pyle in the toilets, loading his rifle and executing drill commands as he loudly recites the Rifleman's Creed. This awakens the platoon and Hartman, who confronts Pyle and orders him to surrender the rifle. Pyle shoots Hartman dead and then appears to be ready to turn on Joker. Joker then calls Pyle by his real name, Leonard, upon which Pyle sits down and commits suicide, while Joker watches in horror.\nIn January 1968, Joker \u2013 now a sergeant \u2013 is a war correspondent in Da Nang for \"Stars and Stripes\" alongside Private First Class Rafterman, a combat photographer. Rafterman wants to go into combat, as Joker claims he has. At the Marine base, Joker is mocked for his lack of the thousand-yard stare, indicating his lack of war experience. They are interrupted by the start of the Tet Offensive as the North Vietnamese Army unsuccessfully attempts to overrun the base.\nThe following day, the journalism staff is briefed about enemy attacks throughout South Vietnam. Joker is sent to Phu Bai, accompanied by Rafterman. They meet the Lusthog Squad, where Joker is reunited with Sergeant \"Cowboy\", with whom he had gone through boot camp. Joker accompanies the squad during the Battle of Hu\u1ebf, where platoon commander \"Touchdown\" is killed by the enemy. After the Marines declare the area secure, a team of American news journalists and reporters enters Hu\u1ebf to interview various Marines about their experiences in Vietnam and their opinions about the war.\nWhile patrolling Hu\u1ebf, Crazy Earl, the squad leader, is killed by a booby trap, leaving Cowboy in command. The squad becomes lost, and Cowboy orders Eightball to scout the area. A Viet Cong sniper wounds Eightball and Doc Jay, the squad Corpsman. Believing that the sniper is drawing the squad into an ambush, Cowboy attempts to radio in tank support to no avail. The squad's machine gunner, Animal Mother, disobeys Cowboy's orders to retreat and attempts to save his comrades. He discovers there is only one sniper, but Doc Jay and Eightball are killed when Doc Jay attempts to indicate the sniper's location. Cowboy then moves the rest of the squad up to an abandoned building for cover. While radioing for support, Cowboy is shot and killed by the sniper.\nAnimal Mother assumes command of the squad and leads an attack on the sniper. Joker discovers the sniper, a teenage girl, and attempts to shoot her, but his rifle jams. Rafterman shoots the sniper, mortally wounding her. As the squad converges, the sniper begs the squad to shoot her, prompting an argument about whether to kill her or leave her to suffer. Animal Mother decides to allow a mercy killing only if Joker performs it. After some hesitation, Joker executes her. The Marines congratulate him on his kill as Joker displays the thousand-yard stare. The Marines march toward their camp, singing the \"Mickey Mouse March\". Joker states via narration that despite being \"in a world of shit\", he is glad to be alive and is no longer afraid.\nCast.\nAdditional characters include Ed O'Ross as Lieutenant Walter J. \"Touchdown\" Schinoski, the first platoon leader of the Lusthog Squad, John Terry as Lieutenant Lockhart, the editor of \"Stars and Stripes\", Bruce Boa as POG Colonel, the colonel who dresses Joker down for wearing a peace symbol on his lapel. Director Stanley Kubrick and his daughter Vivian make uncredited appearances as two photographers at a Vietnam massacre site.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nKubrick contacted Michael Herr, author of the Vietnam War memoir \"Dispatches\" (1977), in the spring of 1980 to discuss working on a film about the Holocaust, but he eventually discarded that in favor of a film about the Vietnam War. They met in England, and the director told Herr that he wanted to do a war film but had yet to find a story to adapt. Kubrick discovered Gustav Hasford's novel \"The Short-Timers\" (1979) while reading the \"Virginia Kirkus Review.\" Herr received it in bound galleys and thought that it was a masterpiece. In 1982, Kubrick read the novel twice, concluding that it \"was a unique, absolutely wonderful book\", and decided, along with Herr, to adapt it for his next film. According to Kubrick, he was drawn to the book's dialogue, finding it \"almost poetic in its carved-out, stark quality\". In 1983, Kubrick began conducting research for the film, watching past footage and documentaries, reading Vietnamese newspapers on microfilm from the Library of Congress, and studying hundreds of photographs from the era. Initially, Herr was not interested in revisiting his Vietnam War experiences, and Kubrick spent three years persuading him to participate in what the author describes as \"a single phone call lasting three years, with interruptions\".\nIn 1985, Kubrick contacted Hasford to work on the screenplay with him and Herr, and often talked to Hasford on the phone three to four times a week, for hours at a time. Kubrick had already written a detailed treatment, and Kubrick and Herr got together at Kubrick's home every day, breaking down the treatment into scenes. From that, Herr wrote the first draft. The filmmaker worried that the book's title might be misread by audiences as referring to people who only did half a day's work and changed it to \"Full Metal Jacket\" after discovering the phrase while going through a gun catalogue. After the first draft was completed, Kubrick phoned his orders to Hasford and Herr, and Hasford and Herr mailed their submissions to him. Kubrick read and edited them, and then the team repeated the process. Neither Hasford nor Herr knew how much he had contributed to the screenplay, which led to a dispute over the final credits. Hasford remembers, \"We were like guys on an assembly line in the car factory. I was putting on one widget and Michael was putting on another widget and Stanley was the only one who knew that this was going to end up being a car.\" Herr says the director was not interested in making an anti-war film, but \"he wanted to show what war is like\".\nAt some point, Kubrick wanted to meet Hasford in person, but Herr advised against this, describing \"The Short-Timers\" author as a \"scary man\" and believing he and Kubrick would not \"get on\". Nonetheless, Kubrick insisted, and they all met at Kubrick's house in England for dinner. It did not go well, and Hasford did not meet with Kubrick again.\nCasting.\nThrough Warner Bros., Kubrick advertised a national casting search in the United States and Canada. The director used videotape to audition actors and received over 3,000 submissions. His staff screened all of the tapes, leaving 800 of them for Kubrick to review personally.\nFormer U.S. Marine drill instructor Ermey, originally hired as a technical advisor, asked Kubrick if he could audition for the role of Hartman. Kubrick had seen Ermey's portrayal of drill instructor Staff Sergeant Loyce in \"The Boys in Company C\" (1978) and told the Marine that he was not vicious enough to play the character. Ermey improvised insulting dialogue against a group of Royal Marines who were being considered for the part of background Marines, to demonstrate his ability to play the character, as well as to show how a drill instructor goes about breaking down the individuality of new recruits. Upon viewing the videotape of these sessions, Kubrick gave Ermey the role, realizing he \"was a genius for this part\". Kubrick also incorporated the 250-page transcript of Ermey's rants into the script. Ermey's experience as a drill instructor during the Vietnam era proved invaluable. Kubrick estimated that Ermey wrote 50% of his own dialogue, especially the insults.\nWhile Ermey practiced his lines in a rehearsal room, Kubrick's assistant Leon Vitali would throw tennis balls and oranges at him which Ermey had to catch and throw back as quickly as possible, while saying his lines as fast as he could. Any hesitation, slip, or missed line would necessitate starting over. Twenty error-free runs were required. \"[He] was my drill instructor\", Ermey said of Vitali.\nAfter eight months of negotiations to cast Anthony Michael Hall as Private Joker, a deal between Kubrick and Hall fell through. Kubrick offered Bruce Willis a role which the actor turned down due to filming commitments to his TV series \"Moonlighting\".\nFilming.\nKubrick shot the film in England from 1985 to 1986: In Cambridgeshire, on the Norfolk Broads, and at the former Millennium Mills, Beckton Gas Works, Newham (east London) and the Isle of Dogs. A former Royal Air Force station and then British Army base, Bassingbourn Barracks doubled as the Parris Island Marine boot camp. A British Army rifle range near Barton, outside Cambridge, was used in the scene where Hartman congratulates Private Pyle for his shooting skills. Kubrick worked from still photographs of Hu\u1ebf, taken in 1968, and found an area owned by British Gas that closely resembled it and was scheduled to be demolished. The disused Beckton Gas Works, a few miles from central London, were filmed to represent Hu\u1ebf after attacks. Kubrick had buildings blown up, and the film's art director used a wrecking ball to knock specific holes in certain buildings over the course of two months. Originally, Kubrick had a plastic replica jungle flown in from California, but once he looked at it he was reported to have said, \"I don't like it. Get rid of it\". The open country was filmed in the Cliffe marshes, and along the River Thames, supplemented with 200 imported Spanish palm trees and 100,000 plastic tropical plants from Hong Kong.\nKubrick acquired four M41 tanks from a Belgian army colonel who was an admirer of the director's work, and Westland Wessex helicopters painted Marine green to represent Marine Corps Sikorsky H-34 Choctaw helicopters. Although the Wessex was a licensed derivative of the Sikorsky H-34, the Wessex substituted two gas turbine engines for the H-34's radial (piston) engine. This resulted in a much longer and less rounded nose than that of the Vietnam era H-34. Kubrick obtained a selection of rifles, M79 grenade launchers, and M60 machine guns from a licensed weapons dealer.\nModine described the shoot as difficult: Beckton Gas Works was a toxic and environmental nightmare for the entire film crew. Asbestos and hundreds of other chemicals poisoned the ground and air. Modine documents details of shooting at Beckton in his book, \"Full Metal Jacket Diary\" (2005). During the boot camp sequence of the film, Modine and the other recruits had to endure the rigors of Marine Corps training, including having Ermey yelling at them for 10 hours a day during the shooting of the Parris Island scenes. To ensure the actors' reactions to Ermey were as authentic and fresh as possible, Ermey and the recruits did not rehearse together. For film continuity, each recruit had to have his head shaved once a week.\nAt one point during filming, Ermey had a car accident, broke all of his ribs on one side, and was out for four and a half months.\nCowboy's death scene shows a building in the background that resembles the famous alien monolith in Kubrick's \"\" (1968). Kubrick described the resemblance as an \"extraordinary accident\".\nDuring filming, Hasford contemplated taking legal action over the writing credits. Originally, the filmmakers intended for Hasford to receive an \"additional dialogue\" credit, but he fought for and eventually received full credit. The writer took two friends and visited the set dressed as extras, only to be mistaken by a crew member for Herr when Hasford identified himself as the writer whose work the film was based on.\nKubrick's daughter Vivian\u2014who appears uncredited as a news-camera operator at the mass grave\u2014shadowed the filming of \"Full Metal Jacket.\" She shot 18 hours of behind-the-scenes footage for a potential \"making-of\" documentary similar to her earlier film documentary on Kubrick's \"The Shining\" (1980), but in this case did not make the film. Snippets of her work can be seen in the documentary \"Stanley Kubrick's Boxes\" (2008).\nThemes.\nCompared to Kubrick's other works, the themes of \"Full Metal Jacket\" have received little attention from critics and reviewers. Michael Pursell's essay \"\"Full Metal Jacket\": The Unravelling of Patriarchy\" (1988) was an early, in-depth consideration of the film's two-part structure and its criticism of masculinity, arguing that the film shows \"war and pornography as facets of the same system\".\nMost reviews have focused on military brainwashing themes in the boot camp training section of the film, while seeing the latter half of the film as more confusing and disjointed in content. Rita Kempley of \"The Washington Post\" wrote, \"it's as if they borrowed bits of every war movie to make this eclectic finale.\" Roger Ebert said, \"The movie disintegrates into a series of self-contained set pieces, none of them quite satisfying.\" Julian Rice, in his book \"Kubrick's Hope\" (2008), sees the second part of the film as continuing the psychic journey of Joker in trying to come to grips with human evil.\nTony Lucia, in his July 5, 1987, review of \"Full Metal Jacket\" for the \"Reading Eagle\", looked at the themes of Kubrick's career, suggesting \"the unifying element may be the ordinary man dwarfed by situations too vast and imposing to handle\". Lucia specifically refers to the \"military mentality\" in this film. He said further that the theme covered \"a man testing himself against his own limitations\", and he concluded: \"\"Full Metal Jacket\" is the latest chapter in an ongoing movie which is not merely a comment on our time or a time past, but on something that reaches beyond.\"\nBritish critic Gilbert Adair wrote: \"Kubrick's approach to language has always been reductive and uncompromisingly deterministic in nature. He appears to view it as the exclusive product of environmental conditioning, only very marginally influenced by concepts of subjectivity and interiority, by all the whims, shades and modulations of personal expression\".\nMichael Herr wrote of his work on the screenplay: \"The substance was single-minded, the old and always serious problem of how you put into a film or a book the living, behaving presence of what Jung called The Shadow, the most accessible of archetypes, and the easiest to experience\u00a0... War is the ultimate field of Shadow-activity, where all of its other activities lead you. As they expressed it in Vietnam, 'Yea, though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil, for I the Evil'.\"\nMusic.\nKubrick's daughter Vivian Kubrick, under the alias \"Abigail Mead\", wrote the film's score. According to an interview, which appeared in the January 1988 issue of \"Keyboard\", the film was scored mostly with a Fairlight CMI synthesizer (the then-current Series III edition) and a Synclavier. For the period music, Kubrick went through \"Billboard\" list of Top 100 Hits for each year from 1962 to 1968 and tried many songs, but \"sometimes the dynamic range of the music was too great, and we couldn't work in dialogue\".\nA single \"Full Metal Jacket (I Wanna Be Your Drill Instructor)\", credited to Mead and Nigel Goulding, was released to promote the film. It incorporates Ermey's drill cadences from the film. The single reached number two in the UK singles chart.\nRelease.\nBox office.\n\"Full Metal Jacket\" received a limited release on June 26, 1987, in 215 theaters. Its opening weekend saw it accrue $2,217,307, an average of $10,313 per theater, ranking it the number 10 film for the June 26\u201328 weekend. It took a further $2,002,890 for a total of $5,655,225 before entering wide release on July 10, 1987, at 881 theaters\u2014an increase of 666. The July 10\u201312 weekend saw the film gross $6,079,963, an average of $6,901 per theater, and rank as the number 2 grossing film. Over the next four weeks the film opened in a further 194 theaters to its widest release of 1,075 theaters before closing two weeks later with a total gross of $46,357,676, making it the number 23 highest-grossing film of 1987. , the film had grossed $120 million worldwide.\nHome media.\nThe film was released on Blu-ray on October 23, 2007. Warner Home Video released the 25th anniversary edition on Blu-ray on August 7, 2012.\nA 4K Ultra HD version was released on September 21, 2020 in the UK, and September 22 in the US. Other regions are slated for an October release. The 4K UHD release uses a new HDR remastered native 2160p transfer from the original 35mm negative, which was supervised by Kubrick's personal assistant Leon Vitali. It contains the remixed audio and, for the first time since the original DVD release, the theatrical mono mix. It was a critical success with publications praising image and audio quality, calling the former exceptionally good and faithful to the original theatrical release and Kubrick's vision, while noting the lack of new extras and bonus content. A special collector's edition box set of this 4K UHD version was released with different cover art, a replica theatrical poster of the film, a letter from director Stanley Kubrick, and a booklet about the film's production among other extras.\nCritical reception.\nReview aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes retrospectively collected reviews to give the film a score of 92% based on reviews from 83 critics and an average rating of 8.30/10. The summary states, \"Intense, tightly constructed, and darkly comic at times, Stanley Kubrick's \"Full Metal Jacket\" may not boast the most original of themes, but it is exceedingly effective at communicating them.\" Another aggregator Metacritic gave it a score of 76 out of 100, which indicates a \"generally favorable\" response, based on 19 reviews. Reviewers generally reacted favorably to the cast, Ermey in particular, and the film's first act in recruit training, but several reviews were critical of the latter part of the film set in Vietnam and what was considered a \"muddled\" moral message in the finale. It ranks on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills.\nRichard Corliss of \"Time\" called the film a \"technical knockout\", praising \"the dialogue's wild, desperate wit; the daring in choosing a desultory skirmish to make a point about war's pointlessness\", and \"the fine, large performances of almost every actor\", believing, at the time, that Ermey and D'Onofrio would receive Oscar nominations. Corliss appreciated \"the Olympian elegance and precision of Kubrick's filmmaking\". \"Empire\"s Ian Nathan awarded the film 3 out of 5 stars, saying it is \"inconsistent\" and describing it as \"both powerful and frustratingly unengaged\". Nathan felt that after leaving the opening act following the recruit training, the film becomes \"bereft of purpose\", but he summarized his review by calling it a \"hardy Kubrickian effort that warms on you with repeated viewings\". Nathan praised Ermey's \"staggering performance\". Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" called it \"harrowing, beautiful and characteristically eccentric\". Canby echoed praise for Ermey, calling him \"the film's stunning surprise\u00a0... he's so good\u2014so obsessed\u2014that you might think he wrote his own lines\". Canby said D'Onofrio's performance should be admired, and he called Modine \"one of the best, most adaptable young film actors of his generation\". Canby concluded: \"Full Metal Jacket\" was \"a film of immense and very rare imagination\".\nJim Hall, writing for Film4 in 2010, awarded the film 5 out of 5 stars and added to the praise for Ermey, saying his \"performance as the foul-mouthed Hartman is justly celebrated and it's difficult to imagine the film working anything like as effectively without him\". The review preferred the opening training to the later Vietnam sequence, calling it \"far more striking than the second and longer section\". Film4 commented that the film ends abruptly but felt \"it demonstrates just how clear and precise the director's vision could be when he resisted a fatal tendency for indulgence\". Film4 concluded: \"\"Full Metal Jacket\" ranks with \"Dr. Strangelove\" as one of Kubrick's very best.\" Jonathan Rosenbaum of the \"Chicago Reader\" called it \"Elliptical, full of subtle inner rhymes \u2026 and profoundly moving, this is the most tightly crafted Kubrick film since \"Dr. Strangelove\", as well as the most horrific.\" \"Variety\" called the film an \"intense, schematic, superbly made\" drama \"loaded with vivid, outrageously vulgar military vernacular that contributes heavily to the film's power\", but felt that it never develops \"a particularly strong narrative.\" The cast performances were all labeled \"exceptional\" with Modine being singled out as \"embodying both what it takes to survive in the war and a certain omniscience.\" Gilbert Adair, writing in a review for \"Full Metal Jacket\", commented that \"Kubrick's approach to language has always been of a reductive and uncompromisingly deterministic nature. He appears to view it as the exclusive product of environmental conditioning, only very marginally influenced by concepts of subjectivity and interiority, by all whims, shades and modulations of personal expression\".\nNot all reviews were positive. \"Chicago Sun-Times\" critic Roger Ebert held a dissenting view, calling the film \"strangely shapeless\" and awarding it 2.5 stars out of 4. Ebert called it \"one of the best-looking war movies ever made on sets and stage\" but felt this was not enough to compete with the \"awesome reality of \"Platoon\", \"Apocalypse Now\" and \"The Deer Hunter\".\" Ebert criticized the film's second act set in Vietnam, saying the \"movie disintegrates into a series of self-contained set pieces, none of them quite satisfying\" and concluded that the film's message was \"too little and too late\", having been done by other Vietnam War films. Ebert gave praise to Ermey and D'Onofrio, saying \"these are the two best performances in the movie, which never recovers after they leave the scene.\" This review angered Gene Siskel on their television show \"At The Movies\"; he criticized Ebert for liking \"Benji the Hunted\" (which came out the same week) more than \"Full Metal Jacket\". Their difference in opinion was parodied on the television show \"The Critic\", where Siskel taunts Ebert with \"coming from the guy who liked \"Benji the Hunted\"!\" \"Time Out London\" disliked the film saying \"Kubrick's direction is as steely cold and manipulative as the r\u00e9gime it depicts\", and felt that the characters were underdeveloped, adding \"we never really get to know, let alone care about, the hapless recruits on view.\"\nBritish television channel Channel 4 voted it number 5 on its list of the greatest war films ever made. In 2008, \"Empire\" placed \"Full Metal Jacket\" number 457 on its list of \"The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time\".\nAccolades.\n\"Full Metal Jacket\" was nominated for 11 awards worldwide between 1987 and 1989 including an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay, two BAFTA Awards for Best Sound and Best Special Effects, and a Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actor for Ermey. Ultimately it won five awards, three from organisations outside of the United States: Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdom. The film won Best Foreign Language Film from the Japanese Academy, Best Producer from the David di Donatello Awards, Director of the Year from the London Critics Circle Film Awards, and Best Director and Best Supporting Actor from the Boston Society of Film Critics Awards, for Kubrick and Ermey respectively. Of the five awards won, four were awarded to Kubrick.\nDifferences between novel and screenplay.\nAdaptation of novel to film.\nFilm scholar Greg Jenkins has done a detailed analysis of the adaptation of the novel as a screenplay. The novel is in three parts. The film greatly expands the relatively brief section in Part I, about the boot camp on Parris Island, and essentially discards Part III. This gives the film a twofold structure, telling two largely independent stories connected by the same characters acting in each. Jenkins believes this structure is a development of concepts that Kubrick has had since the 1960s. At that time, Kubrick talked about wanting to explode the usual conventions of narrative structure.\nSergeant Hartman (renamed from the book's Gerheim) has an expanded role in the film. In the film, Private Pyle's incompetence is presented as weighing negatively on the rest of the platoon and in the film, unlike the novel, he is the only under-performing recruit. The film omits \"Hartman's\" disclosure to other troops that he thinks Pyle might be mentally unstable, a \"Section 8\", instead it is Joker in the scene where he mops the bathroom with Cowboy. In contrast, Hartman praises Pyle, saying that he is \"born again hard\". Jenkins says that the character of Hartman could not have been portrayed as having a warmer social relationship with the troops, as that would have upset the balance of the film, which depends on the spectacle of ordinary soldiers coming to grips with Hartman as a force of nature embodying a killer culture.\nVarious episodes in the book have been cut from the screenplay or conflated with others. For example, Cowboy's introduction of the \"Lusthog Squad\" has been both markedly shortened and supplemented by material from other sections of the book. Although the book's final, third section was largely dropped, elements from this section were inserted into other episodes of the film. For instance, the climactic episode with the sniper is a conflation of two episodes in the book, from Parts II and III. Jenkins thinks the film presents this passage more dramatically but in less gruesome detail than in the novel.\nThe film often has a more tragic tone than the book, which relies on callous humor. Joker in the film remains a model of humane thinking, as evidenced by his moral struggle in the sniper episode and elsewhere. He works to overcome his own meekness, rather than to compete with other Marines. The film omits the book's showing his eventual domination over Animal Mother.\nThe film omits the death of the character Rafterman. Jenkins believed this allowed viewers to reflect on Rafterman's personal growth in the film and speculate on his future growth after the war.\nIn popular culture.\nThe line of dialogue \"Me so horny. Me love you long time,\" uttered by the Da Nang street prostitute (played by Papillon Soo Soo) to Joker (Modine) became a catchphrase in popular culture after it was sampled by rap artists 2 Live Crew in their 1990 hit \"Me So Horny\" and by Sir Mix-A-Lot in \"Baby Got Back\" (1992)."}
{"id": "11702", "revid": "1023411322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11702", "title": "Flirting", "text": "Flirting or coquetry is a social and sexual behavior involving spoken or written communication, as well as body language, by one person to another, either to suggest interest in a deeper relationship with the other person, or if done playfully, for amusement.\nFlirting usually involves speaking and behaving in a way that suggests a mildly greater intimacy than the actual relationship between the parties would justify, though within the rules of social etiquette, which generally disapproves of a direct expression of sexual interest in the given setting. This may be accomplished by communicating a sense of playfulness or irony. Double entendres (where one meaning is more formally appropriate, and another more suggestive) may be used. Body language can include flicking the hair, eye contact, brief touching, open stances, proximity, and other gestures. Flirting may be done in an under-exaggerated, shy or frivolous style. Vocal communication of interest can include, for example,\nFlirting behavior varies across cultures due to different modes of social etiquette, such as how closely people should stand (proxemics), how long to hold eye contact, how much touching is appropriate and so forth. Nonetheless, some behaviors may be more universal. For example, ethologist Iren\u00e4us Eibl-Eibesfeldt found that in places as different as Africa and North America, women exhibit similar flirting behavior, such as a prolonged stare followed by a nonchalant break of gaze along with a little smile.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the word \"flirt\" is obscure. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" (first edition) associates it with such onomatopoeic words as \"flit\" and \"flick\", emphasizing a lack of seriousness; on the other hand, it has been attributed to the old French \"conter fleurette\", which means \"to (try to) seduce\" by the dropping of flower petals, that is, \"to speak sweet nothings\". While old-fashioned, this expression is still used in French, often mockingly, but the English gallicism \"to flirt\" has made its way and has now become an anglicism.\nThe word \"fleurette\" was used in the 16th century in some sonnets, and some other texts. The French word \"fleurette\" (small flower), and the language of old south France word \"flouretas\" (from the Latin \"flora\"(for flower)), are related to some little says where flowers are both at the same time a pretext and the comparison terms. In southern France, some usage were yet used in 1484,\nIn French, some other words more or less related are derived from the word fleur: for instance \"effleurer\" (English: lightly touch) from 13th century \"esflour\u00e9e\"; \"d\u00e9florer\" (English: deflower) from 13th century \"desflorer\" or (fleuret (English Foil) 18th century.\nThe association of flowers, spring, youth, and women is not modern and were yet considered in ancient culture, such as the Chloris in ancient Greece, or Flora (deity) in the ancient Roman Empire, including Floralia festival, and in other older poems, such as the Song of Songs.\nHistory.\nDuring World War II, anthropologist Margaret Mead was working in Britain for the British Ministry of Information and later for the U.S. Office of War Information, delivering speeches and writing articles to help the American soldiers better understand the British civilians, and vice versa. She observed in the flirtations between the American soldiers and British women a pattern of misunderstandings regarding who is supposed to take which initiative. She wrote of the Americans, \"The boy learns to make advances and rely upon the girl to repulse them whenever they are inappropriate to the state of feeling between the pair\", as contrasted to the British, where \"the girl is reared to depend upon a slight barrier of chilliness... which the boys learn to respect, and for the rest to rely upon the men to approach or advance, as warranted by the situation.\" This resulted, for example, in British women interpreting an American soldier's gregariousness as something more intimate or serious than he had intended.\nCommunications theorist Paul Watzlawick used this situation, where \"both American soldiers and British girls accused one another of being sexually brash\", as an example of differences in \"punctuation\" in interpersonal communications. He wrote that courtship in both cultures used approximately 30 steps from \"first eye contact to the ultimate consummation\", but that the sequence of the steps was different. For example, kissing might be an early step in the American pattern but a relatively intimate act in the English pattern.\nJapanese courtesans had another form of flirting, emphasizing non-verbal relationships by hiding the lips and showing the eyes, as depicted in much Shunga art, the most popular print media at the time, until the late 19th century.\nEuropean hand fans.\nThe fan was extensively used as a means of communication and therefore a way of flirting from the 16th century onwards in some European societies, especially England and Spain. A whole sign language was developed with the use of the fan, and even etiquette books and magazines were published. Charles Francis Badini created the Original Fanology or Ladies' Conversation Fan which was published by William Cock in London in 1797. The use of the fan was not limited to women, as men also carried fans and learned how to convey messages with them. For instance, placing the fan near the heart meant \"I love you\", while opening a fan wide meant \"Wait for me\".\nIn Spain, where the use of fans (called \"abanicos\") is still very popular today, ladies used them to communicate with suitors or prospective suitors without attracting the notice of their families or chaperons. This use was highly popular during the 19th and early 20th centuries.\nPurpose.\nPeople flirt for a variety of reasons. According to social anthropologist Kate Fox, there are two main types of flirting: flirting just for fun and flirting with further intent.\nIn a 2014 review, Henningsen made a further distinction and identified six main motivations for flirting: sex, relational development, exploration, fun, self-esteem and instrumental. Henningsen found that often, many flirting interactions involve more than one of these motives. There also appears to be gender differences in flirting motivations.\nCourtship.\nMany people flirt as a courtship initiation method, with the aim of engaging in a sexual relationship with another person. In this sense, flirting plays a role in the mate-selection process. The person flirting will send out signals of sexual availability to another, and expects to see the interest returned in order to continue flirting. Flirting can involve non-verbal signs, such as an exchange of glances, hand-touching, and hair-touching; or verbal signs, such as chatting, giving flattering comments, and exchanging telephone numbers in order to initiate further contact.\nMany studies have confirmed that sex is a driving motivation for flirting behaviours. Additionally, Messman and colleagues' study provided support for this hypothesis; it demonstrated that, the more one was physically attracted to a person, the higher the chances one would flirt with them.\nFlirting in the goal of signalling interest appears as a puzzling phenomenon when considering that flirting is often performed very subtly. In fact, evidence shows that people are often mistaken in how they interpret flirting behaviours. Thus, if a main purpose of flirting is to signal interest to the other person, why isn't this signalling done more clearly and explicitly?\nA possible explanation, for the ambiguous nature of human flirting lies in the costs associated with courtship signals. Indeed, according to Gersick and colleagues, signalling interest can be costly as it can lead to the disturbance of the nature of a relationship. For instance, signalling sexual interest to a friend bears the risk of introducing uncertainty into the friendship, especially if the romantic advance is rejected by the recipient. For this reason, individuals prefer engaging in a flirting interaction that is more subtle to limit the risks associated with the expression of sexual interest.\nMore generally, human relationships are governed by social norms and whenever these are broken, one can suffer significant costs that can range from social, economic and even legal nature. As an illustration, a manager flirting with his subordinate can lead to strong costs such as being accused of sexual harassment, which can potentially lead to job loss.\nAdditionally, third parties can impose costs on someone expressing sexual interest. Expressing sexual interest to somebody else's romantic partner is a highly punishable act. This often leads to jealousy from the person's partner which can trigger anger and (possible) physical punishment, especially in men. Third parties can also impose costs through the act of eavesdropping. These can lead to damage to one's reputation leading to possible social, economic and legal costs.\nA last point to consider is that the costs associated with interest signalling are magnified in the case of humans, when compared to the animal world. Indeed, the existence of language means that information can circulate much faster. For instance, in the case of eavesdropping, the information overhead by the eavesdropper can be spread to very large social networks, thereby magnifying the social costs.\nOther motivations.\nAnother reason people engage in flirting is to consolidate or maintain a romantic relationship with their partner. They will engage in flirting behaviours to promote the flourishing of their relationship with their partner. People will also flirt in the goal of 'exploring'. In this sense, the aim is not necessarily to express sexual or romantic interest but simply to assess whether the other might be interested in them before making any decision about what they would want from that individual.\nHenningsen and Fox also demonstrated that flirting can sometimes be employed just for fun. For instance, studies have shown that flirting in the workplace was used mostly for fun purposes.\nAnother motive that drives flirting is developing one's own self esteem. People often feel highly valued when someone flirts with them. Therefore, often people flirt to encourage reciprocation and thereby increase their self esteem. As a last point, people might flirt for instrumental purposes. For instance, they will flirt to get something out of the other person such as drink in a nightclub or a promotion at work.\nGender differences in motivations.\nCertain types of flirting seem to be more common amongst males compared to females and vice versa.\nTo start with, Henningsen and colleagues' study demonstrated that flirting with sexual intent was found to be more prominent amongst men. On the other hand, flirting for relationship development purposes was more often employed by women.\nThese findings are not surprising when the parental investment theory is taken into account. First, it states that females are more choosy and men more competitive, therefore predicting that flirting as courtship initiation will be more commonly used amongst men. The theory also predicts that females invest more in their offspring, which makes them more prone to invest in their relationship as this can provide resources that can contribute to their offspring's survival. On the other hand, men have no guarantee that their mates' offspring is theirs, so have less incentives to seek long-term relationships; thereby explaining why men care less about flirting for relationship development.\nAdditionally, Henningsen found that flirting for fun was more common in females than males. A possible explanation for this could lie in the fact that women engage in what he calls \"practice flirting\". As women are more selective and want to attract the best partner to take care of their offspring, they might flirt for fun to practice and evaluate what flirting behaviours work the best.\nExamples.\nFlirting may consist of stylized gestures, language, body language, postures, and physiologic signs which act as cues to another person. Among these, at least in Western society, are:\nThe effectiveness of many of these interactions has been subjected to detailed analysis by behavioral psychologists, and advice on their use is available from dating coaches.\nCultural variations.\nFlirting varies a great deal from culture to culture. For example, for many western cultures one very common flirting strategy includes eye contact. However, eye contact can have a very different meaning in some Asian countries, where women might get in trouble if they return a glance to men who stare at them. Furthermore, Chinese and Japanese women are sometimes not expected to initiate eye contact as it could be considered rude and disrespectful.\nThe distance between two people is also important when flirting. People from the \"contact cultures\", such as those in the Mediterranean or Latin America, may feel comfortable with closer proximity, whereas a British or Northern European person may typically need more space. Although touching, especially of the hand or arm, can constitute flirting, touching is also often done without intentions of flirting, particularly in the contact cultures where it forms a natural part of communication.\nIn Japan, flirting in the street or public places is known as Nanpa."}
{"id": "11705", "revid": "7583140", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11705", "title": "Franklin J. Schaffner", "text": "Franklin James Schaffner (May 30, 1920July 2, 1989) was an American film, television, and stage director. He won an Academy Award for Best Director for \"Patton\" (1970), and is known for the films \"Planet of the Apes\" (1968), \"Nicholas and Alexandra\" (1971), \"Papillon\" (1973), and \"The Boys from Brazil\" (1978). He served as president of the Directors Guild of America between 1987 and 1989.\nEarly life.\nSchaffner was born in Tokyo, Japan, the son of American missionaries Sarah Horting (n\u00e9e Swords) and Paul Franklin Schaffner, and was raised in Japan. \nThe Schaffners returned to the United States and settled in Lancaster, Pennsylvania when Franklin Schaffner was 5 years old. Franklin Schaffner attended J.P. McCaskey High School, where he appeared as Mr. Darcy in the school's production of \"Pride and Prejudice\". In 1938, he graduated as valedictorian of McCaskey High School's first graduating class.\nSchaffner graduated from Franklin &amp; Marshall College (F&amp;M) in Lancaster. As a student, Schaffner was active in the drama program at F&amp;M's Green Room Theatre, where he appeared in eleven plays and served as president of the Green Room Club. He then studied law at Columbia University in New York City, but his education was interrupted by service with the United States Navy in World War II during which he served with American amphibious forces in Europe and North Africa. In the latter stages of the war, he was sent to the Pacific Far East to serve with the United States Office for Strategic Services.\nTelevision career.\nSchaffner returned to the United States after the war. He worked for a world peace organization then as an assistant director for the documentary film series \"The March of Time\". He became a director in the news and public affairs department of CBS television where his jobs including covering sports, beauty pageants and public-service programs.\nIn 1950 he directed \"The Traitor\", the first episode of \"Ford Theatre\". He also did adaptations of \"Alice in Wonderland\" and \"Treasure Island\"\nHe directed \"Thunder on Sycamore Street\" by Reginald Rose for \"Studio One\". He and Rose reunited on \"Twelve Angry Men\" which won Schaffner an Emmy for Best Director.\nThe following year Schaffner earned another Emmy for his work on the 1955 TV adaptation of the Broadway play \"The Caine Mutiny Court Martial\", shown on the anthology series \"Ford Star Jubilee\". \nSchaffner became one of three regular directors on the \"Kaiser Aluminium Hour\"; the others were George Roy Hill and Fielder Cook. He was also a regular director on \"Playhouse 90\".\nHe was the original director on the series, \"The Defenders\", created by Rose. Schaffner's work earned him another Emmy.\nIn 1960, he directed Allen Drury's stage play \"Advise and Consent\". This earned him the Best Director recognition in the Variety Critics Poll.\nIn the realm of network television, Schaffner also received widespread critical acclaim in 1962 for his groundbreaking collaboration with the First Lady of the United States Jacqueline Kennedy and CBS television's Musical Director Alfredo Antonini in the production of \"A Tour of the White House with Mrs. John F. Kennedy\", a television special broadcast to over 80 million viewers worldwide. \nSchaffner's contributions in this production earned him a nomination in 1963 by the Director's Guild of America USA, for its award in the category of Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Television.\nFeature films.\nEarly films.\nIn January 1960 Schaffner signed a multi picture deal with Columbia Pictures. \nIn May 1961 he signed to make \"A Summer Place\" at 20th Century Fox with Fabian and Dolores Hart. The film was not made. Schaffner directed \"The Good Years\" (1962) for TV with Henry Fonda and Lucille Ball. Other TV work included \"The Great American Robbery\".\nInstead Schaffner's first motion picture was \"The Stripper\" (1963), made at Fox from a play by William Inge, starring Richard Beymer and Joanne Woodward. The film was well-received critically, but not a commercial success.\nHe continued to work for TV including \"The Legend of Lylah Clare\".\nSchaffner later made \"The Best Man\" (1964) based on a play by Gore Vidal and \"The War Lord\" (1965), based on a play by Leslie Stevens, with Charlton Heston. In a 1966 interview he said \"as you mature you learn that the story is the most important thing.\" He announced various films for Columbia - \"The Day Lincoln Was Shot\", \"The Whistle Blows for Victory\" and \"The Green Beret\" - but they were not made.\nHe went to Britain to make \"The Double Man\" (1967) with Yul Brynner, a film Schaffner admitted he did for the money.\nPeak.\nSchaffner had a huge critical and commercial hit in \"Planet of the Apes\" (1968) starring Heston at 20th Century Fox.\nIn December 1968 Schaffner signed a non-exclusive three-picture deal with Columbia.\nHis next film was for 20th Century Fox, however: \"Patton\" (1970), a biopic of General Patton starring George C. Scott. It was a major success for which Schaffner won the Academy Award for Best Director and the Directors Guild of America Award for Best Director. \nHe made \"Nicholas and Alexandra\" (1971) for producer Sam Spiegel. It was an expensive box-office failure. Schaffner followed it with \"Papillon\" (1973) a $14 million epic with Steve McQueen and Dustin Hoffman that was a considerable financial success. In 1971 he said his films \"are almost always about people who are out of their time and place.\"\nSchaffner intended to follow \"Papillon\" with \"Dynasty of Western Outlaws\", about outlaws over the years in Missouri from a script by John Gay, and an adaptation of \"The French Lieutenant's Woman\". He ended up making neither: \"Dynasty\" never was made, and \"French Lieutenant\" was made a decade later by another director.\nSchaffner reunited with George C. Scott in \"Islands in the Stream\" (1977), based on the novel by Ernest Hemingway. He then did \"The Boys from Brazil\" (1978) based on a novel by Ira Levin with Gregory Peck.\nLater work.\nHis later films included \"Sphinx\" (1981), a $10 million thriller about Egypt based on novel by Robin Cook and produced by Stanley O'Toole, who had made \"Boys from Brazil\" with Schaffner. It was a commercial failure as was \"Yes, Giorgio\" (1982), a musical comedy starring Luciano Pavarotti.\nSchaffner's last films were \"Lionheart\" (1987) and \"Welcome Home\" (1989).\nSchaffner was president of the Directors Guild of America from 1987 until his death in 1989.\nFrequent collaborators.\nJerry Goldsmith composed the music for seven of his films: \"The Stripper\", \"Planet of the Apes\", \"Patton\", \"Papillon\", \"Islands in the Stream\", \"The Boys from Brazil\" and \"Lionheart\". Four of them were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Score.\nSchaffner twice worked with actors Charlton Heston and Maurice Evans (\"The War Lord\"; \"Planet of the Apes\"), George C. Scott (\"Patton\"; \"Islands in the Stream\") and Laurence Olivier (\"Nicholas and Alexandra\"; \"The Boys from Brazil\").\nPersonal life.\nSchaffner married Helen Jean Gilchrist in 1948. The couple had two children, Jennie and Kate. She died in 2007.\nSchaffner died on July 2, 1989 at the age of 69. He was released 10 days before his death from a hospital where he was being treated for lung cancer.\nCritical perception.\nScreenwriter William Goldman identified Schaffner in 1981 as being one of the three best directors (then living) at handling \"scope\" (a gift for screen epics) in films. The other two were David Lean and Richard Attenborough.\nLegacy.\nIn 1991, Schaffner's widow, Jean Schaffner, established the Franklin J. Schaffner Alumni Medal (colloquially known as the Franklin J. Schaffner Award), which is awarded by the American Film Institute at its annual ceremony to an alumnus of either the AFI Conservatory or the AFI Conservatory Directing Workshop for Women who best embodies the qualities of the late director: talent, taste, dedication and commitment to quality filmmaking. Notable recipients include David Lynch, Amy Heckerling, Terence Malick, Darren Aronofsky, Patty Jenkins and Paul Schrader, among others.\nThe Director's Guild of America also began presenting a Franklin J. Schaffner Achievement Award to Associate Directors or Stage Managers in 1991.\nThe moving image collection of Franklin J. Schaffner is held at the Academy Film Archive.\nIn May 2020, the mayor of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, proclaimed Franklin Schaffner Week (May 23\u201330, 2020) to mark the centennial of his birth."}
{"id": "11707", "revid": "8144267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11707", "title": "Freeway", "text": ""}
{"id": "11709", "revid": "7957594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11709", "title": "False etymology", "text": "A false etymology (fake etymology, popular etymology, etymythology, pseudo-etymology, or par(a)etymology) is a popular but false belief about the origin or derivation of a specific word. It is sometimes called a folk etymology, but this is also a technical term in linguistics.\nSuch etymologies often have the feel of urban legends, and can be more colorful and fanciful than the typical etymologies found in dictionaries, often involving stories of unusual practices in particular subcultures (e.g. Oxford students from non-noble families being supposedly forced to write \"sine nobilitate\" by their name, soon abbreviated to \"s.nob.\", hence the word \"\"). Many recent examples are \"backronyms\" (acronyms made up to explain a term), such as \"posh\" for \"port outward, starboard homeward\".\nSource and influence.\nErroneous etymologies can exist for many reasons. Some are reasonable interpretations of the evidence that happen to be false. For a given word there may often have been many serious attempts by scholars to propose etymologies based on the best information available at the time, and these can be later modified or rejected as linguistic scholarship advances. The results of medieval etymology, for example, were plausible given the insights available at the time, but have often been rejected by modern linguists. The etymologies of humanist scholars in the early modern period began to produce more reliable results, but many of their hypotheses have also been superseded.\nOther false etymologies are the result of specious and untrustworthy claims made by individuals, such as the unfounded claims made by Daniel Cassidy that hundreds of common English words such as \"baloney\", \"grumble\", and \"bunkum\" derive from the Irish language.\nSome etymologies are part of urban legends, and seem to respond to a general taste for the surprising, counter-intuitive and even scandalous. One common example has to do with the phrase \"rule of thumb\", meaning \"a rough guideline\". An urban legend has it that the phrase refers to an old English law under which a man could legally beat his wife with a stick no thicker than his thumb.\nIn the United States, some of these scandalous legends have had to do with racism and slavery; common words such as \"picnic\", \"buck\", and \"crowbar\" have been alleged to stem from derogatory terms or racist practices. The \"discovery\" of these alleged etymologies is often believed by those who circulate them to draw attention to racist attitudes embedded in ordinary discourse. On one occasion, the use of the word \"niggardly\" led to the resignation of a US public official because it sounded similar to the unrelated word \"nigger\".\nDerivational-Only Popular Etymology (DOPE) versus Generative Popular Etymology (GPE).\nGhil'ad Zuckermann proposes a clear-cut distinction between Derivational-Only Popular Etymology (DOPE) and Generative Popular Etymology (GPE):\n\"DOPE consists of etymological reanalysis of a pre-existent lexical item [...] The DOPE producer is applying his/her Apollonian Tendency, the wish to describe and create order, especially with unfamiliar information or new experience [...], the craving for meaningfulness.\" DOPE is \"merely passive\", \"mistaken derivation, where there is a rationalization \"ex post-facto\".\"\nGPE, on the other hand, involves the introduction of a new sense (meaning) or a new lexical item \u2013 see, for example, phono-semantic matching."}
{"id": "11711", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11711", "title": "Finch", "text": "The true finches are small to medium-sized passerine birds in the family Fringillidae. Finches have stout conical bills adapted for eating seeds and nuts and often have colourful plumage. They occupy a great range of habitats where they are usually resident and do not migrate. They have a worldwide distribution except for Australia and the polar regions. The family Fringillidae contains more than two hundred species divided into fifty genera. It includes species known as siskins, canaries, redpolls, serins, grosbeaks and euphonias.\nMany birds in other families are also commonly called \"finches\". These groups include: the estrildid finches (Estrildidae) of the Old World tropics and Australia; some members of the Old World bunting family (Emberizidae) and the New World sparrow family (Passerellidae); and the Darwin's finches of the Galapagos islands, now considered members of the tanager family (Thraupidae).\nFinches and canaries were used in the UK, US and Canada in the coal mining industry to detect carbon monoxide from the eighteenth to twentieth century. This practice ceased in the UK in 1986.\nSystematics and taxonomy.\nThe taxonomy of the finch family, in particular the cardueline finches, has a long and complicated history. The study of the relationship between the taxa has been confounded by the recurrence of similar morphologies due to the convergence of species occupying similar niches. In 1968 the American ornithologist Raymond Andrew Paynter, Jr. wrote:\nLimits of the genera and relationships among the species are less understood \u2013 and subject to more controversy \u2013 in the carduelines than in any other species of passerines, with the possible exception of the estrildines [waxbills].\nBeginning in around 1990 a series of phylogenetic studies based on mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequences resulted in substantial revisions being made to the taxonomy. Several groups of birds that had previously been assigned to other families were found to be related to the finches. The Neotropical \"Euphonia\" and the \"Chlorophonia\" were formerly placed in the tanager family Thraupidae due to their similar appearance but analysis of mitochondrial DNA sequences revealed that both genera were more closely related to the finches. They are now placed in a separate subfamily Euphoniinae within the Fringillidae. The Hawaiian honeycreepers were at one time placed in their own family, Drepanididae but were found to be closely related to the \"Carpodacus\" rosefinches and are now placed within the Carduelinae subfamily. The three largest genera, \"Carpodacus\", \"Carduelis\" and \"Serinus\" were found to be polyphyletic. Each was split into monophyletic genera. The American rosefinches were moved from \"Carpodacus\" to \"Haemorhous\". \"Carduelis\" was split by moving the greenfinches to \"Chloris\" and a large clade into \"Spinus\" leaving just three species in the original genus. Thirty seven species were moved from \"Serinus\" to \"Crithagra\" leaving eight species in the original genus. Today the family Fringillidae is divided into three subfamilies, the Fringillinae containing a single genus with the chaffinches, the Carduelinae containing 183 species divided into 49 genera, and the Euphoniinae containing the \"Euphonia\" and the \"Chlorophonia\".\nAlthough Przewalski's \"rosefinch\" (\"Urocynchramus pylzowi\") has ten primary flight feathers rather than the nine primaries of other finches, it was sometimes classified in the Carduelinae. It is now assigned to a distinct family, Urocynchramidae, monotypic as to genus and species, and with no particularly close relatives among the Passeroidea.\nFossil record.\nFossil remains of true finches are rare, and those that are known can mostly be assigned to extant genera at least. Like the other Passeroidea families, the true finches seem to be of roughly Middle Miocene origin, around 20 to 10 million years ago (Ma). An unidentifable finch fossil from the Messinian age, around 12 to 7.3 million years ago (Ma) during the Late Miocene subepoch, has been found at Polg\u00e1rdi in Hungary.\nEtymology.\nThe scientific name Fringillidae comes from the Latin word \"fringilla\" for the common chaffinch (\"Fringilla coelebs\"), a member of the family which is common in Europe. The name was coined (as Fringillad\u00e6) by the English zoologist William Elford Leach in a guide to the contents of the British Museum published in 1820.\nDescription.\nThe smallest \"classical\" true finches are the Andean siskin (\"Spinus spinescens\") at as little as 9.5\u00a0cm (3.8\u00a0in) and the lesser goldfinch (\"Spinus psaltria\") at as little as . The largest species is probably the collared grosbeak (\"Mycerobas affinis\") at up to and , although larger lengths, to in the pine grosbeak (\"Pinicola enucleator\"), and weights, to in the evening grosbeak (\"Hesperiphona vespertina\"), have been recorded in species which are slightly smaller on average. They typically have strong, stubby beaks, which in some species can be quite large; however, Hawaiian honeycreepers are famous for the wide range of bill shapes and sizes brought about by adaptive radiation. All true finches have 9 primary remiges and 12 rectrices. The basic plumage colour is brownish, sometimes greenish; many have considerable amounts of black, while white plumage is generally absent except as wing-bars or other signalling marks. Bright yellow and red carotenoid pigments are commonplace in this family, and thus blue structural colours are rather rare, as the yellow pigments turn the blue color into green. Many, but by no means all true finches have strong sexual dichromatism, the females typically lacking the bright carotenoid markings of males.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe finches have a near-global distribution, being found across the Americas, Eurasia and Africa, as well as some island groups such as the Hawaiian islands. They are absent from Australasia, Antarctica, the Southern Pacific and the islands of the Indian Ocean, although some European species have been widely introduced in Australia and New Zealand.\nFinches are typically inhabitants of well-wooded areas, but some can be found on mountains or even in deserts.\nBehaviour.\nThe finches are primarily granivorous, but euphoniines include considerable amounts of arthropods and berries in their diet, and Hawaiian honeycreepers evolved to utilize a wide range of food sources, including nectar. The diet of Fringillidae nestlings includes a varying amount of small arthropods. True finches have a bouncing flight like most small passerines, alternating bouts of flapping with gliding on closed wings. Most sing well and several are commonly seen cagebirds; foremost among these is the domesticated canary (\"Serinus canaria domestica\"). The nests are basket-shaped and usually built in trees, more rarely in bushes, between rocks or on similar substrate.\nList of genera.\nThe family Fringillidae contains 229 species divided into 50 genera and three subfamilies. The subfamily Carduelinae includes 18 extinct Hawaiian honeycreepers and the extinct Bonin grosbeak. See List of Fringillidae species for further details.\nSubfamily Fringillinae\nSubfamily Carduelinae\nSubfamily Euphoniinae"}
{"id": "11712", "revid": "39957278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11712", "title": "Facilitated diffusion", "text": "Facilitated diffusion (also known as facilitated transport or passive-mediated transport) is the process of spontaneous passive transport (as opposed to active transport) of molecules or ions across a biological membrane via specific transmembrane integral proteins. Being passive, facilitated transport does not directly require chemical energy from ATP hydrolysis in the transport step itself; rather, molecules and ions move down their concentration gradient reflecting its diffusive nature.\nFacilitated diffusion is different from simple diffusion in several ways. \nPolar molecules and large ions dissolved in water cannot diffuse freely across the plasma membrane due to the hydrophobic nature of the fatty acid tails of the phospholipids that make up the lipid bilayer. Only small, non-polar molecules, such as oxygen and carbon dioxide, can diffuse easily across the membrane. Hence, small polar molecules are transported by proteins in the form of transmembrane channels. These channels are gated, meaning that they open and close, and thus deregulate the flow of ions or small polar molecules across membranes, sometimes against the osmotic gradient. Larger molecules are transported by transmembrane carrier proteins, such as permeases, that change their conformation as the molecules are carried across (e.g. glucose or amino acids). \nNon-polar molecules, such as retinol or lipids, are poorly soluble in water. They are transported through aqueous compartments of cells or through extracellular space by water-soluble carriers (e.g. retinol binding protein). The metabolites are not altered because no energy is required for facilitated diffusion. Only permease changes its shape in order to transport metabolites. The form of transport through a cell membrane in which a metabolite is modified is called group translocation transportation.\nGlucose, sodium ions, and chloride ions are just a few examples of molecules and ions that must efficiently cross the plasma membrane but to which the lipid bilayer of the membrane is virtually impermeable. Their transport must therefore be \"facilitated\" by proteins that span the membrane and provide an alternative route or bypass mechanism. Some examples of proteins that mediate this process are glucose transporters, organic cation transport proteins, urea transporter, monocarboxylate transporter 8 and monocarboxylate transporter 10.\nVarious attempts have been made by engineers to mimic the process of facilitated transport in synthetic (i.e., non-biological) membranes for use in industrial-scale gas and liquid separations, but these have met with limited success to date, most often for reasons related to poor carrier stability and/or dissociation of the carrier from the passive transport.\nIn vivo model of facilitated diffusion.\nIn living organisms, the main physical and biochemical processes that are required for survival are regulated by diffusion. Facilitated diffusion is one form of diffusion and it is important in several metabolic processes of living cells. One vital role of facilitated diffusion is that it is the main mechanism behind the binding of Transcription Factors (TFs) to designated target sites on the DNA molecule. The in vitro model, which is a very well known method of facilitated diffusion, that takes place outside of a living cell, explains the 3-dimensional pattern of diffusion in the cytosol and the 1-dimensional diffusion along the DNA contour. After carrying out extensive research on processes occurring out of the cell, this mechanism was generally accepted but there was a need to verify that this mechanism could take place in vivo or inside of living cells. Bauer &amp; Metzler (2013) therefore carried out an experiment using a bacterial genome in which they investigated the average time for TF \u2013 DNA binding to occur. After analyzing the process for the time it takes for TF's to diffuse across the contour and cytoplasm of the bacteria's DNA, it was concluded that in vitro and in vivo are similar in that the association and dissociation rates of TF's to and from the DNA are similar in both. Also, on the DNA contour, the motion is slower and target sites are easy to localize while in the cytoplasm, the motion is faster but the TF's are not sensitive to their targets and so binding is restricted.\nIntracellular facilitated diffusion.\nSingle-molecule imaging is an imaging technique which provides an ideal resolution necessary for the study of the Transcription factor binding mechanism in living cells. In prokaryotic bacteria cells such as \"E. coli\", facilitated diffusion is required in order for regulatory proteins to locate and bind to target sites on DNA base pairs. There are 2 main steps involved: the protein binds to a non-specific site on the DNA and then it diffuses along the DNA chain until it locates a target site, a process referred to as sliding. According to Brackley et al. (2013), during the process of protein sliding, the protein searches the entire length of the DNA chain using 3-D and 1-D diffusion patterns. During 3-D diffusion, the high incidence of Crowder proteins creates an osmotic pressure which brings searcher proteins (e.g. Lac Repressor) closer to the DNA to increase their attraction and enable them to bind, as well as steric effect which exclude the Crowder proteins from this region (Lac operator region). Blocker proteins participate in 1-D diffusion only i.e. bind to and diffuse along the DNA contour and not in the cytosol.\nFacilitated diffusion of proteins on Chromatin.\nThe in vivo model mentioned above clearly explains 3-D and 1-D diffusion along the DNA strand and the binding of proteins to target sites on the chain. Just like prokaryotic cells, in eukaryotes, facilitated diffusion occurs in the nucleoplasm on chromatin filaments, accounted for by the switching dynamics of a protein when it is either bound to a chromatin thread or when freely diffusing in the nucleoplasm. In addition, given that the chromatin molecule is fragmented, its fractal properties need to be considered. After calculating the search time for a target protein, alternating between the 3-D and 1-D diffusion phases on the chromatin fractal structure, it was deduced that facilitated diffusion in eukaryotes precipitates the searching process and minimizes the searching time by increasing the DNA-protein affinity.\nFor oxygen.\nOxygen binds with red blood cells in the blood stream. The oxygen affinity with hemoglobin on red blood cell surfaces enhances this bonding ability. In a system of facilitated diffusion of oxygen, there is a tight relationship between the ligand which is oxygen and the carrier which is either hemoglobin or myoglobin. This mechanism of facilitated diffusion of oxygen by hemoglobin or myoglobin was discovered and initiated by Wittenberg and Scholander. They carried out experiments to test for the steady-state of diffusion of oxygen at various pressures. Oxygen-facilitated diffusion occurs in a homogeneous environment where oxygen pressure can be relatively controlled.\n For oxygen diffusion to occur, there must be a full saturation pressure (more) on one side of the membrane and full reduced pressure (less) on the other side of the membrane i.e. one side of the membrane must be of higher concentration. During facilitated diffusion, hemoglobin increases the rate of constant diffusion of oxygen and facilitated diffusion occurs when oxyhemoglobin molecule is randomly displaced.\nFor carbon monoxide.\nCarbon monoxide has a facilitated diffusion process similar to that of oxygen. They both make use of the high affinity of hemoglobin and myoglobin for the gas. Carbon monoxide also combines with hemoglobin and myoglobin with the help of facilitated diffusion just as it is in oxygen but the rate at which they react differs from one another. Carbon monoxide has a dissociation velocity which is 100 times less than that of oxygen; its affinity for myoglobin is 40 times higher and 250 times higher for hemoglobin, compared to oxygen.\nFor glucose.\nGlucose is a six-carbon sugar that provides energy needed by cells. Since glucose is a large molecule, it is difficult to be transported across the membrane through simple diffusion. Hence, it diffuses across membranes through facilitated diffusion, down the concentration gradient. The carrier protein at the membrane binds to the glucose and alters its shape such that it can easily to be transported from one side of the membrane to the other. Movement of glucose into the cell could be rapid or slow depending on the number of membrane-spanning protein. It is transported against the concentration gradient by a dependent glucose symporter which provides a driving force to other glucose molecules in the cells. Facilitated diffusion helps in the release of accumulated glucose into the extracellular space adjacent to the blood capillary."}
{"id": "11714", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11714", "title": "F-18", "text": ""}
{"id": "11715", "revid": "30035619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11715", "title": "McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle", "text": "The McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle is an American twin-engine, all-weather tactical fighter aircraft designed by McDonnell Douglas (now part of Boeing). Following reviews of proposals, the United States Air Force selected McDonnell Douglas's design in 1969 to meet the service's need for a dedicated air superiority fighter. The Eagle first flew in July 1972, and entered service in 1976. It is among the most successful modern fighters, with over 100 victories and no losses in aerial combat, with the majority of the kills by the Israeli Air Force.\nThe Eagle has been exported to Israel, Japan, and Saudi Arabia. The F-15 was originally envisioned as a pure air-superiority aircraft. Its design included a secondary ground-attack capability that was largely unused. The aircraft design proved flexible enough that an improved all-weather strike derivative, the F-15E Strike Eagle, was later developed, entered service in 1989 and has been exported to several nations. As of 2021, the aircraft is being produced in several variants.\nDevelopment.\nEarly studies.\nThe F-15 can trace its origins to the early Vietnam War, when the U.S. Air Force and U.S. Navy fought each other over future tactical aircraft. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara was pressing for both services to use as many common aircraft as possible, even if performance compromises were involved. As part of this policy, the USAF and Navy had embarked on the TFX (F-111) program, aiming to deliver a medium-range interdiction aircraft for the Air Force that would also serve as a long-range interceptor aircraft for the Navy.\nIn January 1965, Secretary McNamara asked the Air Force to consider a new low-cost tactical fighter design for short-range roles and close air support to replace several types like the F-100 Super Sabre and various light bombers then in service. Several existing designs could fill this role; the Navy favored the Douglas A-4 Skyhawk and LTV A-7 Corsair II, which were pure attack aircraft, while the Air Force was more interested in the Northrop F-5 fighter with a secondary attack capability. The A-4 and A-7 were more capable in the attack role, while the F-5 less so, but could defend itself. If the Air Force chose a pure attack design, maintaining air superiority would be a priority for a new airframe. The next month, a report on light tactical aircraft suggested the Air Force purchase the F-5 or A-7, and consider a new higher-performance aircraft to ensure its air superiority. This point was reinforced after the loss of two Republic F-105 Thunderchief aircraft to obsolete MiG-17s on 4 April 1965.\nIn April 1965, Harold Brown, at that time director of the Department of Defense Research and Engineering, stated the favored position was to consider the F-5 and begin studies of an \"F-X\". These early studies envisioned a production run of 800 to 1,000 aircraft and stressed maneuverability over speed; it also stated that the aircraft would not be considered without some level of ground-attack capability. On 1 August, Gabriel Disosway took command of Tactical Air Command and reiterated calls for the F-X, but lowered the required performance from Mach 3.0 to 2.5 to lower costs.\nAn official requirements document for an air superiority fighter was finalized in October 1965, and sent out as a request for proposals to 13 companies on 8 December. Meanwhile, the Air Force chose the A-7 over the F-5 for the support role on 5 November 1965, giving further impetus for an air superiority design as the A-7 lacked any credible air-to-air capability.\nEight companies responded with proposals. Following a downselect, four companies were asked to provide further developments. In total, they developed some 500 design concepts. Typical designs featured variable-sweep wings, weight over , included a top speed of Mach 2.7 and a thrust-to-weight ratio of 0.75. When the proposals were studied in July 1966, the aircraft were roughly the size and weight of the TFX F-111, and like that aircraft, were designs that could not be considered an air-superiority fighter.\nSmaller, lighter.\nThrough this period, studies of combat over Vietnam were producing worrying results. Theory had stressed long-range combat using missiles and optimized aircraft for this role. The result was highly loaded aircraft with large radar and excellent speed, but limited maneuverability and often lacking a gun. The canonical example was the McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II, used by the USAF, USN, and U.S. Marine Corps to provide air superiority over Vietnam, the only fighter with enough power, range, and maneuverability to be given the primary task of dealing with the threat of Soviet fighters while flying with visual engagement rules.\nIn practice, due to policy and practical reasons, aircraft were closing to visual range and maneuvering, placing the larger US aircraft at a disadvantage to the much less expensive day fighters such as the MiG-21. Missiles proved to be much less reliable than predicted, especially at close range. Although improved training and the introduction of the M61 Vulcan cannon on the F-4 did much to address the disparity, these early outcomes led to considerable re-evaluation of the 1963 Project Forecast doctrine. This led to John Boyd's energy\u2013maneuverability theory, which stressed that extra power and maneuverability were key aspects of a successful fighter design and these were more important than outright speed. Through tireless championing of the concepts and good timing with the \"failure\" of the initial F-X project, the \"fighter mafia\" pressed for a lightweight day fighter that could be built and operated in large numbers to ensure air superiority. In early 1967, they proposed that the ideal design had a thrust-to-weight ratio near 1:1, a maximum speed further reduced to Mach 2.3, a weight of , and a wing loading of .\nBy this time, the Navy had decided the F-111 would not meet their requirements and began the development of a new dedicated fighter design, the VFAX program. In May 1966, McNamara again asked the forces to study the designs and see whether the VFAX would meet the Air Force's F-X needs. The resulting studies took 18 months and concluded that the desired features were too different; the Navy stressed loiter time and mission flexibility, while the Air Force was now looking primarily for maneuverability.\nFocus on air superiority.\nIn 1967, the Soviet Union revealed the Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-25 at the Domodedovo airfield near Moscow. The MiG-25 was designed as a high-speed, high-altitude interceptor aircraft, and made many performance tradeoffs to excel in this role. Among these was the requirement for very high speed, over Mach 2.8, which demanded the use of stainless steel instead of aluminum for many parts of the aircraft. The added weight demanded a much larger wing to allow the aircraft to operate at the required high altitudes. However, to observers, it appeared outwardly similar to the very large F-X studies, an aircraft with high speed and a large wing offering high maneuverability, leading to serious concerns throughout the Department of Defense and the various arms that the US was being outclassed. The MiG-23 was likewise a subject of concern, and it was generally believed to be a better aircraft than the F-4. The F-X would outclass the MiG-23, but now the MiG-25 appeared to be superior in speed, ceiling, and endurance to all existing US fighters, even the F-X. Thus, an effort to improve the F-X followed.\nBoth Headquarters USAF and TAC continued to call for a multipurpose aircraft, while both Disosway and Air Chief of Staff Bruce K. Holloway pressed for a pure air-superiority design that would be able to meet the expected performance of the MiG-25. During the same period, the Navy had ended its VFAX program and instead accepted a proposal from Grumman for a smaller and more maneuverable design known as VFX, later becoming the Grumman F-14 Tomcat. VFX was considerably closer to the evolving F-X requirements. The Air Force in-fighting was eventually ended by the worry that the Navy's VFAX would be forced on them; in May 1968, it was stated that \"We finally decided \u2013 and I hope there is no one who still disagrees \u2013 that this aircraft is going to be an air superiority fighter\".\nIn September 1968, a request for proposals was released to major aerospace companies. These requirements called for single-seat fighter having a maximum take-off weight of for the air-to-air role with a maximum speed of Mach 2.5 and a thrust-to-weight ratio of nearly 1:1 at mission weight. It also called for a twin-engined arrangement, as this was believed to respond to throttle changes more rapidly and might offer commonality with the Navy's VFX program. However, details of the avionics were left largely undefined, as whether to build a larger aircraft with a powerful radar that could detect the enemy at longer ranges was not clear, or alternatively a smaller aircraft that would make detecting it more difficult for the enemy.\nFour companies submitted proposals, with the Air Force eliminating General Dynamics and awarding contracts to Fairchild Republic, North American Rockwell, and McDonnell Douglas for the definition phase in December 1968. The companies submitted technical proposals by June 1969. The Air Force announced the selection of McDonnell Douglas on 23 December 1969. The winning design resembled the twin-tailed F-14, but with fixed wings; both designs were based on configurations studied in wind-tunnel testing by NASA.\nThe Eagle's initial versions were the F-15 single-seat variant and TF-15 twin-seat variant. (After the F-15C was first flown, the designations were changed to \"F-15A\" and \"F-15B\"). These versions would be powered by new Pratt &amp; Whitney F100 engines to achieve a combat thrust-to-weight ratio in excess of 1:1. A proposed 25-mm Ford-Philco GAU-7 cannon with caseless ammunition suffered development problems. It was dropped in favor of the standard M61 Vulcan gun. The F-15 used conformal carriage of four Sparrow missiles like the Phantom. The fixed wing was put onto a flat, wide fuselage that also provided an effective lifting surface. The first F-15A flight was made on 27 July 1972, with the first flight of the two-seat F-15B following in July 1973.\nThe F-15 has a \"look-down/shoot-down\" radar that can distinguish low-flying moving targets from ground clutter. It would use computer technology with new controls and displays to lower pilot workload and require only one pilot to save weight. Unlike the F-14 or F-4, the F-15 has only a single canopy frame with clear vision forward. The USAF introduced the F-15 as \"the first dedicated USAF air-superiority fighter since the North American F-86 Sabre\".\nThe F-15 was favored by customers such as the Israel and Japan air arms. Criticism from the fighter mafia that the F-15 was too large to be a dedicated dogfighter and too expensive to procure in large numbers, led to the Lightweight Fighter (LWF) program, which led to the USAF General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon and the middle-weight Navy McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet.\nFurther development.\nThe single-seat F-15C and two-seat F-15D models entered production in 1978 and conducted their first flights in February and June of that year. These models were fitted with the Production Eagle Package (PEP 2000), which included of additional internal fuel, provisions for exterior conformal fuel tanks, and an increased maximum takeoff weight up to . The increased takeoff weight allows internal fuel, a full weapons load, conformal fuel tanks, and three external fuel tanks to be carried. The APG-63 radar uses a programmable signal processor (PSP), enabling the radar to be reprogrammable for additional purposes such as the addition of new armaments and equipment. The PSP was the first of its kind in the world, and the upgraded APG-63 radar was the first radar to use it. Other improvements included strengthened landing gear, a new digital central computer, and an overload warning system, which allows the pilot to fly up to 9\u00a0g at all weights.\nThe F-15 Multistage Improvement Program (MSIP) was initiated in February 1983 with the first production MSIP F-15C produced in 1985. Improvements included an upgraded central computer; a Programmable Armament Control Set, allowing for advanced versions of the AIM-7, AIM-9, and AIM-120A missiles; and an expanded Tactical Electronic Warfare System that provides improvements to the ALR-56C radar warning receiver and ALQ-135 countermeasure set. The final 43 F-15Cs included the Hughes APG-70 radar developed for the F-15E; these are sometimes referred as Enhanced Eagles. Earlier MSIP F-15Cs with the APG-63 were upgraded to the APG-63(V)1 to improve maintainability and to perform similar to the APG-70. Existing F-15s were retrofitted with these improvements.\nIn 1979, McDonnell Douglas and F-15 radar manufacturer, Hughes, teamed to privately develop a strike fighter version of the F-15. This version competed in the Air Force's Dual-Role Fighter competition starting in 1982. The F-15E strike variant was selected for production over General Dynamics' competing F-16XL in 1984. Beginning in 1985, F-15C and D models were equipped with the improved P&amp;W F100-PW-220 engine and digital engine controls, providing quicker throttle response, reduced wear, and lower fuel consumption. Starting in 1997, original F100-PW-100 engines were upgraded to a similar configuration with the designation F100-PW-220E starting.\nBeginning in 2007, 179 USAF F-15Cs would be retrofitted with the AN/APG-63(V)3 Active Electronically Scanned Array radar. A significant number of F-15s are to be equipped with the Joint Helmet Mounted Cueing System. Lockheed Martin is working on an IRST system for the F-15C. A follow-on upgrade called the Eagle passive/active warning survivability system (EPAWSS) was planned, but remained unfunded. Boeing was selected in October 2015 to serve as prime contractor for the EPAWSS, with BAE Systems selected as a subcontractor. The EPAWSS is an all-digital system with advanced electronic countermeasures, radar warning, and increased chaff and flare capabilities in a smaller footprint than the 1980s-era Tactical Electronic Warfare System. More than 400 F-15Cs and F-15Es will have the system installed.\nIn September 2015, Boeing unveiled its 2040C Eagle upgrade, designed to keep the F-15 relevant through 2040. Seen as a necessity because of the low numbers of F-22s procured, the upgrade builds upon the company's F-15SE Silent Eagle concept with low-observable features. Most improvements focus on lethality including quad-pack munitions racks to double its missile load to 16, conformal fuel tanks for extended range, \"Talon HATE\" communications pod to communicate with fifth-generation fighters, the APG-63(v)3 AESA radar, a long-range infrared search and track sensor, and BAE Systems' EPAWSS systems.\nDesign.\nOverview.\nThe F-15 has an all-metal semi-monocoque fuselage with a large-cantilever, shoulder-mounted wing. The wing planform of the F-15 suggests a modified cropped delta shape with a leading-edge sweepback angle of 45\u00b0. Ailerons and a simple high-lift flap are located on the trailing edge. No leading-edge maneuvering flaps are used. This complication was avoided by the combination of low wing loading and fixed leading-edge camber that varies with spanwise position along the wing. Airfoil thickness ratios vary from 6% at the root to 3% at the tip.\nThe empennage is of metal and composite construction, with twin aluminium/composite material honeycomb structure vertical stabilizers with boron-composite skin, resulting in an exceptionally thin tailplane and rudders. Composite horizontal all-moving tails outboard of the vertical stabilizers move independently to provide roll control in some flight maneuvers. The F-15 has a spine-mounted air brake and retractable tricycle landing gear. It is powered by two Pratt &amp; Whitney F100 axial compressor turbofan engines with afterburners, mounted side by side in the fuselage and fed by rectangular inlets with variable intake ramps. The cockpit is mounted high in the forward fuselage with a one-piece windscreen and large canopy for increased visibility and a 360\u00b0 field of view for the pilot. The airframe began to incorporate advanced superplastically formed titanium components in the 1980s.\nThe F-15's maneuverability is derived from low wing loading (weight to wing area ratio) with a high thrust-to-weight ratio, enabling the aircraft to turn tightly without losing airspeed. The F-15 can climb to in around 60 seconds. At certain speeds, the dynamic thrust output of the dual engines is greater than the aircraft's combat weight and drag, so it has the ability to accelerate vertically. The weapons and flight-control systems are designed so that one person can safely and effectively perform air-to-air combat. The A and C models are single-seat variants; these were the main air-superiority versions produced. B and D models add a second seat behind the pilot for training. E models use the second seat for a weapon systems officer. Visibly, the F-15 has a unique feature \"vis-\u00e0-vis\" other modern fighter aircraft; it does not have the distinctive \"turkey feather\" aerodynamic exhaust petals covering its engine nozzles. Following problems during development of its exhaust petal design, including dislodgment during flight, the decision was made to remove them, resulting in a 3% aerodynamic drag increase.\nAvionics.\nA multimission avionics system includes a head-up display (HUD), advanced radar, AN/ASN-109 inertial guidance system, flight instruments, ultra high frequency communications, and tactical air navigation system and instrument landing system receivers. It also has an internally mounted, tactical electronic warfare system, Identification friend or foe system, an electronic countermeasures suite, and a central digital computer.\nThe HUD projects all essential flight information gathered by the integrated avionics system. This display, visible in any light condition, provides the pilot information necessary to track and destroy an enemy aircraft without having to look down at cockpit instruments.\nThe F-15's versatile APG-63 and 70 pulse-Doppler radar systems can look up at high-flying targets and look-down/shoot-down at low-flying targets without being confused by ground clutter. These radars can detect and track aircraft and small high-speed targets at distances beyond visual range down to close range, and at altitudes down to treetop level. The APG-63 has a basic range of . The radar feeds target information into the central computer for effective weapons delivery. For close-in dogfights, the radar automatically acquires enemy aircraft, and this information is projected on the head-up display. The F-15's electronic warfare system provides both threat warning (radar warning receiver) and automatic countermeasures against selected threats.\nWeaponry and external stores.\nA variety of air-to-air weaponry can be carried by the F-15. An automated weapon system enables the pilot to release weapons effectively and safely, using the head-up display and the avionics and weapons controls located on the engine throttles or control stick. When the pilot changes from one weapon system to another, visual guidance for the selected weapon automatically appears on the head-up display.\nThe Eagle can be armed with combinations of four different air-to-air weapons: AIM-7F/M Sparrow missiles or AIM-120 AMRAAM advanced medium-range air-to-air missiles on its lower fuselage corners, AIM-9L/M Sidewinder or AIM-120 AMRAAM missiles on two pylons under the wings, and an internal M61 Vulcan Gatling gun in the right wing root.\nLow-drag conformal fuel tanks (CFTs) were developed for the F-15C and D models. They can be attached to the sides of the engine air intakes under each wing and are designed to the same load factors and airspeed limits as the basic aircraft. These tanks slightly degrade performance by increasing aerodynamic drag and cannot be jettisoned in-flight. However, they cause less drag than conventional external tanks. Each conformal tank can hold 750 U.S. gallons (2,840 l) of fuel. These CFTs increase range and reduce the need for in-flight refueling. All external stations for munitions remain available with the tanks in use. Moreover, Sparrow or AMRAAM missiles can be attached to the corners of the CFTs. The 57 FIS based at Keflavik NAS, Iceland, was the only C-model squadron to use CFTs on a regular basis due to its extended operations over the North Atlantic. With the closure of the 57 FIS, the F-15E is the only variant to carry them on a routine basis. CFTs have also been sold to Israel and Saudi Arabia.\nUpgrades.\nThe McDonnell Douglas F-15E Strike Eagle is a two-seat, dual-role, totally integrated fighter for all-weather, air-to-air, and deep interdiction missions. The rear cockpit is upgraded to include four multipurpose cathode ray tube displays for aircraft systems and weapons management. The digital, triple-redundant Lear Siegler aircraft flight control system permits coupled automatic terrain following, enhanced by a ring-laser gyro inertial navigation system. For low-altitude, high-speed penetration and precision attack on tactical targets at night or in adverse weather, the F-15E carries a high-resolution APG-70 radar and LANTIRN pods to provide thermography. The newest F-15E version is the F-15 Advanced, which features fly-by-wire controls.\nThe APG-63(V)2 active electronically scanned array (AESA) radar has been retrofitted to 18 U.S. Air Force F-15C aircraft. This upgrade includes most of the new hardware from the APG-63(V)1, but adds an AESA to provide increased pilot situation awareness. The AESA radar has an exceptionally agile beam, providing nearly instantaneous track updates and enhanced multitarget tracking capability. The APG-63(V)2 is compatible with current F-15C weapon loads and enables pilots to take full advantage of AIM-120 AMRAAM capabilities, simultaneously guiding multiple missiles to several targets widely spaced in azimuth, elevation, or range. The further improved APG-63(V)3 AESA radar is expected to be fitted to 179 F-15C aircraft; the first upgraded aircraft was delivered in October 2010. The ZAP (Zone Acquisition Program) missile launch envelope has been integrated into the operational flight program system of all U.S. F-15 aircraft, providing dynamic launch zone and launch acceptability region information for missiles to the pilot by display cues in real-time.\nOperational history.\nIntroduction and early service.\nThe largest operator of the F-15 is the United States Air Force. The first Eagle, an F-15B, was delivered on 13 November 1974. In January 1976, the first Eagle destined for a combat squadron, the 555th TFS, was delivered. These initial aircraft carried the Hughes Aircraft (now Raytheon) APG-63 radar.\nThe first kill by an F-15 was scored by Israeli Air Force ace Moshe Melnik in 1979. During Israeli raids against Palestinian factions in Lebanon in 1979\u20131981, F-15As reportedly downed 13 Syrian MiG-21s and two Syrian MiG-25s. Israeli F-15As and Bs participated as escorts in Operation Opera, an air strike on an Iraqi nuclear reactor. In the 1982 Lebanon War, Israeli F-15s were credited with 41 Syrian aircraft destroyed (23 MiG-21s and 17 MiG-23s, and one A\u00e9rospatiale SA.342L Gazelle helicopter). During Operation Mole Cricket 19, Israeli F-15s and F-16s together shot down 82 Syrian fighter aircraft (MiG-21s, MiG-23s, and MiG-23Ms) with no losses.\nIsrael was the only operator to use and develop the air-to-ground abilities of the air-superiority F-15 variants, doing so because the fighter's range was well beyond other combat aircraft in the Israeli inventory in the 1980s. The first known use of F-15s for a strike mission was during Operation Wooden Leg on 1 October 1985, with six F-15Ds attacking PLO Headquarters in Tunis with two GBU-15 guided bombs per aircraft and two F-15Cs restriking the ruins with six Mk-82 unguided bombs each. This was one of the few times air-superiority F-15s (A/B/C/D models) were used in tactical strike missions. Israeli air-superiority F-15 variants have since been extensively upgraded to carry a wider range of air-to-ground armaments, including JDAM GPS-guided bombs and Popeye missile.\nRoyal Saudi Air Force F-15C pilots reportedly shot down two Iranian Air Force F-4E Phantom IIs in a skirmish on 5 June 1984.\nAnti-satellite trials.\nThe ASM-135 missile was designed to be a standoff antisatellite (ASAT) weapon, with the F-15 acting as a first stage. The Soviet Union could correlate a U.S. rocket launch with a spy satellite loss, but an F-15 carrying an ASAT would blend in among hundreds of F-15 flights. From January 1984 to September 1986, two F-15As were used as launch platforms for the ASAT missile. The F-15As were modified to carry one ASM-135 on the centerline station with extra equipment within a special centerline pylon. The launch aircraft executed a Mach 1.22, 3.8 g climb at 65\u00b0 to release the ASAT missile at an altitude of . The flight computer was updated to control the zoom-climb and missile release.\nThe third test flight involved a retired P78-1 solar observatory satellite in a orbit, which was destroyed by kinetic energy. The pilot, USAF Major Wilbert D. \"Doug\" Pearson, became the only pilot to destroy a satellite. The ASAT program involved five test launches. The program was officially terminated in 1988.\nGulf War and aftermath.\nThe USAF began deploying F-15C, D, and E model aircraft to the Persian Gulf region in August 1990 for Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm. During the Gulf War, the F-15 accounted for 36 of the 39 air-to-air victories by U.S. Air Force against Iraqi forces. Iraq has confirmed the loss of 23 of its aircraft in air-to-air combat. The F-15C and D fighters were used in the air-superiority role, while F-15E Strike Eagles were used in air-to-ground attacks mainly at night, hunting modified Scud missile launchers and artillery sites using the LANTIRN system. According to the USAF, its F-15Cs had 34 confirmed kills of Iraqi aircraft during the 1991 Gulf War, most of them by missile fire: five Mikoyan MiG-29s, two MiG-25s, eight MiG-23s, two MiG-21s, two Sukhoi Su-25s, four Sukhoi Su-22s, one Sukhoi Su-7, six Dassault Mirage F1s, one Ilyushin Il-76 cargo aircraft, one Pilatus PC-9 trainer, and two Mil Mi-8 helicopters. Air superiority was achieved in the first three days of the conflict; many of the later kills were reportedly of Iraqi aircraft fleeing to Iran, rather than engaging American aircraft. A Strike Eagle achieved an aerial kill of an Iraqi Mi-8 helicopter with a laser-guided bomb. Two F-15Es were lost to ground fire, another was damaged on the ground by a Scud strike on King Abdulaziz Air Base.\nOn 11 November 1990, a Royal Saudi Air Force (RSAF) pilot defected to Sudan with an F-15C fighter during Operation Desert Shield. Saudi Arabia paid US$40 million for return of the aircraft three months later. RSAF F-15s shot down two Iraqi Mirage F1s during the Operation Desert storm. One Saudi F-15C was lost to a crash during the Gulf War in 1991. The IRAF claims this fighter was part of two USAF F-15Cs that engaged two Iraqi MiG-25PDs, and was hit by an R-40 missile before crashing.\nThey have since been deployed to support Operation Southern Watch, the patrolling of the Iraqi no-fly zones in Southern Iraq; Operation Provide Comfort in Turkey; in support of NATO operations in Bosnia, and recent air expeditionary force deployments. In 1994, two U.S. Army Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawks were mistakenly downed by USAF F-15Cs in northern Iraq in a friendly-fire incident. USAF F-15Cs shot down four Yugoslav MiG-29s using AIM-120 and AIM-7 Radar guided missiles during NATO's 1999 intervention in Kosovo, Operation Allied Force.\nStructural defects.\nAll F-15 aircraft were grounded by the USAF after a Missouri Air National Guard F-15C came apart in flight and crashed on 2 November 2007. The newer F-15E fleet was later cleared for continued operations. The US Air Force reported on 28 November 2007 that a critical location in the upper longerons on the F-15C model was suspected of causing the failure, causing the fuselage forward of the air intakes, including the cockpit and radome, to separate from the airframe.\nF-15A through D-model aircraft were grounded until the location received more detailed inspections and repairs as needed. The grounding of F-15s received media attention as it began to place strains on the nation's air-defense efforts. The grounding forced some states to rely on their neighboring states' fighters for air-defense protection, and Alaska to depend on Canadian Forces' fighter support.\nOn 8 January 2008, the USAF Air Combat Command (ACC) cleared a portion of its F-15A through D-model fleet for return to flying status. It also recommended a limited return to flight for units worldwide using the affected models. The accident review board report was released on 10 January 2008. The report stated that analysis of the F-15C wreckage determined that the longeron did not meet drawing specifications, which led to fatigue cracks and finally a catastrophic failure of the remaining support structures and breakup of the aircraft in flight. In a report released on 10 January 2008, nine other F-15s were identified to have similar problems in the longeron. As a result of these problems, General John D. W. Corley stated, \"the long-term future of the F-15 is in question\". On 15 February 2008, ACC cleared all its grounded F-15A/B/C/D fighters for flight pending inspections, engineering reviews, and any needed repairs. ACC also recommended release of other U.S. F-15A/B/C/D aircraft.\nRecent service.\nThe F-15 has a combined air-to-air combat record of 104 kills to no losses . The F-15's air superiority versions, the A/B/C/D models, have not suffered any losses to enemy action. Over half of F-15 kills have been achieved by Israeli Air Force pilots.\nOn 16 September 2009, the last F-15A, an Oregon Air National Guard aircraft, was retired, marking the end of service for the F-15A and F-15B models in the United States.\nWith the retirement of the F-15A and B models, the F-15C and D models are supplemented in U.S. service by the newer F-22 Raptor. , regular Air Force F-15C and F-15D fighters are based overseas with the Pacific Air Forces at Kadena AB in Japan and with the U.S. Air Forces in Europe at RAF Lakenheath in the United Kingdom. Other regular Air Force F-15s are operated by ACC as adversary/aggressor platforms at Nellis AFB, Nevada, and by Air Force Material Command in test and evaluation roles at Edwards AFB, California, and Eglin AFB, Florida. All remaining combat-coded F-15Cs and F-15Ds are operated by the Air National Guard.\nThe USAF is upgrading 178 F-15C/Ds with the AN/APG-63(V)3 AESA radar, and equipping other F-15s with the Joint Helmet Mounted Cueing System as of 2006. In 2007, the Air Force planned to keep 178 F-15C/Ds along with 224 F-15Es in service beyond 2025.\nAs part of the Air Force's FY 2015 budget, the F-15C faced cuts or retirement in response to sequestration. Then in April 2017, Air Force officials announced plans to retire the F-15C/D in the mid-2020s and press more F-16s into roles occupied by the F-15. In December 2018 Bloomberg Government reported that the Pentagon, not the Air Force, in its 2020 budget request, will likely request US$1.2 billion for 12 new-built F-15X fighters to replace older F-15Cs operated by Air National Guard units. Newly built F-15EX Eagle II fighters will replace F-15C/Ds, as the older airframes had an average age of 37 years by 2021; 75% were beyond their certified service lives leading to groundings from structural issues, and life extensions were deemed too expensive. 144 Eagle IIs are planned primarily to fly ANG homeland defense missions, as well as carry outsized standoff weapons in combat.\nThe F-15E will remain in service for years to come because of the model's primary air-to-ground role and the lower number of hours on the F-15E airframes.\nYemen Civil War.\nDuring the Yemeni Civil War (2015-present), Houthis have used R-27T missiles modified to serve as surface-to-air missiles. A video released on 7 January 2018 also shows a modified R-27T hitting a Saudi F-15 on a forward-looking infrared camera. Houthi sources claim to have downed the F-15, although this has been disputed, as the missile apparently proximity detonated, though the F-15 continued to fly in its trajectory seemingly unaffected. Rebels later released footage showing an aircraft wreck, but serial numbers on the wreckage suggested the aircraft was a Panavia Tornado, also operated by Saudi forces. On 8 January, the Saudi admitted the loss of an aircraft but due to technical reasons.\nOn 21 March 2018, Houthi rebels released a video where they hit and possibly shot down a Saudi F-15 in Saada province. In the video a R-27T air-to-air missile adapted for surface-to-air use was launched, appearing to have successfully hit a jet. As in the video of the previous similar hit recorded on 8 January, the target, while clearly hit, did not appear to be downed. Saudi forces confirmed the hit, while saying the jet safely landed at a Saudi base. Saudi official sources confirmed the incident, reporting that it happened at 3:48 pm local time after a surface-to-air defense missile was launched at the fighter jet from inside Saada airport.\nAfter the Houthi attack on Saudi oil infrastructure on 14 September 2019, Saudi Arabia tasked F-15 fighter jets armed with missiles to intercept low flying drones, difficult to intercept with ground based high altitude missile systems like the MIM-104 Patriot with several drones being downed since then. On 2 July 2020, a Saudi F-15 fighter jet shot down two Houthi Shahed 129 drones above Yemen. On 7 March 2021, during a Houthi attack at several Saudi oil installations, Saudi F-15s shot down several attacking drones shot down using heatseeking AIM-9 Sidewinder missiles, with video evidence showing at least two Samad-3 UAVs and one Qasef-2K downed.\nOn 30 March 2021, a video made by Saudi border guards showed a Saudi F-15 shooting down a Houthi Quasef-2K drone with an AIM-120 AMRAAM fired at short range.\nVariants.\nPrototypes.\nTwelve prototypes were built and used for trials by the F-15 Joint Test Force at Edwards Air Force Base using McDonnell Douglas and United States Air Force personnel. Most prototypes were later used by NASA for trials and experiments.\nNotable accidents.\nA total of 175 F-15s have been lost to non-combat causes as of June 2016. However, the F-15 aircraft is very reliable with only 1 loss per 50,000 flight hours.\nAircraft on display.\nAlthough the F-15 continues to be a front-line fighter, a number of older USAF and IAF models have been retired, with several placed on outdoor display or in museums.\nGermany.\nF-15A\nNetherlands.\nF-15A\nJapan.\nF-15A\nIsrael.\nF-15A\nSaudi Arabia.\nF-15D\nUnited Kingdom.\nF-15A\nNotable appearances in media.\nThe F-15 was the subject of the IMAX movie \"\", about the RED FLAG exercises. In Tom Clancy's nonfiction book, \"Fighter Wing\" (1995), a detailed analysis of the Air Force's premier fighter aircraft, the F-15 Eagle and its capabilities are showcased.\nThe F-15 has also been a popular subject as a toy, and a fictional likeness of an aircraft similar to the F-15 has been used in cartoons, books, video games, animated television series, and animated films."}
{"id": "11719", "revid": "1216158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11719", "title": "Grumman F-14 Tomcat", "text": "The Grumman F-14 Tomcat is an American supersonic, twin-engine, two-seat, twin-tail, variable-sweep wing fighter aircraft. The Tomcat was developed for the United States Navy's Naval Fighter Experimental (VFX) program after the collapse of the F-111B project. The F-14 was the first of the American Teen Series fighters, which were designed incorporating air combat experience against MiG fighters during the Vietnam War.\nThe F-14 first flew on 21 December 1970 and made its first deployment in 1974 with the U.S. Navy aboard , replacing the McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II. The F-14 served as the U.S. Navy's primary maritime air superiority fighter, fleet defense interceptor, and tactical aerial reconnaissance platform into the 2000s. The Low Altitude Navigation and Targeting Infrared for Night (LANTIRN) pod system was added in the 1990s and the Tomcat began performing precision ground-attack missions.\nIn the 1980s, F-14s were used as land-based interceptors by the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force during the Iran\u2013Iraq War, where they saw combat against Iraqi warplanes. Iran claimed their F-14s shot down at least 160 Iraqi aircraft during the war (only 55 of these confirmed according to historian Tom Cooper), while 16 Tomcats were lost including seven losses due to accidents.\nThe Tomcat was retired by U.S. Navy on 22 September 2006, having been supplanted by the Boeing F/A-18E/F Super Hornet. Several retired F-14s have been put on display across the US. The F-14 remains in service with Iran's air force, having been exported to Iran under the Pahlavi regime in 1976. In November 2015, reports emerged of Iranian F-14s flying escort for Russian Tupolev Tu-95, Tu-160, and Tu-22M bombers on air strikes in Syria.\nDevelopment.\nBackground.\nBeginning in the late 1950s, the U.S. Navy sought a long-range, high-endurance interceptor to defend its carrier battle groups against long-range anti-ship missiles launched from the jet bombers and submarines of the Soviet Union. They outlined the idea of a Fleet Air Defense (FAD) aircraft with a more powerful radar and longer range missiles than the F-4 Phantom II to intercept both enemy bombers and missiles at very long range. Studies into this concept led to the Douglas F6D Missileer project of 1959, but this large subsonic aircraft appeared to have little ability to defend itself once it fired its missiles, and the project was cancelled in December 1961.\nThe Navy was still looking for a long-range defensive aircraft, but one with higher performance than the Missileer. The Navy was directed to participate in the Tactical Fighter Experimental (TFX) program with the U.S. Air Force by Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara. McNamara wanted \"joint\" solutions to service aircraft needs to reduce development costs and had already directed the Air Force to buy the F-4 Phantom II, which was developed for the Navy and Marine Corps.\nTFX had the range and payload capabilities to fill the FAD role, but was designed as a tactical bomber and lacked the manoeuvrability and overall performance that led the Navy to cancel the Missileer. The Navy strenuously opposed the TFX as it feared compromises necessary for the Air Force's need for a low-level attack aircraft would adversely impact the aircraft's performance as a fighter. Their concerns were overridden, and the project went ahead as the F-111B.\nLacking recent experience in naval fighters, the F-111's main contractor, General Dynamics, partnered with Grumman to provide the experience needed to develop a naval version. Weight and performance issues plagued the F-111B program. With the F-111B program in distress, Grumman began studying improvements and alternatives. In 1966, the Navy awarded Grumman a contract to begin studying advanced fighter designs. Grumman narrowed down these designs to its 303 design.\nThe name \"Tomcat\" was partially chosen to pay tribute to Admiral Thomas Connolly, as the nickname \"Tom's Cat\" had already been widely used within the program during development to reflect Connolly's involvement, and now the moniker was adapted into an official name in line with the Grumman tradition of giving its fighter aircraft feline names. Changing it to \"Tomcat\" associated the aircraft with the previous Wildcat, Hellcat, Tigercat, Bearcat, Panther, Cougar, and Tiger fighters. Other names considered were \"Alleycat\" (considered inappropriate due to sexual connotations) and \"Seacat\".\nVFX.\nThrough this same period, experience over Vietnam against the more agile MiG fighters demonstrated that the Phantom lacked the manoeuvrability needed to successfully win in any engagement. This led to the VFAX program to study new fighter aircraft that would either replace or supplant the Phantom in the fighter and ground-attack roles while the TFX worked the long-range interception role. Grumman continued work on its 303 design and offered it to the Navy in 1967, which led to fighter studies by the Navy. The company continued to refine the design into 1968.\nAround this time, Vice Admiral Thomas F. Connolly, Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Air Warfare, flew the developmental F-111A variant on a flight and discovered that it had difficulty going supersonic and had poor carrier landing characteristics. He later testified before Congress about his concerns against the official U.S. Department of the Navy position and, in May 1968, Congress stopped funding for the F-111B, allowing the Navy to pursue an answer tailored to its requirements.\nFree to choose their own solution to the FAD requirement, VFAX ended in favor of a new design that would combine the two roles. In July 1968, the Naval Air Systems Command (NAVAIR) issued a request for proposals (RFP) for the Naval Fighter Experimental (VFX) program. VFX called for a tandem two-seat, twin-engined air-to-air fighter with a maximum speed of Mach 2.2. It would also have a built-in M61 Vulcan cannon and a secondary close air support role. The VFX's air-to-air missiles would be either six AIM-54 Phoenix or a combination of six AIM-7 Sparrow and four AIM-9 Sidewinder missiles. Bids were received from General Dynamics, Grumman, Ling-Temco-Vought, McDonnell Douglas, and North American Rockwell; four bids incorporated variable-geometry wings.\nF-14.\nMcDonnell Douglas and Grumman were selected as finalists in December 1968. Grumman was selected for the contract award in January 1969. Grumman's design reused the TF30 engines from the F-111B, though the Navy planned on replacing them with the Pratt &amp; Whitney F401-400 engines under development for the Navy, along with the related Pratt &amp; Whitney F100 for the USAF. Though lighter than the F-111B, it was still the largest and heaviest U.S. fighter to fly from an aircraft carrier, a consequence of the requirement to carry the large AWG-9 radar and AIM-54 Phoenix missiles (from the F-111B) and an internal fuel load of .\nUpon winning the contract for the F-14, Grumman greatly expanded its Calverton, Long Island, New York facility for evaluating the aircraft. Much of the testing, including the first of many compressor stalls and multiple ejections, took place over Long Island Sound. In order to save time and forestall interference from Secretary McNamara, the Navy skipped the prototype phase and jumped directly to full-scale development; the Air Force took a similar approach with its F-15. The F-14 first flew on 21 December 1970, just 22 months after Grumman was awarded the contract, and reached initial operational capability (IOC) in 1973. The United States Marine Corps was initially interested in the F-14 as an F-4 Phantom II replacement; going so far as to send officers to Fighter Squadron One Twenty-Four (VF-124) to train as instructors. The Marine Corps pulled out of any procurement when the development of the stores' management system for ground attack munitions was not pursued. An air-to-ground capability was not developed until the 1990s.\nFiring trials involved launches against simulated targets of various types, from cruise missiles to high-flying bombers. AIM-54 Phoenix missile testing from the F-14 began in April 1972. The longest single Phoenix launch was successful against a target at a range of in April 1973. Another unusual test was made on 22 November 1973, when six missiles were fired within 38 seconds at Mach 0.78 and ; four scored direct hits, one broke lock and missed, and one was declared \"no test\" after the radar signature augmentation in the target drone (which increased the apparent radar signature of the tiny drone to the size of a MiG-21) failed, causing the missile to break track. This gave a tested success rate of 80%, since effectively only 5 missiles were tested. This was the most expensive single test of air to air missiles ever performed at that time.\nImprovements and changes.\nWith time, the early versions of all the missiles were replaced by more advanced versions, especially with the move to full solid-state electronics that allowed better reliability, better ECCM and more space for the rocket engine. So the early arrangement of the AIM-54A Phoenix active-radar air-to-air missile, the AIM-7E-2 Sparrow semi-active radar homing air-to-air missile, and the AIM-9J Sidewinder heat-seeking air-to-air missile was replaced in the 1980s with the B (1983) and C (1986) version of the Phoenix, the F (1977), M (1982), P (1987 or later) for Sparrows, and with the Sidewinder, L (1979) and M (1982). Within these versions, there are several improved batches (for example, Phoenix AIM-54C++).\nThe Tactical Airborne Reconnaissance Pod System (TARPS) was developed in the late 1970s for the F-14. Approximately 65 F-14As and all F-14Ds were modified to carry the pod. TARPS was primarily controlled by the Radar Intercept Officer (RIO) via an extra display for observing reconnaissance data. The \"TARPS Digital (TARPS-DI)\" was a 1996 upgrade featuring a digital camera. The digital camera was further updated beginning in 1998 with the \"TARPS Completely Digital (TARPS-CD)\" configuration that also provided real-time transmission of imagery.\nSome of the F-14A aircraft underwent engine upgrades to the GE F110-400 in 1987. These upgraded Tomcats were redesignated F-14A+, which was later changed to F-14B in 1991. The F-14D variant was developed at the same time; it included the GE F110-400 engines with newer digital avionics systems such as a glass cockpit, and compatibility with the Link 16 secure datalink. The Digital Flight Control System (DFCS) notably improved the F-14's handling qualities when flying at a high angle of attack or in air combat maneuvering.\nWhile the F-14 had been developed as a lightweight alternative to the F-111B, the F-14 was still the heaviest and most expensive fighter of its time. VFAX was revived in the 1970s as a lower cost solution to replacing the Navy and Marine Corps's fleets of F-4s, and A-7s. VFAX was directed to review the fighters in the USAF Light Weight Fighter competition, which led to the development of the F/A-18 Hornet as roughly a midsize fighter and attack aircraft. In 1994, Congress would reject Grumman proposals to the Navy to upgrade the Tomcat beyond the D model (such as the Super Tomcat 21, the cheaper QuickStrike version, and the more advanced Attack Super Tomcat 21).\nGround attack upgrades.\nIn the 1990s, with the pending retirement of the A-6 Intruder, the F-14 air-to-ground program was resurrected. Trials with live bombs had been carried out in the 1980s; the F-14 was cleared to use basic iron bombs in 1992. During Operation Desert Storm of the Gulf War, most air-to-ground missions were left to A-7, A-6 Intruder and F/A-18 Hornet squadrons, while the F-14s focused on air defense operations. Following Desert Storm, F-14As and F-14Bs underwent upgrades to avionics and cockpit displays to enable the use of precision munitions, enhance defensive systems, and apply structural improvements. The new avionics were comparable with the F-14D; these upgraded aircraft were designated F-14A (Upgrade) and F-14B (Upgrade) respectively.\nBy 1994, Grumman and the Navy were proposing ambitious plans for Tomcat upgrades to plug the gap between the retirement of the A-6 and the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet entering service. However, the upgrades would have taken too long to implement to meet the gap, and were priced in the billions. The U.S. Congress considered this too expensive for an interim solution. A quick, inexpensive upgrade using the Low Altitude Navigation and Targeting Infrared for Night (LANTIRN) targeting pod was devised. The LANTIRN pod provided the F-14 with a forward-looking infrared (FLIR) camera for night operations and a laser target designator to direct laser-guided bombs (LGB). Although LANTIRN is traditionally a two-pod system, an AN/AAQ-13 navigation pod with terrain-following radar and a wide-angle FLIR, along with an AN/AAQ-14 targeting pod with a steerable FLIR and a laser target designator, the decision was made to only use the targeting pod. The Tomcat's LANTIRN pod was altered and improved over the baseline configuration, such as a Global Positioning System / Inertial Navigation System (GPS-INS) capability to allow an F-14 to accurately locate itself. The pod was carried on the right wing glove pylon.\nThe LANTIRN pod did not require changes to the F-14's own system software, but the pod was designed to operate on a MIL-STD-1553B bus not present on the F-14A or B. Consequently, Martin Marietta specially developed an interface card for LANTIRN. The Radar Intercept Officer (RIO) would receive pod imagery on a 10-inch Programmable Tactical Information Display (PTID) or another Multi-Function Display in the F-14 rear cockpit and guided LGBs using a new hand controller installed on the right side console. Initially, the hand controller replaced the RIO's TARPS control panel, meaning a Tomcat configured for LANTIRN could not carry TARPS and the reverse, but eventually a workaround was later developed to allow a Tomcat to carry LANTIRN or TARPS as needed.\nAn upgraded LANTIRN named \"LANTIRN 40K\" for operations up to was introduced in 2001, followed by Tomcat Tactical Targeting (T3) and Fast Tactical Imagery (FTI), to provide precise target coordinate determination and ability to transmit images in-flight. Tomcats also added the ability to carry the GBU-38 Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM) in 2003, giving it the option of a variety of LGB and GPS-guided weapons. Some F-14Ds were upgraded in 2005 with a ROVER III Full Motion Video (FMV) downlink, a system that transmits real-time images from the aircraft's sensors to the laptop of Forward air controller (FAC) on the ground.\nDesign.\nThe F-14 Tomcat was designed as both an air superiority fighter and a long-range naval interceptor, which enabled it to both serve as escort attack aircraft when armed with Sparrow missiles and fleet air defense loitering interceptor role when armed with Phoenix missiles. The F-14 was designed with a two-seat cockpit with a bubble canopy which affords all-around visibility aiding aircrew in air-to-air combat. It features variable geometry wings that swing automatically during flight. For high-speed intercept, they are swept back and they swing forward for lower speed flight. It was designed to improve on the F-4 Phantom's air combat performance in most respects.\nThe F-14's fuselage and wings allow it to climb faster than the F-4, while the twin-tail arrangement offers better stability. The F-14 is equipped with an internal 20\u00a0mm M61 Vulcan Gatling cannon mounted on the left side (unlike the Phantom, which was not equipped with an internal gun in the US Navy), and can carry AIM-54 Phoenix, AIM-7 Sparrow, and AIM-9 Sidewinder anti-aircraft missiles. The twin engines are housed in widely spaced nacelles. The flat area of the fuselage between the nacelles is used to contain fuel and avionics systems, such as the wing-sweep mechanism and flight controls, as well as weaponry since the wings are not used for carrying ordnance. By itself, the fuselage provides approximately 40 to 60 percent of the F-14's aerodynamic lifting surface depending on the wing sweep position. The lifting body characteristics of the fuselage allowed one F-14 to safely land after suffering a mid-air collision that sheared off more than half of the plane's right wing in 1991.\nVariable-geometry wings and aerodynamic design.\nThe F-14's wing sweep can be varied between 20\u00b0 and 68\u00b0 in flight, and can be automatically controlled by the Central Air Data Computer, which maintains wing sweep at the optimum lift-to-drag ratio as the Mach number varies; pilots can manually override the system if desired. When parked, the wings can be \"overswept\" to 75\u00b0 to overlap the horizontal stabilizers to save deck space aboard carriers. In an emergency, the F-14 can land with the wings fully swept to 68\u00b0, although this presents a significant safety hazard due to greatly increased stall speed. Such an aircraft would typically be diverted from an aircraft carrier to a land base if an incident did occur. The F-14 has flown safely with an asymmetrical wing-sweep during testing, and was deemed able to land aboard a carrier if needed in an emergency. The wing pivot points are significantly spaced far apart. This has two benefits. The first is that weaponry can be fitted on a pylon on the fixed wing glove, liberating the wings from having swiveling pylons fitted, a feature which had proven to add significant drag on the F-111B. Since less of the total lifting area is variable, the center of lift moves less as the wings moves, reducing trim drag at high speed. When the wing is swept back, its thickness-to-chord ratio decreases, which allows the aircraft to satisfy the Mach 2.4 top speed required by the U.S. Navy. The body of the aircraft contributes significantly to overall lift and so the Tomcat possesses a lower wing loading than its wing area would suggest. When carrying four Phoenix missiles or other heavy stores between the engines this advantage is lost and maneuverability is reduced in those configurations.\nAilerons are not fitted, with roll control being provided by wing-mounted spoilers at low speed (which are disabled if the sweep angle exceeds 57\u00b0), and by differential operation of the all-moving tailerons at high speed. Full-span slats and flaps are used to increase lift both for landing and combat, with slats being set at 17\u00b0 for landing and 7\u00b0 for combat, while flaps are set at 35\u00b0 for landing and 10\u00b0 for combat. An air bag fills up the space occupied by the swept-back wing when the wing is in the forward position and a flexible fairing on top of the wing smooths out the shape transition between the fuselage and top wing area. The twin tail layout helps in maneuvers at high angle of attack (AoA) while reducing the height of the aircraft to fit within the limited roof clearance of hangars aboard aircraft carriers.\nTwo triangular shaped retractable surfaces, called glove vanes, were originally mounted in the forward part of the wing glove, and could be automatically extended by the flight control system at high Mach numbers. They were used to generate additional lift (force) ahead of the aircraft's center of gravity, thus helping to compensate for mach tuck at supersonic speeds. Automatically deployed at above Mach 1.4, they allowed the F-14 to pull 7.5 g at Mach 2 and could be manually extended with wings swept full aft. They were later disabled, however, owing to their additional weight and complexity. The air brakes consist of top-and-bottom extendable surfaces at the rearmost portion of the fuselage, between the engine nacelles. The bottom surface is split into left and right halves; the tailhook hangs between the two-halves, an arrangement sometimes called the \"castor tail\".\nEngines and structure.\nThe F-14 was initially equipped with two Pratt &amp; Whitney TF30 (or JTF10A) augmented turbofan engines, each rated at 20,900\u00a0lb (93\u00a0kN) of thrust, which enabled the aircraft to attain a maximum speed of Mach 2.34. The F-14 would normally fly at a cruising speed for reduced fuel consumption, which was important for conducting lengthy patrol missions. The rectangular air inlets for the engines were equipped with movable ramps and bleed doors to meet the different airflow requirements of the engine from take-off to maximum supersonic speed. De Laval nozzles were also fitted to the engine's exhaust.\nThe performance of the TF30 engine became an object of criticism. John Lehman, Secretary of the Navy in the 1980s, told the U.S. Congress that the TF30/F-14 combination was \"probably the worst engine/airframe mismatch we have had in years\" and that the TF30 was \"a terrible engine\"; 28% of all F-14 accidents were attributed to the engine. A high frequency of turbine blade failures led to the reinforcement of the entire engine bay to limit damage from such failures. The engines also had proved to be extremely prone to compressor stalls, which could easily result in loss of control, severe yaw oscillations, and could lead to an unrecoverable flat spin. At specific altitudes, exhaust produced by missile launches could cause an engine compressor stall. This led to the development of a bleed system that temporarily blocks the frontal intake ramp and reduces engine power during missile launch. With the TF30, the F-14's overall thrust-to-weight ratio at maximum takeoff weight is around 0.56, considerably less than the F-15A's ratio of 0.85; when fitted with the General Electric F110 engine, an improved thrust-to-weight ratio of 0.73 at maximum weight and 0.88 at normal takeoff weight was achieved. Despite having large differences in thrust, the F-14A, F-14B, and later F-14D with the newer General Electric F110 engines were rated at the same top speed.\nThe wings have a two-spar structure with integral fuel tanks. Around 25% of the structure is made of titanium, including the wing box, wing pivots, and upper and lower wing skins; this is a light, rigid, and strong material. Electron beam welding was used in the construction of the titanium parts.\nThe landing gear is very robust, in order to withstand catapult launches (takeoffs) and recoveries (landings) needed for carrier operations. It comprises a double nosewheel and widely spaced single main wheels. There are no hardpoints on the sweeping parts of the wings, and so all the armament is fitted on the belly between the air intake ramps and on pylons under the wing gloves. Internal fuel capacity is : in each wing, in a series of tanks aft of the cockpit, and a further in two feeder tanks. It can carry two external drop tanks under the engine intake ramps. There is also an air-to-air refueling probe, which folds into the starboard nose.\nAvionics and flight controls.\nThe cockpit has two seats, arranged in tandem, outfitted with Martin-Baker GRU-7A rocket-propelled ejection seats, rated from zero altitude and zero airspeed up to 450 knots. The canopy is spacious, and fitted with four mirrors to effectively provide all-round visibility. Only the pilot has flight controls; the flight instruments themselves are of a hybrid analog-digital nature. The cockpit also features a head-up display (HUD) to show primarily navigational information; several other avionics systems such as communications and direction-finders are integrated into the AWG-9 radar's display. A feature of the F-14 is its Central Air Data Computer (CADC), designed by Garrett AiResearch, that forms the onboard integrated flight control system. It uses a MOSFET-based Large-Scale Integration chipset.\nThe aircraft's large nose contains a two-person crew and several bulky avionics systems. The main element is the Hughes AN/AWG-9 X band radar; the antenna is a -wide planar array, and has integrated Identification friend or foe antennas. The AWG-9 has several search and tracking modes, such as Track while scan (TWS), Range-While-Search (RWS), Pulse-Doppler Single-Target Track (PDSTT), and Jam Angle Track (JAT); a maximum of 24 targets can be tracked simultaneously, and six can be engaged in TWS mode up to around . Cruise missiles are also possible targets with the AWG-9, which can lock onto and track small objects even at low altitude when in Pulse-Doppler mode. For the F-14D, the AWG-9 was replaced by the upgraded APG-71 radar. The Joint Tactical Information Distribution System (JTIDS)/Link 16 for data communications was added later on.\nThe F-14 also features electronic countermeasures (ECM) and radar warning receiver (RWR) systems, chaff/flare dispensers, fighter-to-fighter data link, and a precise inertial navigation system. The early navigation system was inertial-based; point-of-origin coordinates were programmed into a navigation computer and gyroscopes would track the aircraft's every motion to calculate distance and direction from that starting point. Global Positioning System later was integrated to provide more precise navigation and redundancy in case either system failed. The chaff/flare dispensers are located on the underside of the fuselage and on the tail. The RWR system consists of several antennas on the aircraft's fuselage, which can roughly calculate both direction and distance of enemy radar users; it can also differentiate between search radar, tracking radar, and missile-homing radar.\nFeatured in the sensor suite was the AN/ALR-23, an Infrared search and track sensor using indium antimonide detectors, mounted under the nose; however this was replaced by an optical system, Northrop's AAX-1, also designated TCS (TV Camera Set). The AAX-1 helps pilots visually identify and track aircraft, up to a range of for large aircraft. The radar and the AAX-1 are linked, allowing the one detector to follow the direction of the other. A dual infrared/optical detection system was adopted on the later F-14D.\nArmament.\nThe F-14 was designed to combat highly maneuverable aircraft as well as the Soviet anti-ship cruise missile and bomber (Tupolev Tu-16, Tupolev Tu-22, Tupolev Tu-22M) threats. The Tomcat was to be a platform for the AIM-54 Phoenix, but unlike the canceled F-111B, it could also engage medium- and short-range threats with other weapons. The F-14 is an air superiority fighter, not just a long-range interceptor aircraft. Over of stores can be carried for combat missions on several hardpoints under the fuselage and under the wings. Commonly, this means a maximum of four Phoenixes or Sparrows on the belly stations, two Phoenixes/Sparrows on the wing hardpoints, and two Sidewinders on the wing hardpoints. The F-14 is also fitted with an internal 20\u00a0mm M61 Vulcan Gatling-type cannon.\nOperationally, the capability to hold up to six Phoenix missiles was never used, although early testing was conducted; there was never a threat requirement to engage six hostile targets simultaneously and the load was too heavy to safely recover aboard an aircraft carrier in the event that the missiles were not fired. During the height of Cold War operations in the late 1970s and 1980s, the typical weapon loadout on carrier-deployed F-14s was usually two AIM-54 Phoenixes, augmented by two AIM-9 Sidewinders, three AIM-7 Sparrow IIIs, a full loadout of 20 mm ammunition and two drop tanks. The Phoenix missile was used twice in combat by the U.S. Navy, both over Iraq in 1999, but the missiles did not score any kills.\nIran made use of the Phoenix system, claiming dozens of kills with it during the 1980\u20131988 Iran\u2013Iraq War. Due to the shortage of air-to-air missiles as a result of sanctions, Iran tried to use other missiles on the Tomcat. It attempted to integrate the Russian R-27R \"Alamo\" BVR missile, but was apparently unsuccessful. In 1985, Iran started Project Sky Hawk, attempting to adapt I-Hawk surface-to-air missiles, which Iran had in its inventory, for F-14s. The modified missiles were successfully tested in 1986 and one or two were used in combat, but the project was abandoned due to guidance problems.\nOperational history.\nUnited States.\nThe F-14 began replacing the F-4 Phantom II in U.S. Navy service starting in September 1974 with squadrons VF-1 \"Wolfpack\" and VF-2 \"Bounty Hunters\" aboard and participated in the American withdrawal from Saigon. The F-14 had its first kills in U.S. Navy service on 19 August 1981 over the Gulf of Sidra in what is known as the Gulf of Sidra incident. In that engagement, two F-14s from VF-41 Black Aces were engaged by two Libyan Su-22 \"Fitters\". The F-14s evaded the short range heat seeking AA-2 \"Atoll\" missile and returned fire, downing both Libyan aircraft. U.S. Navy F-14s once again were pitted against Libyan aircraft on 4 January 1989, when two F-14s from VF-32 shot down two Libyan MiG-23 \"Floggers\" over the Gulf of Sidra in a second Gulf of Sidra incident.\nIts first sustained combat use was as a photo reconnaissance platform. The Tomcat was selected to inherit the reconnaissance mission upon the departure of the dedicated RA-5C Vigilante and RF-8G Crusaders from the fleet. A large pod called the Tactical Airborne Reconnaissance Pod System (TARPS) was developed and fielded on the Tomcat in 1981. With the retirement of the last RF-8G Crusaders in 1982, TARPS F-14s became the U.S. Navy's primary tactical reconnaissance system. One of two Tomcat squadrons per airwing was designated as a TARPS unit and received 3 TARPS capable aircraft and training for 4 TARPS aircrews.\nWhile the Tomcat was being used by Iran in combat against Iraq in its intended air superiority mission in the early 1980s, the U.S. Navy found itself flying regular daily combat missions over Lebanon to photograph activity in the Bekaa Valley. At the time, the Tomcat had been thought too large and vulnerable to be used over land, but the need for imagery was so great that Tomcat aircrews developed high-speed medium altitude tactics to deal with considerable AAA and SA-7 SAM threat in the Bekaa area. The first exposure of a Navy Tomcat to an SA-2 missile was over Somalia in April 1983 when a local battery was unaware of two Tomcats scheduled for a TARPS mission in a prelude to an upcoming international exercise in the vicinity of Berbera. An SA-2 was fired at the second Tomcat while conducting mapping profile at max conserve setting. The Tomcat aircrews spotted the missile launch and dove for the deck thereby evading it without damage. The unexpected demand for combat TARPS laid the way for high altitude sensors such as the KA-93 Long Range Optics (LOROP) to be rapidly procured for the Tomcat as well as an Expanded Chaff Adapter (ECA) to be incorporated in an AIM-54 Phoenix Rail. Commercial \"Fuzz buster\" type radar detectors were also procured and mounted in pairs in the forward cockpit as a stop gap solution to detect SAM radars such as the SA-6. The ultimate solution was an upgrade to the ALR-67 then being developed, but it would not be ready until the advent of the F-14A+ later in the 1980s.\nThe participation of the F-14 in the 1991 Operation Desert Storm consisted of Combat Air Patrol (CAP) over the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf and overland missions consisting of strike escort and reconnaissance. Until the waning days of Desert Storm, in-country air superiority was tasked to USAF F-15 Eagles due to the way the Air Tasking Orders (ATO) delegated primary overland CAP stations to the F-15 Eagle. The governing Rules of Engagement (ROE) also dictated a strict Identification Friend or Foe (IFF) requirement when employing Beyond Visual Range weapons such as the AIM-7 Sparrow and particularly the AIM-54 Phoenix. This hampered the Tomcat from using its most powerful weapon. Furthermore, the powerful emissions from the AWG-9 radar are detectable at great range with a radar warning receiver. Iraqi fighters routinely retreated as soon as the Tomcats \"lit them up\" with the AWG-9. The U.S. Navy suffered its only F-14 loss from enemy action on 21 January 1991 when BuNo 161430, an F-14A upgraded to an F-14A+, from VF-103 was shot down by an SA-2 surface-to-air missile while on an escort mission near Al Asad airbase in Iraq. Both crews survived ejection with the pilot being rescued by USAF Special Operation Forces and the RIO being captured by Iraqi troops as a POW until the end of the war. The F-14 also achieved its final kill in US service, a Mi-8 \"Hip\" helicopter, with an AIM-9 Sidewinder.\nIn 1995, F-14s from VF-14 and VF-41 participated in Operation Deliberate Force as well as Operation Allied Force in 1999, and in 1998, VF-32 and VF-213 participated in Operation Desert Fox. On 15 February 2001, the Joint Direct Attack Munition or JDAM was added to the Tomcat's arsenal. On 7 October 2001, F-14s would lead some of the first strikes into Afghanistan marking the start of Operation Enduring Freedom and the first F-14 drop of a JDAM occurred on 11 March 2002. F-14s from VF-2, VF-31, VF-32, VF-154, and VF-213 would also participate in Operation Iraqi Freedom. The F-14Ds of VF-2, VF-31, and VF-213 obtained JDAM capability in March 2003. On 10 December 2005, the F-14Ds of VF-31 and VF-213 were upgraded with a ROVER III downlink for transmitting images to a ground Forward Air Controller (FAC). The Navy decided to retire the F-14 with the F/A-18E/F Super Hornet filling the roles of fleet defense and strike formerly filled by the F-14.\nThe last American F-14 combat mission was completed on 8 February 2006, when a pair of Tomcats landed aboard after one dropped a bomb over Iraq. During their final deployment with \"Theodore Roosevelt\", VF-31 and VF-213 collectively completed 1,163 combat sorties totaling 6,876 flight hours, and dropped of ordnance during reconnaissance, surveillance, and close air support missions in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. USS \"Theodore Roosevelt\" launched an F-14D, of VF-31, for the last time on 28 July 2006; piloted by Lt. Blake Coleman and Lt. Cmdr Dave Lauderbaugh as RIO. The last two F-14 squadrons, the VF-31 Tomcatters, and the VF-213 Black Lions conducted their last fly-in at Naval Air Station Oceana on 10 March 2006.\nThe official final flight retirement ceremony was on 22 September 2006 at Naval Air Station Oceana and was flown by Lt. Cmdr. Chris Richard and Lt. Mike Petronis as RIO in a backup F-14 after the primary aircraft experienced mechanical problems. The actual last flight of an F-14 in U.S. service took place 4 October 2006, when an F-14D of VF-31 was ferried from NAS Oceana to Republic Airport on Long Island, New York. The remaining intact F-14 aircraft in the U.S. were flown to and stored at the 309th Aerospace Maintenance and Regeneration Group \"Boneyard\", at Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, Arizona; in 2007 the U.S. Navy announced plans to shred the remaining F-14s to prevent any components from being acquired by Iran. In August 2009, the 309th AMARG stated that the last aircraft were taken to HVF West, Tucson, Arizona for shredding. At that time only 11 F-14s remained in desert storage.\nIran.\nThe sole foreign customer for the Tomcat was the Imperial Iranian Air Force, during the reign of the last Shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. In the early 1970s, the Imperial Iranian Air Force (IIAF) was searching for an advanced fighter, specifically one capable of intercepting Soviet MiG-25 reconnaissance flights. After a visit of U.S. President Richard Nixon to Iran in 1972, during which Iran was offered the latest in American military technology, the IIAF selected and initiated acquisition of the F-14 Tomcat, but offered McDonnell Douglas the chance to demonstrate its F-15 Eagle. The US Navy and Grumman Corporation arranged competitive demonstrations of the Eagle and the Tomcat at Andrews AFB for the Shah and high-ranking officers, and in January 1974 Iran placed an order for 30 F-14s and 424 AIM-54 Phoenix missiles, initiating Project \"Persian King\", worth US$300\u00a0million. A few months later, this order was increased to a total of 80 Tomcats and 714 Phoenix missiles as well as spare parts and replacement engines for 10 years, complete armament package, and support infrastructure (including construction of the Khatami Air Base near Isfahan).\nThe first F-14 arrived in January 1976, modified only by the removal of classified avionics components, but fitted with the TF-30-414 engines. The following year 12 more were delivered. Meanwhile, training of the first groups of Iranian crews by the U.S. Navy was underway in the US; one of these conducted a successful shoot-down with a Phoenix missile of a target drone flying at .\nFollowing the overthrow of the Shah in 1979, the air force was renamed the Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force (IRIAF) and the post-revolution Interim Government of Iran canceled most Western arms orders. In 1980, an Iranian F-14 shot down an Iraqi Mil Mi-25 helicopter for its first air-to-air kill during the Iran\u2013Iraq War (1980\u20131988). According to research by Tom Cooper, Iranian F-14s scored at least 50 air-to-air victories in the first six months of the war against Iraqi MiG-21s, MiG-23s, and some Su-20s/22s. During the same period, only one Iranian F-14 suffered damage after being hit by debris from a nearby MiG-21 that exploded.\nIranian Tomcats were originally used as an early-warning platform assisting other less-sophisticated aircraft with targeting and defense. They were also crucial to the defense of areas deemed vital by the Iranian government, such as oil terminals on Kharg Island and industrial infrastructure in the capital Tehran. Many of these patrols had the support of Boeing 707-3J9C in-flight refueling tankers. As fighting escalated between 1982 and 1986, the F-14s gradually became more involved in the battle. They performed well, but their primary role was to intimidate the Iraqi Air Force and avoid heavy engagement to protect the fleet's numbers. Their presence was often enough to drive away opposing Iraqi fighters. The precision and effectiveness of the Tomcat's AWG-9 weapons system and AIM-54A Phoenix long-range air-to-air missiles enabled the F-14 to maintain air superiority. In December 1980, an Iraqi MiG-21bis accounted for the only confirmed kill of an F-14 by that type of aircraft. On 11 August 1984, a MiG-23ML shot down an F-14A using an R-60 missile. On 2 September 1986, a MiG-23ML mistakenly shot down an F-14 that was defecting to Iraq with an R-24T missile. In another engagement, a MiG-23ML shot down another F-14A on 17 January 1987.\nIraq also obtained Mirage F.1EQ fighters from France in 1981, armed with Super530F and Magic Mk.2 air-to-air missiles. The Mirage F.1 fighters were eventually responsible for three confirmed F-14 kills. The IRIAF attempted to keep 60 F-14s operational throughout the war, but reports indicate this number was reduced to 30 by 1986 with only half fully mission-capable.\nBased on research by Tom Cooper and Farzad Bishop, Iranian claimed their F-14s shot down at least 160 Iraqi aircraft during the Iran\u2013Iraq War, including 58 MiG-23s (15 of these are confirmed according to Cooper), 33 Mirage F1s, 23 MiG-21s, 23 Su-20s/22s, nine MiG-25s (one of these are confirmed according to Iraqi), five Tu-22s, two MiG-27s, one Mil Mi-24, one Dassault Mirage 5, one B-6D, one A\u00e9rospatiale Super Frelon, and two unidentified aircraft. Despite the circumstances the F-14s and their crews faced during the war against Iraq \u2013 lacking support from AWACS, AEW aircraft, and Ground Control Intercept (GCI) \u2013 the F-14 proved to be successful in combat. It achieved this in the midst of a confrontation with an enemy that was constantly upgrading its capabilities and receiving support from three major countries \u2013 France, the US, and the USSR. Part of the success is attributed to the resilient Iranian economy and IRIAF personnel.\nWhile Iraq's army claimed it shot down more than 70 F-14s, the Foreign Broadcast Information System in Washington DC estimated that Iran lost 12 to 16 F-14 during the war. Cooper writes three F-14 were shot down by Iraqi pilots and four by Iranian surface-to-air missiles (SAM). Two more Tomcats were lost in unknown circumstances during the battle, and seven crashed due to technical failure or accidents. During the war, the Iranian Air Force F-14s suffered 9 confirmed losses, one lost due to engine stall, one in unknown conditions, two by Iranian Hawk SAMs, two by MIG-23s and three were shot down by Mirage F-1EQs. There are also unconfirmed reports of the downing of 10 more Tomcats.\nOn 31 August 1986, an Iranian F-14A armed with at least one AIM-54A missile defected to Iraq. Then again on 2 September 1986 another Iranian F-14A defected to Iraq. In addition, one or more of Iran's F-14A was delivered to the Soviet Union in exchange for technical assistance; at least one of its crew defected to the Soviet Union.\nOn 24 July 2002, an Iranian F-14A confronted two Azerbaijani MiG-25s that were threatening an Iranian P-3F, securing a radar lock on one of the MiGs, which then turned away, during tensions over attempts by Azerbaijan to survey for oil in Iranian waters in the Caspian Sea.\nIran had an estimated 44 F-14s in 2009 according to Combat Aircraft. Aviation Week estimated it had 19 operational F-14s in January 2013, and Flight Global estimated that 28 were in service in 2014.\nFollowing the US Navy's retirement of its Tomcats in 2006, Iran sought to purchase spare parts for its aircraft. In January 2007, the U.S. Department of Defense announced that sales of spare F-14 parts would be suspended over concerns of the parts ending up in Iran. In July 2007, the remaining American F-14s were shredded to ensure that any parts could not be acquired. Despite these measures, Iran managed to significantly increase its stocks of spare parts, increasing the number of airworthy Tomcats, although as it did not manage to obtain spare parts for the aircraft's weapon systems, the number of combat ready Tomcats was still low (seven in 2008). In 2010, Iran requested that the U.S. deliver the 80th F-14 that it had purchased in 1974 but never received due to the Islamic Revolution. In October 2010, an Iranian Air Force commander claimed that the country overhauls and optimizes different types of military aircraft, mentioning their Air Force has installed Iran-made radar systems on the F-14. In 2012, the Iranian Air Force's Mehrabad Overhaul Center delivered an F-14 with upgraded weapon systems with locally sourced components, designated F-14AM. Shortages of Phoenix missiles led to attempts to integrate the Russian R-27 semi-active radar-guided missile, but these proved unsuccessful. An alternative was the use of modified MIM-23 Hawk missiles to replace the Tomcat's Phoenixes and Sparrows, but as the Tomcat could only carry two Hawks, this project was also abandoned, and the Fakour-90 missile, which used the guidance system of the Hawk packaged into the airframe of the Phoenix, launched. Pre-production Fakour-90s were delivered in 2017, and a production order for 100 missiles (now designated AIM-23B) was placed in 2018, intending to replace the F-14s AIM-7E Sparrow missiles.\nOn 26 January 2012, an Iranian F-14 crashed three minutes after takeoff. Both crew members were killed.\nIn November 2015, Iranian F-14s had been reported flying escort for Russian Tu-95 bombers on air strikes in Syria against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.\nVariants.\nA total of 712 F-14s were built from 1969 to 1991. F-14 assembly and test flights were performed at Grumman's plant in Calverton on Long Island, New York. Grumman facility at nearby Bethpage, New York was directly involved in F-14 manufacturing and was home to its engineers. The airframes were partially assembled in Bethpage and then shipped to Calverton for final assembly. Various tests were also performed at the Bethpage Plant. Over 160 of the U.S. aircraft were destroyed in accidents.\nF-14A.\nThe F-14A was the initial two-seat, twin-engine, all-weather interceptor fighter variant for the U.S. Navy. It first flew on 21 December 1970. The first 12 F-14As were prototype versions (sometimes called YF-14As). Modifications late in its service life added precision strike munitions to its armament. The U.S. Navy received 478 F-14A aircraft and 79 were received by Iran. The final 102 F-14As were delivered with improved Pratt &amp; Whitney TF30-P-414A engines. Additionally, an 80th F-14A was manufactured for Iran, but was delivered to the U.S. Navy.\nF-14B.\nThe F-14 received its first of many major upgrades in March 1987 with the F-14A Plus (or F-14A+). The F-14A's TF30 engine was replaced with the improved GE F110-GE-400 engine. The F-14A+ also received the state-of-the-art ALR-67 Radar Homing and Warning (RHAW) system. Much of the avionics components, as well as the AWG-9 radar, were retained. The F-14A+ was later redesignated F-14B on 1 May 1991. A total of 38 new aircraft were manufactured and 48 F-14A were upgraded into B variants.\nThe TF30 had been plagued from the start with susceptibility to compressor stalls at high AoA and during rapid throttle transients or above . The F110-400 engine provided a significant increase in thrust, producing with afterburner at sea level, which rose to at Mach 0.9. The increased thrust gave the Tomcat a better than 1:1 thrust-to-weight ratio at low fuel quantities. The basic engine thrust without afterburner was powerful enough for carrier launches, further increasing safety. Another benefit was allowing the Tomcat to cruise comfortably above , which increased its range and survivability. The F-14B arrived in time to participate in Desert Storm.\nIn the late 1990s, 67 F-14Bs were upgraded to extend airframe life and improve offensive and defensive avionics systems. The modified aircraft became known as \"F-14B Upgrade\".\nF-14D.\nThe final variant of the F-14 was the F-14D Super Tomcat. The F-14D variant was first delivered in 1991. The original Pratt &amp; Whitney TF30 engines were replaced with General Electric F110-GE-400 engines, similar to the F-14B. The F-14D also included newer digital avionics systems including a glass cockpit and replaced the AWG-9 with the newer AN/APG-71 radar. Other systems included the Airborne Self Protection Jammer (ASPJ), Joint Tactical Information Distribution System (JTIDS), SJU-17(V) Naval Aircrew Common Ejection Seats (NACES), and Infrared search and track (IRST).\nThe GE F110-GE-400 engine provided increased thrust and additional endurance to extend range or to stay on station much longer. In the overland attack role this gave the F-14D 60 percent more striking range or one-third more time on station. The rate of climb was increased by 61 percent. The F110's increased thrust allowed almost all carrier launches to be made in military (dry) power. While this did result in fuel savings, the main reason not to use afterburner during carrier launches was that if an engine failed the F110's thrust in full afterburner would produce a yawing moment too abruptly for the pilot to correct. Thus the launch of an F-14D with afterburner was rare, while the F-14A required full afterburner unless very lightly loaded.\nAlthough the F-14D was to be the definitive version of the Tomcat, not all fleet units received the D variant. In 1989, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney refused to approve the purchase of any more F-14D model aircraft for $50\u00a0million each and pushed for a $25\u00a0million modernization of the F-14 fleet instead. Congress decided not to shut production down and funded 55 aircraft as part of a compromise. A total of 37 new aircraft were completed, and 18 F-14A models were upgraded to D-models, designated F-14D(R) for a rebuild. An upgrade to the F-14D's computer software to allow AIM-120 AMRAAM missile capability was planned but was later terminated to free up funding for LANTIRN integration.\nWhile upgrades had kept the F-14 competitive with modern fighter aircraft technology, Cheney called the F-14 1960s technology. Despite an appeal from the Secretary of the Navy for at least 132 F-14Ds and some aggressive proposals from Grumman for a replacement, Cheney planned to replace the F-14 with a fighter that was not manufactured by Grumman. Cheney called the F-14 a \"jobs program\", and when the F-14 was canceled, an estimated 80,000 jobs of Grumman employees, subcontractors, or support personnel were affected. Starting in 2005, some F-14Ds received the ROVER III upgrade.\nProjected variants.\nThe first \"F-14B\" was to be an improved version of the F-14A with more powerful \"Advanced Technology Engine\" F401 turbofans. The \"F-14C\" was a projected variant of this initial F-14B with advanced multi-mission avionics. Grumman also offered an interceptor version of the F-14B in response to the U.S. Air Force's Improved Manned Interceptor Program to replace the Convair F-106 Delta Dart as an Aerospace Defense Command interceptor in the 1970s. The F-14B program was terminated in April 1974.\nGrumman proposed a few improved \"Super Tomcat\" versions. The first was the \"Quickstrike\", which was an F-14D with navigational and targeting pods, additional attach points for weapons, and added ground attack capabilities to its radar. The Quickstrike was to fill the role of the A-6 Intruder after it was retired. This was not considered enough of an improvement by Congress, so the company shifted to the \"Super Tomcat 21\" proposed design. The Super Tomcat 21 was a proposed lower cost alternative to the Navy Advanced Tactical Fighter (NATF). The Grumman design would have the same shape and body as the Tomcat, and an upgraded AN/APG-71 radar. New GE F110-129 engines were to provide a supercruise speed of Mach 1.3 and featured thrust vectoring nozzles. The version would have increased fuel capacity and modified control surfaces for improved takeoffs and lower landing approach speed. The \"Attack Super Tomcat 21\" version was the last Super Tomcat proposed design. It added even more fuel capacity, more improvements to control surfaces, and possibly an active electronically scanned array (AESA) radar from the canceled A-12 attack aircraft.\nThe last \"Tomcat\" variant was the \"ASF-14\" (Advanced Strike Fighter-14), Grumman's replacement for the NATF concept. By all accounts, it would not be even remotely related to the previous Tomcats save in appearance, incorporating the new technology and design know-how from the Advanced Tactical Fighter (ATF) and Advanced Tactical Aircraft (ATA) programs. The ASF-14 would have been a new-build aircraft; however, its projected capabilities were not that much better than that of the (A)ST-21 variants. In the end, the Attack Super Tomcat was considered to be too costly. The Navy decided to pursue the cheaper F/A-18E/F Super Hornet to fill the fighter-attack role.\nAircraft on display.\nNotable F-14s preserved at museums and military installations include:\nTomcat logo.\nThe Tomcat logo design came when Grumman's Director of Presentation Services, Dick Milligan, and one of his artists, Grumman employee Jim Rodriguez, were asked for a logo by Grumman's Director of Business Development and former Blue Angels No. 5 pilot, Norm Gandia. Per Rodriguez, \"He asked me to draw a lifelike Tomcat wearing boxing gloves and trunks sporting a six-shooter on his left side; where the guns are located on the F-14, along with two tails.\" The Cat was drawn up after a tabby cat was sourced and used for photographs, and named \"Tom\". The logo has gone through many variations, including one for the then\u2013Imperial Iranian Air Force F-14, called \"Ali-cat\". The accompanying slogan \"Anytime Baby!\" was developed by Norm Gandia as a challenge to the U.S. Air Force's McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle.\nNotable appearances in media.\nThe Grumman F-14 Tomcat was central to the 1986 film \"Top Gun\". The aviation-themed film was such a success in creating interest in naval aviation that the US Navy, which assisted with the film, set up recruitment desks outside some theaters. Producers paid the US Navy as reimbursement for flight time of aircraft in the film with an F-14 billed at per flight hour.\nTwo F-14As of VF-84 from the USS \"Nimitz\" were featured in the 1980 film \"The Final Countdown\", with four from the squadron in the 1996 release \"Executive Decision\", the Jolly Rogers' final film appearance before being disestablished. The military legal drama TV series \"JAG\" (1995\u20132005) featured lead character Harmon Rabb, a Tomcat pilot-turned-lawyer.\nMultiple F-14s are featured in the 2008 documentary \"Speed and Angels\", featuring the story of two young Navy recruits working to achieve their dream of becoming F-14 fighter pilots."}
