{"id": "4215", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4215", "title": "Brian de Palma", "text": ""}
{"id": "4216", "revid": "1024007828", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4216", "title": "Brian De Palma", "text": "Brian Russell De Palma (born September 11, 1940) is an American film director and screenwriter. With a career spanning over 50 years, he is best known for his work in the suspense, crime and psychological thriller genres. His prominent films include mainstream box office hits such as \"Carrie\" (1976), \"Dressed to Kill\" (1980), \"Scarface\" (1983), \"The Untouchables\" (1987), and \"\" (1996), as well as cult favorites such as \"Sisters\" (1972), \"Phantom of the Paradise\" (1974), \"Blow Out\" (1981), \"Body Double\" (1984), \"Casualties of War\" (1989), \"Carlito's Way\" (1993), and \"Femme Fatale\" (2002).\nDe Palma is often cited as a leading member of the New Hollywood generation of film directors. His directing style often makes use of quotations from other films or cinematic styles, and bears the influence of filmmakers such as Alfred Hitchcock and Jean-Luc Godard. His films have been criticised for their violence and sexual content but have also been championed by prominent American critics such as Roger Ebert and Pauline Kael.\nEarly life.\nDe Palma was born on September 11, 1940, in Newark, New Jersey, the youngest of three boys. His Italian-American parents were Vivienne DePalma (n\u00e9e Muti), and Anthony DePalma, an orthopedic surgeon who was the son of immigrants from Alberona, Province of Foggia. He was raised in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and New Hampshire, and attended various Protestant and Quaker schools, eventually graduating from Friends' Central School. He had a poor relationship with his father, and would secretly follow him to record his adulterous behavior; this would eventually inspire the teenage character played by Keith Gordon in De Palma's 1980 film \"Dressed to Kill\". When he was in high school, he built computers. He won a regional science-fair prize for a project titled \"An Analog Computer to Solve Differential Equations\".\nCareer.\n1960s and early career.\nEnrolled at Columbia University as a physics student, De Palma became enraptured with the filmmaking process after viewing \"Citizen Kane\" and \"Vertigo\". After receiving his undergraduate degree in 1962, De Palma enrolled at the newly coed Sarah Lawrence College as a graduate student in their theater department, earning an M.A. in the discipline in 1964 and becoming one of the first male students among a female population. Once there, influences as various as drama teacher Wilford Leach, the Maysles brothers, Michelangelo Antonioni, Jean-Luc Godard, Andy Warhol, and Alfred Hitchcock impressed upon De Palma the many styles and themes that would shape his own cinema in the coming decades.\nAn early association with a young Robert De Niro resulted in \"The Wedding Party\". The film, which was co-directed with Leach and producer Cynthia Munroe, had been shot in 1963 but remained unreleased until 1969, when De Palma's star had risen sufficiently within the Greenwich Village filmmaking scene. De Niro was unknown at the time; the credits mistakenly display his name as \"Robert \". The film is noteworthy for its invocation of silent film techniques and an insistence on the jump-cut for effect. De Palma followed this style with various small films for the NAACP and the Treasury Department.\nDuring the 1960s, De Palma began making a living producing documentary films, notably \"The Responsive Eye\", a 1966 movie about \"The Responsive Eye\" op-art exhibit curated by William Seitz for MOMA in 1965. In an interview with Gelmis from 1969, De Palma described the film as \"very good and very successful. It's distributed by Pathe Contemporary and makes lots of money. I shot it in four hours, with synched sound. I had two other guys shooting people's reactions to the paintings, and the paintings themselves.\"\n\"Dionysus in 69\" (1969) was De Palma's other major documentary from this period. The film records The Performance Group's performance of Euripides' \"The Bacchae\", starring, amongst others, De Palma regular William Finley. The play is noted for breaking traditional barriers between performers and audience. The film's most striking quality is its extensive use of the split-screen. De Palma recalls that he was \"floored\" by this performance upon first sight, and in 1973 recounts how he \"began to try and figure out a way to capture it on film. I came up with the idea of split-screen, to be able to show the actual audience involvement, to trace the life of the audience and that of the play as they merge in and out of each other.\"\nDe Palma's most significant features from this decade are \"Greetings\" (1968) and \"Hi, Mom!\" (1970). Both films star Robert De Niro and espouse a Leftist revolutionary viewpoint common to their era. \"Greetings\" was entered into the 19th Berlin International Film Festival, where it won a Silver Bear award. His other major film from this period is the slasher comedy \"Murder a la Mod\". Each of these films experiments with narrative and intertextuality, reflecting De Palma's stated intention to become the \"American Godard\" while integrating several of the themes which permeated Hitchcock's work.\n1970s: transition to Hollywood.\nIn the 1970s, De Palma went to Hollywood where he worked on bigger budget films. In 1970, De Palma left New York for Hollywood at age thirty to make \"Get to Know Your Rabbit\", starring Orson Welles and Tommy Smothers. Making the film was a crushing experience for De Palma, as Smothers did not like many of De Palma's ideas.\nAfter several small, studio and independently-released films that included stand-outs \"Sisters\", \"Phantom of the Paradise\", and \"Obsession\", De Palma directed a film adaptation of the 1974 novel \"Carrie\". Though the psychic thriller is seen by some as De Palma's bid for a blockbuster, the project was in fact small, underfunded by United Artists, and well under the cultural radar during the early months of production, as the source novel by Stephen King had yet to climb the bestseller list. De Palma gravitated toward the project and changed crucial plot elements based upon his own predilections, not the saleability of the novel. The cast was young and relatively new, though Sissy Spacek and John Travolta had gained attention for previous work in, respectively, film and episodic sitcoms. \"Carrie\" became a hit, the first genuine box-office success for De Palma. It garnered Spacek and Piper Laurie Oscar nominations for their performances. Pre-production for the film had coincided with the casting process for George Lucas's \"Star Wars\", and many of the actors cast in De Palma's film had been earmarked as contenders for Lucas's movie, and vice versa. The \"shock ending\" finale is effective even while it upholds horror-film convention, its suspense sequences are buttressed by teen comedy tropes, and its use of split-screen, split-diopter and slow motion shots tell the story visually rather than through dialogue.\nThe financial and critical success of \"Carrie\" allowed De Palma to pursue more personal material. \"The Demolished Man\" was a novel that had fascinated De Palma since the late 1950s and appealed to his background in mathematics and avant-garde storytelling. Its unconventional unfolding of plot (exemplified in its mathematical layout of dialogue) and its stress on perception have analogs in De Palma's filmmaking. He sought to adapt it on numerous occasions, though the project would carry a substantial price tag, and has yet to appear on-screen (Steven Spielberg's 2002 adaptation of Philip K. Dick's \"Minority Report\" bears striking similarities to De Palma's visual style and some of the themes of \"The Demolished Man\"). The result of his experience with adapting \"The Demolished Man\" was \"The Fury\", a science fiction psychic thriller that starred Kirk Douglas, Carrie Snodgress, John Cassavetes and Amy Irving. The film was admired by Jean-Luc Godard, who featured a clip in his mammoth \"Histoire(s) du cin\u00e9ma\", and Pauline Kael who championed both \"The Fury\" and De Palma. The film boasted a larger budget than \"Carrie\", though the consensus view at the time was that De Palma was repeating himself, with diminishing returns. As a film, it retains De Palma's considerable visual flair, but points more toward his work in mainstream entertainments such as \"\", the thematic complex thriller for which he is now better known.\n1980s and breakthrough.\nThe 1980s were denoted by some De Palma's De Palma's best known films including \"Dressed to Kill\" (1980), \"Blow Out\" (1981), \"Scarface\" (1983), \"Body Double\" (1984), and \"The Untouchables\" (1987). In 1984, he directed the music video of the Bruce Springsteen's single \"Dancing in the Dark\" (which also featured a then unknown Courteney Cox).\n1990s - 2000s: career downturn.\nIn the 1990s and 2000s De Palma's career continued with other films typically in the thriller or drama genres. \"The Bonfire of the Vanities\" (1990) was an infamous failure with both critics and audiences but De Palma had subsequent successes with \"Raising Cain\" (1992) and \"Carlito's Way\" (1993) with \"\" (1996) becoming his highest grossing film and \".\" \nDe Palma's work after \"Mission: Impossible\" has been less well received. His ensuing films Snake Eyes (1998), \"Mission to Mars\" (2000), and \"Femme Fatale\" (2002) all failed at the box office and received generally poor reviews, though the latter has since developed a cult status amongst cinephiles. His 2006 adaptation of The Black Dahlia was also unsuccessful and is currently the last movie De Palma has directed with backing from Hollywood. \nA political controversy erupted over the portrayal of US soldiers in De Palma's 2007 film \"Redacted\". Loosely based on the 2006 Mahmudiyah killings by American soldiers in Iraq, the film echoes themes that appeared in De Palma's Vietnam War film, Casualties of War (1989). \"Redacted\" received a limited release in the United States and grossed less than $1 million against a $5 million budget.\n2010s.\nDe Palma's output has slowed since the release of \"Redacted\". In 2012, his film \"Passion\" starring Rachel McAdams and Noomi Rapace was selected to compete for the Golden Lion at the 69th Venice International Film Festival but received mixed reviews and was financially unsuccessful. \nIn 2015, he was the subject of the well-received documentary \"De Palma,\" directed by Noah Baumbach and Jake Paltrow. \nDe Palma's next project was the 2019 thriller \"Domino.\" It received generally negative reviews and was released direct-to-VOD in the United States, grossing less than half a million dollars internationally. De Palma has also expressed dissatisfaction with both the production of the film and the final product.\nTrademarks and style.\nThemes.\nDe Palma's films can fall into two categories, his psychological thrillers (\"Sisters\", \"Body Double\", \"Obsession\", \"Dressed to Kill\", \"Blow Out\", \"Raising Cain\") and his mainly commercial films (\"Scarface\", \"The Untouchables\", \"Carlito's Way\", and \"Mission: Impossible\"). He has often produced \"De Palma\" films one after the other before going on to direct a different genre, but would always return to his familiar territory. Because of the subject matter and graphic violence of some of De Palma's films, such as \"Dressed to Kill\", \"Scarface\" and \"Body Double\", they are often at the center of controversy with the Motion Picture Association of America, film critics and the viewing public.\nDe Palma is known for quoting and referencing other directors' work throughout his career. Michelangelo Antonioni's \"Blowup\" and Francis Ford Coppola's \"The Conversation\" plots were used for the basis of \"Blow Out\". \"The Untouchables\" finale shoot out in the train station is a clear borrow from the Odessa Steps sequence in Sergei Eisenstein's \"The Battleship Potemkin\". The main plot from \"Rear Window\" was used for \"Body Double\", while it also used elements of \"Vertigo\". \"Vertigo\" was also the basis for \"Obsession\". \"Dressed to Kill\" was a note-for-note homage to Hitchcock's \"Psycho\", including such moments as the surprise death of the lead actress and the exposition scene by the psychiatrist at the end.\nCamera shots.\nFilm critics have often noted De Palma's penchant for unusual camera angles and compositions throughout his career. He often frames characters against the background using a canted angle shot. Split-screen techniques have been used to show two separate events happening simultaneously. To emphasize the dramatic impact of a certain scene De Palma has employed a 360-degree camera pan. Slow sweeping, panning and tracking shots are often used throughout his films, often through precisely-choreographed long takes lasting for minutes without cutting. Split focus shots, often referred to as \"di-opt\", are used by De Palma to emphasize the foreground person/object while simultaneously keeping a background person/object in focus. Slow-motion is frequently used in his films to increase suspense.\nPersonal life.\nDe Palma has been married and divorced three times, to actress Nancy Allen (1979\u20131983), producer Gale Anne Hurd (1991\u20131993), and Darnell Gregorio (1995\u20131997). He has one daughter from his marriage to Hurd, Lolita de Palma, born in 1991, and one daughter from his marriage to Gregorio, Piper De Palma, born in 1996. He resides in Manhattan, New York.\nRenowned paleontologist Robert De Palma is Brian De Palma's cousin.\nLegacy.\nDe Palma is often cited as a leading member of the New Hollywood generation of film directors, a distinct pedigree who either emerged from film schools or are overtly cine-literate. His contemporaries include Martin Scorsese, Paul Schrader, John Milius, George Lucas, Francis Ford Coppola, Steven Spielberg, John Carpenter, and Ridley Scott. His artistry in directing and use of cinematography and suspense in several of his films has often been compared to the work of Alfred Hitchcock. Psychologists have been intrigued by De Palma's fascination with pathology, by the aberrant behavior aroused in characters who find themselves manipulated by others.\nDe Palma has encouraged and fostered the filmmaking careers of directors such as Mark Romanek and Keith Gordon, the latter of whom he collaborated with twice with Gordon as an actor, both in 1980's \"Home Movies\" and \"Dressed to Kill\". Filmmakers influenced by De Palma include Terrence Malick, Quentin Tarantino, Ronny Yu, Don Mancini, Nacho Vigalondo, and Jack Thomas Smith. During an interview with De Palma, Quentin Tarantino said that \"Blow Out\" is one of his all-time favorite films, and that after watching \"Scarface\" he knew how to make his own film.\nCritics who frequently admire De Palma's work include Pauline Kael and Roger Ebert. Kael wrote in her review of \"Blow Out\", \"At forty, Brian De Palma has more than twenty years of moviemaking behind him, and he has been growing better and better. Each time a new film of his opens, everything he has done before seems to have been preparation for it.\" In his review of \"Femme Fatale\", Roger Ebert wrote about the director: \"De Palma deserves more honor as a director. Consider also these titles: \"Sisters\", \"Blow Out\", \"The Fury\", \"Dressed to Kill\", \"Carrie\", \"Scarface\", \"Wise Guys\", \"Casualties of War\", \"Carlito's Way\", \"Mission: Impossible\". Yes, there are a few failures along the way (\"Snake Eyes\", \"Mission to Mars\", \"The Bonfire of the Vanities\"), but look at the range here, and reflect that these movies contain treasure for those who admire the craft as well as the story, who sense the glee with which De Palma manipulates images and characters for the simple joy of being good at it. It's not just that he sometimes works in the style of Hitchcock, but that he has the nerve to.\"\nThe influential French film magazine \"Cahiers du Cin\u00e9ma\" has placed five of De Palma's films (\"Carlito's Way\", \"\", \"Snake Eyes\", \"Mission to Mars\", and \"Redacted\") on their annual top ten list, with \"Redacted\" placing first on the 2008 list. The magazine also listed \"Carlito's Way\" as the greatest film of the 1990s.\nCriticism.\nJulie Salamon has written that critics have accused De Palma of being \"a perverse misogynist\". De Palma has responded to such accusations by saying: \"I'm always attacked for having an erotic, sexist approach chopping up women, putting women in peril. I'm making suspense movies! What else is going to happen to them?\"\nHis films have also been interpreted as feminist and examined for their perceived queer affinities. In Film Comment's \"Queer and Now and Then\" column on \"Femme Fatale\", film critic Michael Koresky writes that \"De Palma's films radiate an undeniable queer energy\" and notes the \"intense appeal\" De Palma's films have for gay critics. In her book \"The Erotic Thriller in Contemporary Cinema\", Linda Ruth Williams writes that \"De Palma understood the cinematic potency of dangerous fucking, perhaps earlier than his feminist detractors\".\nRobin Wood considered \"Sisters\" an overtly feminist film, writing that \"one can define the monster of \"Sisters\" as women's liberation; adding only that the film follows the time-honored horror film tradition of making the monster emerge as the most sympathetic character and its emotional center.\" Pauline Kael's review of \"Casualties of War\", \"A Wounded Apparition\", describes the film as \"feminist\" and notes that \"De Palma was always involved in examining (and sometimes satirizing) victimization, but he was often accused of being a victimizer\". Helen Grace, in a piece for Lola Journal, writes that upon seeing \"Dressed to Kill\" amidst calls for a boycott from feminist groups Women Against Violence Against Women and Women Against Pornography, that the film \"seemed to say more about masculine anxiety than about the fears that women were expressing in relation to the film\".\nDavid Thomson wrote in his entry for De Palma, \"There is a self-conscious cunning in De Palma's work, ready to control everything except his own cruelty and indifference.\" Matt Zoller Seitz objected to this characterisation, writing that there are films from the director which can be seen as \"straightforwardly empathetic and/or moralistic\"."}
{"id": "4218", "revid": "8086180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4218", "title": "North American B-25 Mitchell", "text": "The North American B-25 Mitchell is a medium bomber that was introduced in 1941 and named in honor of Major General William \"Billy\" Mitchell, a pioneer of U.S. military aviation. Used by many Allied air forces, the B-25 served in every theater of World War II, and after the war ended, many remained in service, operating across four decades. Produced in numerous variants, nearly 10,000 B-25s were built. These included several limited models such as the F-10 reconnaissance aircraft, the AT-24 crew trainers, and the United States Marine Corps' PBJ-1 patrol bomber.\nDesign and development.\nThe Air Corps issued a specification for a medium bomber in March 1939 that was capable of carrying a payload of over at North American Aviation used its NA-40B design to develop the NA-62, which competed for the medium bomber contract. No YB-25 was available for prototype service tests. In September 1939, the Air Corps ordered the NA-62 into production as the B-25, along with the other new Air Corps medium bomber, the Martin B-26 Marauder \"off the drawing board\".\nEarly into B-25 production, NAA incorporated a significant redesign to the wing dihedral. The first nine aircraft had a constant-dihedral, meaning the wing had a consistent, upward angle from the fuselage to the wingtip. This design caused stability problems. \"Flattening\" the outer wing panels by giving them a slight anhedral angle just outboard of the engine nacelles nullified the problem and gave the B-25 its gull wing configuration. Less noticeable changes during this period included an increase in the size of the tail fins and a decrease in their inward tilt at their tops.\nNAA continued design and development in 1940 and 1941. Both the B-25A and B-25B series entered USAAF service. The B-25B was operational in 1942. Combat requirements led to further developments. Before the year was over, NAA was producing the B-25C and B-25D series at different plants. Also in 1942, the manufacturer began design work on the cannon-armed B-25G series. The NA-100 of 1943 and 1944 was an interim armament development at the Kansas City complex known as the B-25D2. Similar armament upgrades by U.S-based commercial modification centers involved about half of the B-25G series. Further development led to the B-25H, B-25J, and B-25J2. The gunship design concept dates to late 1942 and NAA sent a field technical representative to the SWPA. The factory-produced B-25G entered production during the NA-96 order followed by the redesigned B-25H gunship. The B-25J reverted to the bomber role, but it, too, could be outfitted as a strafer.\nNAA manufactured the greatest number of aircraft in World War II, the first time a company had produced trainers, bombers, and fighters simultaneously (the AT-6/SNJ Texan/Harvard, B-25 Mitchell, and the P-51 Mustang). It produced B-25s at both its Inglewood main plant and an additional 6,608 aircraft at its Kansas City, Kansas, plant at Fairfax Airport.\nAfter the war, the USAF placed a contract for the TB-25L trainer in 1952. This was a modification program by Hayes of Birmingham, Alabama. Its primary role was reciprocating engine pilot training.\nA development of the B-25 was the North American XB-28, designed as a high-altitude bomber. Two prototypes were built with the second prototype, the XB-28A, evaluated as a photo-reconnaissance platform, but the aircraft did not enter production.\nOperational history.\nAsia-Pacific.\nThe majority of B-25s in American service were used in the war against Japan in Asia and the Pacific. The Mitchell fought from the Northern Pacific to the South Pacific and the Far East. These areas included the campaigns in the Aleutian Islands, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, New Britain, China, Burma and the island hopping campaign in the Central Pacific. The aircraft's potential as a ground-attack aircraft emerged during the Pacific war. The jungle environment reduced the usefulness of medium-level bombing, and made low-level attack the best tactic. Using similar mast height level tactics and skip bombing, the B-25 proved itself to be a capable anti-shipping weapon and sank many enemy sea vessels of various types. An ever-increasing number of forward firing guns made the B-25 a formidable strafing aircraft for island warfare. The strafer versions were the B-25C1/D1, the B-25J1 and with the NAA strafer nose, the J2 subseries.\nIn Burma, the B-25 was often used to attack Japanese communication links, especially bridges in central Burma. It also helped supply the besieged troops at Imphal in 1944. The China Air Task Force, the Chinese American Composite Wing, the First Air Commando Group, the 341st Bomb Group, and eventually, the relocated 12th Bomb Group, all operated the B-25 in the China Burma India Theater. Many of these missions involved battle-field isolation, interdiction, and close air support.\nLater in the war, as the USAAF acquired bases in other parts of the Pacific, the Mitchell could strike targets in Indochina, Formosa, and Kyushu, increasing the usefulness of the B-25. It was also used in some of the shortest raids of the Pacific War, striking from Saipan against Guam and Tinian. The 41st Bomb Group used it against Japanese-occupied islands that had been bypassed by the main campaign, such as happened in the Marshall Islands.\nMiddle East and Italy.\nThe first B-25s arrived in Egypt and were carrying out independent operations by October 1942. Operations there against Axis airfields and motorized vehicle columns supported the ground actions of the Second Battle of El Alamein. Thereafter, the aircraft took part in the rest of the campaign in North Africa, the invasion of Sicily, and the advance up Italy. In the Strait of Messina to the Aegean Sea, the B-25 conducted sea sweeps as part of the coastal air forces. In Italy, the B-25 was used in the ground attack role, concentrating on attacks against road and rail links in Italy, Austria, and the Balkans. The B-25 had a longer range than the Douglas A-20 Havoc and Douglas A-26 Invader, allowing it to reach further into occupied Europe. The five bombardment groups \u2013 20 squadrons \u2013 of the Ninth and Twelfth Air Forces that used the B-25 in the Mediterranean Theater of Operations were the only U.S. units to employ the B-25 in Europe.\nEurope.\nThe RAF received nearly 900 Mitchells, using them to replace Douglas Bostons, Lockheed Venturas, and Vickers Wellington bombers. The Mitchell entered active RAF service on 22 January 1943. At first, it was used to bomb targets in occupied Europe. After the Normandy invasion, the RAF and France used Mitchells in support of the Allies in Europe. Several squadrons moved to forward airbases on the continent. The USAAF did not use the B-25 in combat in the European theater of operations.\nUSAAF.\nThe B-25B first gained fame as the bomber used in the 18 April 1942 Doolittle Raid, in which 16 B-25Bs led by Lieutenant Colonel Jimmy Doolittle attacked mainland Japan, four months after the bombing of Pearl Harbor. The mission gave a much-needed lift in spirits to the Americans and alarmed the Japanese, who had believed their home islands to be inviolable by enemy forces. Although the amount of actual damage done was relatively minor, it forced the Japanese to divert troops for home defense for the remainder of the war.\nThe raiders took off from the carrier and successfully bombed Tokyo and four other Japanese cities without loss. Fifteen of the bombers subsequently crash-landed en route to recovery fields in eastern China. These losses were the result of the task force being spotted by a Japanese vessel, forcing the bombers to take off early, fuel exhaustion, stormy nighttime conditions with zero visibility, and lack of electronic homing aids at the recovery bases. Only one B-25 bomber landed intact, in Siberia, where its five-man crew was interned and the aircraft confiscated. Of the 80 aircrews, 69 survived their historic mission and eventually made it back to American lines.\nFollowing a number of additional modifications, including the addition of Plexiglas dome for navigational sightings to replace the overhead window for the navigator and heavier nose armament, de-icing and anti-icing equipment, the B-25C entered USAAF operations. Through block 20, the B-25C and B-25D differed only in the location of manufacture: C series at Inglewood, California, and D series at Kansas City, Kansas. After block 20, some NA-96s began the transition to the G series, while some NA-87s acquired interim modifications eventually produced as the B-25D2 and ordered as the NA-100. NAA built a total of 3,915 B-25Cs and Ds during World War II.\nAlthough the B-25 was originally designed to bomb from medium altitudes in level flight, it was used frequently in the Southwest Pacific theatre in treetop-level strafing and missions with parachute-retarded fragmentation bombs against Japanese airfields in New Guinea and the Philippines. These heavily armed Mitchells were field-modified at Townsville, Australia, under the direction of Major Paul I. \"Pappy\" Gunn and North American technical representative Jack Fox. These \"commerce destroyers\" were also used on strafing and skip bombing missions against Japanese shipping trying to resupply their armies.\nUnder the leadership of Lieutenant General George C. Kenney, Mitchells of the Far East Air Forces and its existing components, the Fifth and Thirteenth Air Forces, devastated Japanese targets in the Southwest Pacific Theater during 1944 to 1945. The USAAF played a significant role in pushing the Japanese back to their home islands. The type operated with great effect in the Central Pacific, Alaska, North Africa, Mediterranean, and China-Burma-India theaters.\nThe USAAF Antisubmarine Command made great use of the B-25 in 1942 and 1943. Some of the earliest B-25 bomb groups also flew the Mitchell on coastal patrols after the Pearl Harbor attack, prior to the AAFAC organization. Many of the two dozen or so antisubmarine squadrons flew the B-25C, D, and G series in the American Theater antisubmarine campaign, often in the distinctive, white sea-search camouflage.\nCombat developments.\nUse as a gunship.\nIn anti-shipping operations, the USAAF had an urgent need for hard-hitting aircraft, and North American responded with the B-25G. In this series, the transparent nose and bombardier/navigator position was changed for a shorter, hatched nose with two fixed .50\u00a0in (12.7\u00a0mm) machine guns and a manually loaded 75\u00a0mm (2.95\u00a0in) M4 cannon, one of the largest weapons fitted to an aircraft, similar to the British 57\u00a0mm gun-armed Mosquito Mk. XVIII and the autoloading German 75\u00a0mm long-barrel \"Bordkanone BK 7,5\" heavy-calibre ordnance fitted to both the Henschel Hs 129B-3 and Junkers Ju 88P-1. The B-25G's shorter nose placed the cannon breech behind the pilot, where it could be manually loaded and serviced by the navigator; his crew station was moved to a position just behind the pilot. The navigator signaled the pilot when the gun was ready and the pilot fired the weapon using a button on his control wheel.\nThe Royal Air Force, U.S. Navy, and Soviet VVS each conducted trials with this series, but none adopted it. The G series comprised one prototype, five preproduction C conversions, 58 C series modifications, and 400 production aircraft for a total of 464 B-25Gs. In its final version, the G-12, an interim armament modification, eliminated the lower Bendix turret and added a starboard dual gun pack, waist guns, and a canopy for the tail gunner to improve the view when firing the single tail gun. In April 1945, the air depots in Hawaii refurbished about two dozen of these and included the eight-gun nose and rocket launchers in the upgrade.\nThe B-25H series continued the development of the gunship concept. NAA Inglewood produced 1000. The H had even more firepower. Most replaced the M4 gun with the lighter T13E1, designed specifically for the aircraft, but 20-odd H-1 block aircraft completed by the Republic Aviation modification center at Evansville had the M4 and two-machine-gun nose armament. The 75\u00a0mm (2.95\u00a0in) gun fired at a muzzle velocity of . Due to its low rate of fire (about four rounds could be fired in a single strafing run), relative ineffectiveness against ground targets, and the substantial recoil, the 75\u00a0mm gun was sometimes removed from both G and H models and replaced with two additional .50\u00a0in (12.7\u00a0mm) machine guns as a field modification. In the new FEAF, these were redesignated the G1 and H1 series, respectively.\nThe H series normally came from the factory mounting four fixed, forward-firing .50\u00a0in (12.7\u00a0mm) machine guns in the nose; four in a pair of under-cockpit conformal flank-mount gun pod packages (two guns per side); two more in the manned dorsal turret, relocated forward to a position just behind the cockpit (which became standard for the J-model); one each in a pair of new waist positions, introduced simultaneously with the forward-relocated dorsal turret; and lastly, a pair of guns in a new tail-gunner's position. Company promotional material bragged that the B-25H could \"bring to bear 10 machine guns coming and four going, in addition to the 75\u00a0mm cannon, eight rockets, and 3,000\u00a0lb (1,360\u00a0kg) of bombs.\"\nThe H had a modified cockpit with single flight controls operated by the pilot. The co-pilot's station and controls were deleted, and instead had a smaller seat used by the navigator/cannoneer, The radio operator crew position was aft the bomb bay with access to the waist guns. Factory production totals were 405 B-25Gs and 1,000 B-25Hs, with 248 of the latter being used by the Navy as PBJ-1Hs. Elimination of the co-pilot saved weight, moving the dorsal turret forward counterbalanced in part the waist guns and the manned rear turret.\nReturn to medium bomber.\nFollowing the two gunship series, NAA again produced the medium bomber configuration with the B-25J series. It optimized the mix of the interim NA-100 and the H series, having both the bombardier's station and fixed guns of the D and the forward turret and refined armament of the H series. NAA also produced a strafer nose-first shipped to air depots as kits, then introduced on the production line in alternating blocks with the bombardier nose. The solid-metal \"strafer\" nose housed eight centerline Browning M2 .50 caliber machine guns. The remainder of the armament was as in the H-5. NAA also supplied kits to mount eight underwing 5 inches \"high velocity airborne rockets\" (HVAR) just outside the propeller arcs. These were mounted on zero-length launch rails, four to a wing.\nThe final, and the most built, series of the Mitchell, the B-25J, looked less like earlier series apart from the well-glazed bombardier's nose of nearly identical appearance to the earliest B-25 subtypes. Instead, the J followed the overall configuration of the H series from the cockpit aft. It had the forward dorsal turret and other armament and airframe advancements. All J models included four .50\u00a0in (12.7\u00a0mm) light-barrel Browning AN/M2 guns in a pair of \"fuselage packages\", conformal gun pods each flanking the lower cockpit, each pod containing two Browning M2s. By 1945, however, combat squadrons removed these. The J series restored the co-pilot's seat and dual flight controls. The factory made available kits to the Air Depot system to create the strafer-nose B-25J-2. This configuration carried a total of 18 .50\u00a0in (12.7\u00a0mm) light-barrel AN/M2 Browning M2 machine guns: eight in the nose, four in the flank-mount conformal gun pod packages, two in the dorsal turret, one each in the pair of waist positions, and a pair in the tail \u2013 with 14 of the guns either aimed directly forward or aimed to fire directly forward for strafing missions. Some aircraft had eight 5-inch (130\u00a0mm) high-velocity aircraft rockets. NAA introduced the J-2 into production in alternating blocks at the J-22. Total J series production was 4,318.\nFlight characteristics.\nThe B-25 was a safe and forgiving aircraft to fly. With one engine out, 60\u00b0 banking turns into the dead engine were possible, and control could be easily maintained down to 145\u00a0mph (230\u00a0km/h). The pilot had to remember to maintain engine-out directional control at low speeds after takeoff with rudder; if this maneuver were attempted with ailerons, the aircraft could snap out of control. The tricycle landing gear made for excellent visibility while taxiing. The only significant complaint about the B-25 was the extremely high noise level produced by its engines; as a result, many pilots eventually suffered from varying degrees of hearing loss.\nThe high noise level was due to design and space restrictions in the engine cowlings, which resulted in the exhaust \"stacks\" protruding directly from the cowling ring and partly covered by a small triangular fairing. This arrangement directed exhaust and noise directly at the pilot and crew compartments.\nDurability.\nThe Mitchell was an exceptionally sturdy aircraft that could withstand tremendous punishment. One B-25C of the 321st Bomb Group was nicknamed \"Patches\" because its crew chief painted all the aircraft's flak hole patches with the bright yellow zinc chromate primer. By the end of the war, this aircraft had completed over 300 missions, had been belly-landed six times, and had over 400 patched holes. The airframe of \"Patches\" was so distorted from battle damage that straight-and-level flight required 8\u00b0 of left aileron trim and 6\u00b0 of right rudder, causing the aircraft to \"crab\" sideways across the sky.\nPostwar (USAF) use.\nIn 1947, legislation created an independent United States Air Force and by that time, the B-25 inventory numbered only a few hundred. Some B-25s continued in service into the 1950s in a variety of training, reconnaissance, and support roles. The principal use during this period was undergraduate training of multiengine aircraft pilots slated for reciprocating engine or turboprop cargo, aerial refueling, or reconnaissance aircraft. Others were assigned to units of the Air National Guard in training roles in support of Northrop F-89 Scorpion and Lockheed F-94 Starfire operations. \nIn its USAF tenure, many B-25s received the so-called \"Hayes modification\" and as a result, surviving B-25s often have exhaust systems with a semicollector ring that splits emissions into two different systems. The upper seven cylinders are collected by a ring, while the other cylinders remain directed to individual ports.\nTB-25J-25-NC Mitchell, \"44-30854\", the last B-25 in the USAF inventory, assigned at March AFB, California, as of March 1960, was flown to Eglin AFB, Florida, from Turner Air Force Base, Georgia, on 21 May 1960, the last flight by a USAF B-25, and presented by Brigadier General A. J. Russell, Commander of SAC's 822d Air Division at Turner AFB, to the Air Proving Ground Center Commander, Brigadier General Robert H. Warren, who in turn presented the bomber to Valparaiso, Florida, Mayor Randall Roberts on behalf of the Niceville-Valparaiso Chamber of Commerce. Four of the original Tokyo Raiders were present for the ceremony, Colonel (later Major General) David Jones, Colonel Jack Simms, Lieutenant Colonel Joseph Manske, and retired Master Sergeant Edwin W. Horton. It was donated back to the Air Force Armament Museum c. 1974 and marked as Doolittle's \"40-2344\".\nU.S. Navy and USMC.\nThe U.S. Navy designation for the Mitchell was the PBJ-1 and apart from increased use of radar, it was configured like its Army Air Forces counterparts. Under the pre-1962 USN/USMC/USCG aircraft designation system, PBJ-1 stood for Patrol (P) Bomber (B) built by North American Aviation (J), first variant (-1) under the existing American naval aircraft designation system of the era. The PBJ had its origin in an inter-service agreement of mid-1942 between the Navy and the USAAF exchanging the Boeing Renton plant for the Kansas plant for B-29 Superfortress production. The Boeing XPBB Sea Ranger flying boat, competing for B-29 engines, was cancelled in exchange for part of the Kansas City Mitchell production. Other terms included the interservice transfer of 50 B-25Cs and 152 B-25Ds to the Navy. The bombers carried Navy bureau numbers (BuNos), beginning with BuNo 34998. The first PBJ-1 arrived in February 1943, and nearly all reached Marine Corps squadrons, beginning with Marine Bombing Squadron 413 (VMB-413). Following the AAFAC format, the Marine Mitchells had search radar in a retractable radome replacing the remotely operated ventral turret. Later D and J series had nose-mounted APS-3 radar; and later still, J and H series mounted radar in the starboard wingtip. The large quantities of B-25H and J series became known as PBJ-1H and PBJ-1J, respectively. These aircraft often operated along with earlier PBJ series in Marine squadrons.\nThe PBJs were operated almost exclusively by the Marine Corps as land-based bombers. To operate them, the U.S. Marine Corps established a number of Marine bomber squadrons (VMB), beginning with VMB-413, in March 1943 at MCAS Cherry Point, North Carolina. Eight VMB squadrons were flying PBJs by the end of 1943, forming the initial Marine medium bombardment group. Four more squadrons were in the process of formation in late 1945, but had not yet deployed by the time the war ended.\nOperational use of the Marine Corps PBJ-1s began in March 1944. The Marine PBJs operated from the Philippines, Saipan, Iwo Jima, and Okinawa during the last few months of the Pacific war. Their primary mission was the long-range interdiction of enemy shipping trying to run the blockade, which was strangling Japan. The weapon of choice during these missions was usually the five-inch HVAR rocket, eight of which could be carried. Some VMB-612 intruder PBJ-1D and J series planes flew without top turrets to save weight and increase range on night patrols, especially towards the end of the war when air superiority existed.; \nDuring the war, the Navy tested the cannon-armed G series and conducted carrier trials with an H equipped with arresting gear. After World War II, some PBJs stationed at the Navy's then-rocket laboratory site in Inyokern, California, site of the present-day Naval Air Weapons Station China Lake, tested various air-to-ground rockets and arrangements. One arrangement was a twin-barrel nose arrangement that could fire 10 spin-stabilized five-inch rockets in one salvo.\nRoyal Air Force.\nThe Royal Air Force (RAF) was an early customer for the B-25 via Lend-Lease. The first Mitchells were given the service name Mitchell I by the RAF and were delivered in August 1941, to No. 111 Operational Training Unit based in the Bahamas. These bombers were used exclusively for training and familiarization and never achieved operational status. The B-25Cs and Ds were designated Mitchell II. Altogether, 167 B-25Cs and 371 B-25Ds were delivered to the RAF. The RAF tested the cannon-armed G series but did not adopt the series nor the follow-on H series.\nBy the end of 1942, the RAF had taken delivery of a total of 93 Mitchells, marks I and II. Some served with squadrons of No. 2 Group RAF, the RAF's tactical medium-bomber force. The first RAF operation with the Mitchell II took place on 22 January 1943, when six aircraft from No. 180 Squadron RAF attacked oil installations at Ghent. After the invasion of Europe (by which point 2 Group was part of Second Tactical Air Force), all four Mitchell squadrons moved to bases in France and Belgium (Melsbroek) to support Allied ground forces. The British Mitchell squadrons were joined by No. 342 (Lorraine) Squadron of the French Air Force in April 1945.\nAs part of its move from Bomber Command, No 305 (Polish) Squadron flew Mitchell IIs from September to December 1943 before converting to the de Havilland Mosquito. In addition to No. 2 Group, the B-25 was used by various second-line RAF units in the UK and abroad. In the Far East, No. 3 PRU, which consisted of Nos. 681 and 684 Squadrons, flew the Mitchell (primarily Mk IIs) on photographic reconnaissance sorties.\nRoyal Canadian Air Force.\nThe Royal Canadian Air Force (RCAF) used the B-25 Mitchell for training during the war. Postwar use had continued operations with most of 162 Mitchells received. The first B-25s had originally been diverted to Canada from RAF orders. These included one Mitchell I, 42 Mitchell IIs, and 19 Mitchell IIIs. No 13 (P) Squadron was formed unofficially at RCAF Rockcliffe in May 1944 and used Mitchell IIs on high-altitude aerial photography sorties. No. 5 Operational Training Unit at Boundary Bay, British Columbia and Abbotsford, British Columbia, operated the B-25D Mitchell in the training role together with B-24 Liberators for Heavy Conversion as part of the BCATP. The RCAF retained the Mitchell until October 1963.\nNo 418 (Auxiliary) Squadron received its first Mitchell IIs in January 1947. It was followed by No 406 (auxiliary), which flew Mitchell IIs and IIIs from April 1947 to June 1958. No 418 operated a mix of IIs and IIIs until March 1958. No 12 Squadron of Air Transport Command also flew Mitchell IIIs along with other types from September 1956 to November 1960. In 1951, the RCAF received an additional 75 B-25Js from USAF stocks to make up for attrition and to equip various second-line units.\nRoyal Australian Air Force.\nThe Australians received Mitchells by the spring of 1944. The joint Australian-Dutch No. 18 (Netherlands East Indies) Squadron RAAF had more than enough Mitchells for one squadron, so the surplus went to re-equip the RAAF's No. 2 Squadron, replacing their Beauforts.\nDutch Air Force.\nDuring World War II, the Mitchell served in fairly large numbers with the Air Force of the Dutch government-in-exile. They participated in combat in the East Indies, as well as on the European front. On 30 June 1941, the Netherlands Purchasing Commission, acting on behalf of the Dutch government-in-exile in London, signed a contract with North American Aviation for 162 B-25C aircraft. The bombers were to be delivered to the Netherlands East Indies to help deter any Japanese aggression into the region.\nIn February 1942, the British Overseas Airways Corporation agreed to ferry 20 Dutch B-25s from Florida to Australia travelling via Africa and India, and an additional 10 via the South Pacific route from California. During March, five of the bombers on the Dutch order had reached Bangalore, India, and 12 had reached Archerfield in Australia. The B-25s in Australia would be used as the nucleus of a new squadron, designated No. 18. This squadron was staffed jointly by Australian and Dutch aircrews plus a smattering of aircrews from other nations, and operated under Royal Australian Air Force command for the remainder of the war.\nThe B-25s of No. 18 Squadron were painted with the Dutch national insignia (at this time a rectangular Netherlands flag) and carried NEIAF serials. Discounting the ten \"temporary\" B-25s delivered to 18 Squadron in early 1942, a total of 150 Mitchells were taken on strength by the NEIAF, 19 in 1942, 16 in 1943, 87 in 1944, and 28 in 1945. They flew bombing raids against Japanese targets in the East Indies. In 1944, the more capable B-25J Mitchells replaced most of the earlier C and D models.\nIn June 1940, No. 320 Squadron RAF had been formed from personnel formerly serving with the Royal Dutch Naval Air Service, who had escaped to England after the German occupation of the Netherlands. Equipped with various British aircraft, No. 320 Squadron flew antisubmarine patrols, convoy escort missions, and performed air-sea rescue duties. They acquired the Mitchell II in September 1943, performing operations over Europe against gun emplacements, railway yards, bridges, troops, and other tactical targets. They moved to Belgium in October 1944, and transitioned to the Mitchell III in 1945. No. 320 Squadron was disbanded in August 1945. Following the war, B-25s were used by Dutch forces during the Indonesian National Revolution.\nSoviet Air Force.\nThe U.S. supplied 862 B-25s (B, D, G, and J types) to the Soviet Union under Lend-Lease during World War II via the Alaska\u2013Siberia ALSIB ferry route.\nOther damaged B-25s arrived or crashed in the Far East of Russia, and one Doolittle Raid aircraft landed there short of fuel after attacking Japan. This lone airworthy Doolittle Raid aircraft to reach the Soviet Union was lost in a hangar fire in the early 1950s while undergoing routine maintenance. In general, the B-25 was operated as a ground-support and tactical daylight bomber (as similar Douglas A-20 Havocs were used). It saw action in fights from Stalingrad (with B/D models) to the German surrender during May 1945 (with G/J types).\nThe B-25s that remained in Soviet Air Force service after the war were assigned the NATO reporting name \"Bank\".\nChina.\nWell over 100 B-25Cs and Ds were supplied to the Nationalist Chinese during the Second Sino-Japanese War. In addition, a total of 131 B-25Js were supplied to China under Lend-Lease.\nThe four squadrons of the 1st BG (1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th) of the 1st Medium Bomber Group were formed during the war. They formerly operated Russian-built Tupolev SB bombers, then transferred to the B-25. The 1st BG was under the command of Chinese-American Composite Wing while operating B-25s. Following the end of the war in the Pacific, these four bombardment squadrons were established to fight against the Communist insurgency that was rapidly spreading throughout the country. During the Chinese Civil War, Chinese Mitchells fought alongside de Havilland Mosquitos.\nIn December 1948, the Nationalists were forced to retreat to the island of Taiwan, taking many of their Mitchells with them. However, some B-25s were left behind and were pressed into service with the air force of the new People's Republic of China.\nBrazilian Air Force.\nDuring the war, the For\u00e7a A\u00e9rea Brasileira received a few B-25s under Lend-Lease. Brazil declared war against the Axis powers in August 1942 and participated in the war against the U-boats in the southern Atlantic. The last Brazilian B-25 was finally declared surplus in 1970.\nFree French.\nThe Royal Air Force issued at least 21 Mitchell IIIs to No 342 Squadron, which was made up primarily of Free French aircrews. Following the liberation of France, this squadron transferred to the newly formed French Air Force (\"Arm\u00e9e de l'Air\") as GB I/20 Lorraine. The aircraft continued in operation after the war, with some being converted into fast VIP transports. They were struck off charge in June 1947.\nBiafra.\nIn October 1967, during the Nigerian Civil War, Biafra bought two Mitchells. After a few bombings in November, they were put out of action in December.\nVariants.\nTrainer variants.\nMost models of the B-25 were used at some point as training aircraft.\nAccidents and incidents.\nAt 9:40 on Saturday, 28 July 1945, a USAAF B-25D crashed in thick fog into the north side of the Empire State Building between the 79th and 80th floors. Fourteen people died\u00a0\u2014 11 in the building and the three occupants of the aircraft, including the pilot, Colonel William F. Smith. Betty Lou Oliver, an elevator attendant, survived the impact and the subsequent fall of the elevator cage 75 stories to the basement.\nFrench general Philippe Leclerc was aboard his North American B-25 Mitchell, Tailly II, when it crashed near Colomb-B\u00e9char in French Algeria on 28 November 1947, killing everyone on board.\nSurviving aircraft.\nMany B-25s are currently kept in airworthy condition by air museums and collectors."}
{"id": "4219", "revid": "32082182", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4219", "title": "British Open (disambiguation)", "text": "The British Open is the Open Championship men's golf tournament.\nBritish Open may also refer to:"}
{"id": "4221", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4221", "title": "B-25", "text": ""}
{"id": "4222", "revid": "15902509", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4222", "title": "Bernthia Perkins", "text": ""}
{"id": "4224", "revid": "29997755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4224", "title": "Bobby Charlton", "text": "Sir Robert Charlton (born 11 October 1937) is an English former footballer who played as a midfielder. Considered as one of the best players of all time, he was a member of the England team that won the 1966 FIFA World Cup, the year he also won the Ballon d'Or. He played almost all of his club football at Manchester United, where he became renowned for his attacking instincts, his passing abilities from midfield and his ferocious long-range shot, as well as his fitness and stamina. He was cautioned only twice in his career; once against Argentina in the 1966 World Cup, and once in a league match against Chelsea. His elder brother Jack, who was also in the World Cup-winning team, was a former defender for Leeds United and international manager.\nBorn in Ashington, Northumberland, Charlton made his debut for the Manchester United first-team in 1956, and over the next two seasons gained a regular place in the team, during which time he survived the Munich air disaster of 1958 after being rescued by Harry Gregg. Charlton is the last surviving person of the crash. After helping United to win the Football League First Division in 1965, he won another First Division title with United in 1967. In 1968, he captained the Manchester United team that won the European Cup, scoring two goals in the final to help them become the first English club to win the competition. He was named in the England squad for four World Cups (1958, 1962, 1966 and 1970), though did not play in the first. At the time of his retirement from the England team in 1970, he was the nation's most capped player, having turned out 106 times at the highest level. (As of November 2019, this record had been surpassed by six players.)\nCharlton was both Manchester United's and England's long-time record goalscorer, and United's long-time record appearance maker, as well as briefly England's, until Bobby Moore overtook his 106 caps in 1973. His appearance record of 758 for United took until 2008 to be beaten, when Ryan Giggs did so in that year's Champions League final. With 249 goals, he is currently United's second-highest all-time goalscorer, after his record was surpassed by Wayne Rooney in 2017. He is also the second-highest goalscorer for England, after his record of 49 goals which was held until 2015 was again surpassed by Rooney.\nHe left Manchester United to become manager of Preston North End for the 1973\u201374 season. He changed to player-manager the following season. He next accepted a post as a director with Wigan Athletic, then became a member of Manchester United's board of directors in 1984 and remains one as of the 2020\u201321 season.\nEarly life.\nCharlton was born in Ashington, Northumberland, England on 11 October 1937 to coal miner Robert \"Bob\" Charlton (24 May 1909-April 1982) and Elizabeth Ellen \"Cissie\" Charlton (\"n\u00e9e\" Milburn) (11 November 1912 \u2013 25 March 1996). He is related to several professional footballers on his mother's side of the family: his uncles were Jack Milburn (Leeds United and Bradford City), George Milburn (Leeds United and Chesterfield), Jim Milburn (Leeds United and Bradford Park Avenue) and Stan Milburn (Chesterfield, Leicester City and Rochdale), and legendary Newcastle United and England footballer Jackie Milburn, was his mother's cousin. However, Charlton credits much of the early development of his career to his grandfather Tanner and his mother Cissie. His elder brother, Jack, initially worked as a miner before applying to the police, only to also become a professional footballer with Leeds United.\nClub career.\nOn 9 February 1953, then a Bedlington Grammar School pupil, Charlton was spotted playing for East Northumberland schools by Manchester United chief scout Joe Armstrong. Charlton went on to play for England Schoolboys and the 15-year-old signed with United on 1 January 1953, along with Wilf McGuinness, also aged 15. Initially his mother was reluctant to let him commit to an insecure football career, so he began an apprenticeship as an electrical engineer; however, he went on to turn professional in October 1954.\nCharlton became one of the famed Busby Babes, the collection of talented footballers who emerged through the system at Old Trafford in the 1940s, 1950s and 1960s as Matt Busby set about a long-term plan of rebuilding the club after the Second World War. He worked his way through the pecking order of teams, scoring regularly for the youth and reserve sides before he was handed his first team debut against Charlton Athletic in October 1956. At the same time, he was doing his National service with the Royal Army Ordnance Corps in Shrewsbury, where Busby had advised him to apply as it meant he could still play for Manchester United at the weekend. Also doing his army service in Shrewsbury at the same time was his United teammate Duncan Edwards.\nCharlton played 14 times for United in that first season, scoring twice on his debut and managing a total of 12 goals in all competitions, and including a hat-trick in a 5\u20131 away win over Charlton Athletic in February. United won the league championship but were denied the 20th century's first \"double\" when they controversially lost the 1957 FA Cup Final to Aston Villa. Charlton, still only 19, was selected for the game, which saw United goalkeeper Ray Wood carried off with a broken cheekbone after a clash with Villa centre forward Peter McParland. Though Charlton was a candidate to go in goal to replace Wood (in the days before substitutes, and certainly before goalkeeping substitutes), it was teammate Jackie Blanchflower who ended up between the posts.\nCharlton was an established player by the time the next season was fully underway, which saw United, as current League champions, become the first English team to compete in the European Cup. Previously, the Football Association had scorned the competition, but United made progress, reaching the semi-finals where they lost to holders Real Madrid. Their reputation was further enhanced the next season as they reached the quarter-finals to play Red Star Belgrade. In the first leg at home, United won 2\u20131. The return in Yugoslavia saw Charlton score twice as United stormed 3\u20130 ahead, although the hosts came back to earn a 3\u20133 draw. However, United maintained their aggregate lead to reach the last four and were in jubilant mood as they left to catch their flight home, thinking of an important League game against Wolves at the weekend.\nMunich air disaster.\nThe aeroplane which took the United players and staff home from Zemun Airport needed to stop in Munich to refuel. This was carried out in worsening weather, and by the time the refuelling was complete and the call was made for the passengers to re-board the aircraft, the wintry showers had taken hold and snow had settled heavily on the runway and around the airport. There were two aborted take-offs which led to concern on board, and the passengers were advised by a stewardess to disembark again while a minor technical error was fixed.\nThe team were back in the airport terminal for barely ten minutes when the call came to reconvene on the plane, and a number of passengers began to feel nervous. Charlton and teammate Dennis Viollet swapped places with Tommy Taylor and David Pegg, who had decided they would be safer at the back of the plane.\nThe plane clipped the fence at the end of the runway on its next take-off attempt and a wing tore through a nearby house, setting it alight. The wing and part of the tail came off and hit a tree and a wooden hut, the plane spinning along the snow until coming to a halt. It had been cut in half.\nCharlton, strapped into his seat, had fallen out of the cabin; when United goalkeeper Harry Gregg (who had somehow got through a hole in the plane unscathed and begun a one-man rescue mission) found him, he thought he was dead. Nevertheless, he grabbed both Charlton and Viollet by their trouser waistbands and dragged them away from the plane, in constant fear that it would explode. Gregg returned to the plane to try to help the appallingly injured Busby and Blanchflower, and when he turned around again, he was relieved to see that Charlton and Viollet, both of whom he had presumed to be dead, had got out of their detached seats and were looking into the wreckage.\nCharlton suffered cuts to his head and severe shock, and was in hospital for a week. Seven of his teammates had perished at the scene, including Taylor and Pegg, with whom he and Viollet had swapped seats prior to the fatal take-off attempt. Club captain Roger Byrne was also killed, along with Mark Jones, Billy Whelan, Eddie Colman and Geoff Bent. Duncan Edwards died a fortnight later from the injuries he had sustained. In total, the crash claimed 23 lives. Initially, ice on the wings was blamed, but a later inquiry declared that slush on the runway had made a safe take-off almost impossible.\nOf the 44 passengers and crew (including the 17-strong Manchester United squad), 23 people (eight of them Manchester United players) died as a result of their injuries in the crash. Charlton survived with minor injuries. Of the eight other players who survived, two of them were injured so badly that they never played again.\nCharlton was the first injured survivor to leave hospital. Harry Gregg and Bill Foulkes were not hospitalised, for they escaped uninjured. He arrived back in England on 14 February 1958, eight days after the crash. As he convalesced with family in Ashington, he spent some time kicking a ball around with local youths, and a famous photograph of him was taken. He was still only 20 years old, yet now there was an expectation that he would help with the rebuilding of the club as Busby's aides tried to piece together what remained of the season.\nResuming his career.\nCharlton returned to playing in an FA Cup tie against West Bromwich Albion on 1 March; the game was a draw and United won the replay 1\u20130. Not unexpectedly, United went out of the European Cup to A.C. Milan in the semi-finals to a 5\u20132 aggregate defeat and fell behind in the League. Yet somehow they reached their second consecutive FA Cup final, and the big day at Wembley coincided with Busby's return to work. However, his words could not inspire a side which was playing on a nation's goodwill and sentiment, and Nat Lofthouse scored twice to give Bolton Wanderers a 2\u20130 win.\nFurther success with Manchester United came at last when they beat Leicester City 3\u20131 in the FA Cup final of 1963, with Charlton finally earning a winners' medal in his third final. Busby's post-Munich rebuilding programme continued to progress with two League championships within three seasons, with United taking the title in 1965 and 1967. A successful (though trophyless) season with Manchester United had seen him take the honours of Football Writers' Association Footballer of the Year and European Footballer of the Year into the competition.\nManchester United reached the 1968 European Cup Final, ten seasons after Munich. Even though other clubs had taken part in the competition in the intervening decade, the team which got to this final was still the first English side to do so. On a highly emotional night at Wembley, Charlton scored twice in a 4\u20131 win after extra time against Benfica and, as United captain, lifted the trophy.\nDuring the early 1970s Manchester United were no longer competing among the top teams in England, and at several stages were battling against relegation. At times, Charlton was not on speaking terms with United's other superstars George Best and Denis Law, and Best refused to play in Charlton's testimonial match against Celtic, saying that \"to do so would be hypocritical\". Charlton left Manchester United at the end of the 1972\u201373 season, having scored 249 goals and set a club record of 758 appearances, a record which Ryan Giggs broke in the 2008 UEFA Champions League Final.\nHis last game for Manchester United was against Chelsea at Stamford Bridge on 28 April 1973, and before the game the BBC cameras for \"Match of the Day\" captured the Chelsea chairman handing him a commemorative cigarette case. Chelsea won the match 1\u20130. Coincidentally, this day also marked his brother Jackie's last appearance as well (for Leeds). Charlton's final goal for the club came a month earlier, on 31 March, in a 2\u20130 win at Southampton, also in the First Division.\nHe was the subject of \"This Is Your Life\" in 1969 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews at The Sportsman's Club in central London.\nInternational career.\nCharlton's emergence as the country's leading young football talent was completed when he was called up to join the England squad for a British Home Championship game against Scotland at Hampden Park on 19 April 1958, just over two months after he had survived the Munich air disaster.\nCharlton was handed his debut as England romped home 4\u20130, with the new player gaining even more admirers after scoring a magnificent thumping volley dispatched with authority after a cross by the left winger Tom Finney. He scored both goals in his second game as England beat Portugal 2\u20131 in a friendly at Wembley; and overcame obvious nerves on a return to Belgrade to play his third match against Yugoslavia. England lost that game 5\u20130 and Charlton played poorly.\n1958 World Cup.\nCharlton was selected for the squad which competed at the 1958 World Cup in Sweden, but he did not play.\nIn 1959 he scored a hat-trick as England demolished the US 8\u20131; and his second England hat-trick came in 1961 in an 8\u20130 thrashing of Mexico. He also managed to score in every British Home Championship tournament he played in except 1963 in an association with the tournament that lasted from 1958 to 1970 and included 16 goals and 10 tournament victories (five shared).\n1962 World Cup.\nHe played in qualifiers for the 1962 World Cup in Chile against Luxembourg and Portugal and was named in the squad for the finals themselves. His goal in the 3\u20131 group win over Argentina was his 25th for England in just 38 appearances, and he was still only 24 years old; but his individual success could not be replicated by that of the team, which was eliminated in the quarter-final by Brazil, who went on to win the tournament.\nBy now, England were coached by Alf Ramsey who had managed to gain sole control of the recruitment and team selection procedure from the committee-based call-up system which had lasted up to the previous World Cup. Ramsey had already cleared out some of the older players who had been reliant on the loyalty of the committee for their continued selection. A hat-trick in the 8\u20131 rout of Switzerland in June 1963 took Charlton's England goal tally to 30, equalling the record jointly held by Tom Finney and Nat Lofthouse; Charlton's 31st goal against Wales in October the same year gave him the record alone.\nCharlton's role was developing from traditional inside-forward to what today would be termed an attacking midfield player, with Ramsey planning to build the team for the 1966 World Cup around him. When England beat the USA 10\u20130 in a friendly on 27 May 1964, he scored one goal, his 33rd at senior level for England.\nHis goals became a little less frequent, and indeed Jimmy Greaves, playing purely as a striker, overtook his England tally in October 1964. Nevertheless, Charlton was still scoring and creating freely, and as the tournament was about to start he was expected to become one of its stars and galvanise his established reputation as one of the world's best footballers.\n1966 World Cup.\nEngland drew the opening game of the tournament 0\u20130 with Uruguay. Charlton scored the first goal in the 2\u20130 win over Mexico. This was followed by an identical scoreline against France, allowing England to qualify for the quarter-finals.\nEngland defeated Argentina 1\u20130. The game was the only international match in which Charlton received a caution. They faced Portugal in the semi-finals. This turned out to be one of Charlton's most important games for England.\nCharlton opened the scoring with a crisp side-footed finish after a run by Roger Hunt had forced the Portuguese goalkeeper out of his net; his second was a sweetly struck shot after a run and pull-back from Geoff Hurst. Charlton and Hunt were now England's joint-highest scorers in the tournament with three each, and a final against West Germany beckoned.\nThe final turned out to be one of Charlton's quieter days; he and a young Franz Beckenbauer effectively marked each other out of the game. England won 4\u20132 after extra time.\nEuro 1968.\nCharlton's next England game was his 75th as England beat Northern Ireland; 2 caps later and he had become England's second most-capped player, behind the veteran Billy Wright, who was approaching his 100th appearance when Charlton was starting out and ended with 105 caps.\nWeeks later he scored his 45th England goal in a friendly against Sweden, breaking the record of 44 set the previous year by Jimmy Greaves. He was then in the England team which made it to the semi-finals of the 1968 European Championships where they were knocked out by Yugoslavia in Florence. During the match Charlton struck a Yugoslav post. England defeated the Soviet Union 2\u20130 in the third place match.\nIn 1969, Charlton was appointed an OBE for services to football. More milestones followed as he won his 100th England cap on 21 April 1970 against Northern Ireland, and was made captain by Ramsey for the occasion. Inevitably, he scored. This was his 48th goal for his country \u2013 his 49th and final goal followed a month later in a 4\u20130 win over Colombia during a warm-up tour for the 1970 World Cup, designed to get the players adapted to altitude conditions. Charlton's inevitable selection by Ramsey for the tournament made him the first \u2013 and still, to date, only \u2013 England player to feature in four World Cup squads.\n1970 World Cup.\nShortly before the World Cup, Charlton was involved in the Bogot\u00e1 Bracelet incident in which he and Bobby Moore were accused of stealing a bracelet from a jewellery store. Moore was later arrested and detained for four days before being granted a conditional release, while Charlton was not arrested.\nEngland began the tournament with two victories in the group stages, plus a memorable defeat against Brazil. Charlton played in all three, though was substituted for Alan Ball in the final game of the group against Czechoslovakia. Ramsey, confident of victory and progress to the quarter-final, wanted Charlton to rest.\nEngland reached the last eight where they again faced West Germany. Charlton controlled the midfield and suppressed Franz Beckenbauer's runs from deep. England took a 2\u20130 lead in the 50th minute after goals from Alan Mullery and Martin Peters. In the 69th minute, Beckenbauer pulled a goal back for the Germans and Ramsey soon replaced Charlton with Colin Bell, who further tested the German goalkeeper Sepp Maier and also provided a cross for Geoff Hurst, who missed a chance to score. West Germany, who had a habit of coming back from behind, eventually scored twice \u2013 a back header from Uwe Seeler made it 2\u20132. In extra-time, Geoff Hurst had a goal mysteriously ruled out after which Gerd M\u00fcller's goal won the match 3\u20132. England were out and, after a record 106 caps and 49 goals, Charlton decided to end his international career at the age of 32. On the flight home from Mexico, he asked Ramsey not to consider him again. His brother Jack, two years his senior but 71 caps his junior, did likewise.\nCharlton's caps record lasted until 1973 when Bobby Moore overtook him; he currently lies seventh in the all-time England appearances list behind Moore, Wayne Rooney, Ashley Cole, Steven Gerrard, David Beckham and Peter Shilton, whose own England career began in the first game after Charlton's had ended. Charlton's goalscoring record was surpassed by Wayne Rooney on 8 September 2015, when Rooney scored a penalty in a 2\u20130 win over Switzerland in a qualifying match for UEFA Euro 2016.\nManagement career and directorships.\nCharlton became the manager of Preston North End in 1973, signing his former United and England teammate Nobby Stiles as player-coach. His first season ended in relegation, and although he began playing again, he left Preston early in the 1975\u201376 season after a disagreement with the board over the transfer of John Bird to Newcastle United. He was appointed a CBE that year and began a casual association with BBC for punditry on matches, which continued for many years. In early 1976, he scored once in three league appearances for Waterford United. He also made a handful of appearances for Australian clubs Newcastle KB United, Perth Azzurri and Blacktown City.\nHe joined Wigan Athletic as a director, and was briefly caretaker manager there in 1983. He then spent some time playing in South Africa. He also built up several businesses in areas such as travel, jewellery and hampers, and ran soccer schools in the UK, the US, Canada, Australia and China. In 1984, he was invited to become member of the board of directors at Manchester United, partly because of his football knowledge and partly because it was felt that the club needed a \"name\" on the board after the resignation of Sir Matt Busby. He remained a director of Manchester United as of 2018, and his continued presence was a factor in placating many fans opposed to the club's takeover by Malcolm Glazer.\nPersonal life and retirement.\nCharlton met his wife, Norma Ball, at an ice rink in Manchester in 1959 and they married in 1961. They have two daughters, Suzanne and Andrea. Suzanne was a weather forecaster for the BBC during the 1990s. They now have grandchildren, including Suzanne's son Robert, who is named in honour of his grandfather.\nIn 2007, while publicising his forthcoming autobiography, Charlton revealed that he had a long-running feud with his brother, Jack. They have rarely spoken since a falling-out between his wife Norma and his mother Cissie (who died on 25 March 1996 at the age of 83). Bobby Charlton did not see his mother after 1992 as a result of the feud.\nJack presented him with his BBC Sports Personality of the Year Lifetime Achievement Award on 14 December 2008. He said that he was 'knocked out' as he was presented the award by his brother. He received a standing ovation as he stood waiting for his prize.\nCharlton helped to promote Manchester's bids for the 1996 and 2000 Olympic Games and the 2002 Commonwealth Games, England's bid for the 2006 World Cup and London's successful bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics. He received a knighthood in 1994 and was an Inaugural Inductee to the English Football Hall of Fame in 2002. On accepting his award, he commented: \"I'm really proud to be included in the National Football Museum's Hall of Fame. It's a great honour. If you look at the names included I have to say I couldn't argue with them. They are all great players and people I would love to have played with.\" He is also the (honorary) president of the National Football Museum, an organisation about which he said \"I can't think of a better museum anywhere in the world.\"\nOn 2 March 2009, Charlton was given the freedom of the city of Manchester. He stated: \"I'm just so proud, it's fantastic. It's a great city. I have always been very proud of it.\"\nCharlton is involved in a number of charitable activities, including fund raising for cancer hospitals. Charlton became involved in the cause of land mine clearance after visits to Bosnia and Cambodia and supports the Mines Advisory Group as well as founding his own charity Find a Better Way which funds research into improved civilian landmine clearance.\nIn January 2011, Charlton was voted the fourth-greatest Manchester United player of all time by the readers of \"Inside United\" and ManUtd.com, behind Ryan Giggs (who topped the poll), Eric Cantona and George Best.\nHe is a member of the Laureus World Sports Academy. On 6 February 2012 Charlton was taken to hospital after falling ill, and subsequently had a gallstone removed. This prevented him from collecting a Lifetime Achievement Award at the Laureus World Sports Awards.\nOn 15 February 2016, Manchester United announced the South Stand of Old Trafford would be renamed in honour of Sir Bobby Charlton. The unveiling took place at the home game against Everton on 3 April 2016.\nIn October 2017, Charlton had a pitch named after him at St George's Park National Football Centre in Burton-upon-Trent.\nIn November 2020, it was revealed that Charlton had been diagnosed with dementia.\nHonours.\nClub.\nSource:\nInternational.\nSource:\nIndividual.\nSource:"}
{"id": "4226", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4226", "title": "Brewsters angle", "text": ""}
{"id": "4227", "revid": "220924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4227", "title": "Barry Lyndon", "text": "Barry Lyndon is a 1975 period drama film written, directed, and produced by Stanley Kubrick, based on the 1844 novel \"The Luck of Barry Lyndon\" by William Makepeace Thackeray. Starring Ryan O'Neal, Marisa Berenson, Patrick Magee, Leonard Rossiter, and Hardy Kr\u00fcger, the film recounts the early exploits and later unravelling of a fictional 18th-century Irish rogue and opportunist who marries a rich widow to climb the social ladder and assume her late husband's aristocratic position.\nKubrick began production on \"Barry Lyndon\" after his 1971 film \"A Clockwork Orange\". He had originally intended to direct a biopic on Napoleon, but lost his financing because of the commercial failure of the similar 1970 film \"Waterloo\". Kubrick eventually directed \"Barry Lyndon\", set partially during the Seven Years' War, utilising his research from the Napoleon project. Filming began in December 1973 and lasted roughly eight months, taking place in England, Ireland, East Germany and West Germany.\nThe film's cinematography has been described as ground-breaking. Especially notable are the long double shots, usually ended with a slow backwards zoom, the scenes shot entirely in candlelight, and the settings based on William Hogarth paintings. The exteriors were filmed on location in Ireland, England and West Germany, with the interiors shot mainly in London. The production was troubled; there were problems related to logistics, weather, and even politics (Kubrick feared that he might be an IRA hostage target).\n\"Barry Lyndon\" won four Oscars at the 48th Academy Awards: Best Scoring: Original Song Score and Adaptation or Scoring: Adaptation; Best Costume Design; Best Art Direction; and Best Cinematography. Although some critics took issue with the film's slow pace and restrained emotion, its reputation, like that of many of Kubrick's works, has strengthened over time, with many now regarding it as one of his greatest achievements and one of the greatest films of all time. \nPlot.\nPart I: \"By What Means Redmond Barry Acquired the Style and Title of Barry Lyndon\".\nAn omniscient (though possibly unreliable) narrator relates that in 1750s Ireland, the father of Redmond Barry is killed in a duel over a sale of some horses. The widow, disdaining offers of marriage, devotes herself to her only son.\nBarry becomes infatuated with his older cousin, Nora Brady. Though she charms him during a card game, she later shows interest in a well-off British Army captain, John Quin, much to Barry's dismay. Nora and her family plan to improve their finances through marriage, while Barry holds Quin in contempt and escalates the situation to a duel, in which Barry shoots Quin. In the aftermath, he flees from the police towards Dublin, and is robbed by Captain Feeney, a highwayman.\nDejected, Barry joins the British Army. Some time after, he encounters Captain Grogan, a family friend. Grogan informs him that Barry did not kill Quin, and that his dueling pistol had only been loaded with tow. The duel was staged by Nora's family to get rid of Barry so that their finances would be secured through a lucrative marriage.\nBarry's regiment is sent to Germany to fight in the Seven Years' War, where Grogan is fatally wounded in a skirmish. Fed up with the war, Barry deserts the army, stealing an officer courier's uniform, horse, and identification papers after finding the officer bathing. En route to neutral Holland, Barry encounters Frau Lieschen, a young German woman whose lover left for the war and never returned. Lieschen feeds and houses Barry. The two briefly become lovers. After leaving, Barry encounters the Prussian Captain Potzdorf, who, seeing through his disguise, offers him the choice of being turned back over to the British, where he will be shot as a deserter, or enlisting in the Prussian Army. Barry enlists in his second army and later receives a special commendation from Frederick the Great for saving Potzdorf's life in a battle.\nTwo years later, after the war ends in 1763, Barry is employed by Captain Potzdorf's uncle in the Prussian Ministry of Police to become a servant of the Chevalier de Balibari, an itinerant professional gambler. The Prussians suspect that the Chevalier is an Irish spy in the service of the Austrians, and send Barry as an undercover agent to verify this. Barry is overcome with emotion upon meeting a fellow Irishman, and reveals himself to the Chevalier immediately. They become confederates at the card table, where Barry and his fine eyesight relay information to the Chevalier. After he and the Chevalier cheat the Prince of T\u00fcbingen at the card table, the Prince accuses the Chevalier of cheating (without proof) and refuses to pay his debt and demands satisfaction. When Barry relays this to his Prussian handlers, they (still suspecting that the Chevalier is a spy) are wary of allowing another meeting between the Chevalier and the Prince. So the Prussians arrange for the Chevalier to be expelled from the country. Barry conveys this plan to the Chevalier, who flees in the night. The next morning, Barry, under disguise as the Chevalier, is escorted from Prussian territory by Prussian army officers.\nOver the next few years, Barry and the Chevalier travel the spas and parlors of Europe, profiting from their gambling scams with Barry forcing payment from reluctant debtors with sword duels. Seeing that his life is going nowhere, Barry decides to marry into wealth. At a gambling table in Spa, he encounters the beautiful and wealthy Countess of Lyndon. He seduces and later marries her after the death of her elderly husband, Sir Charles Lyndon. Because Lyndon is frail, sickly, and old, Barry's goading and verbal repartee ultimately send him into a fit of convulsions that ends with his death. Barry's coup-de-grace is the statement \"Let those laugh that win\".\nPart II: \"Containing an Account of the Misfortunes and Disasters Which Befell Barry Lyndon\".\nIn 1773, Barry takes the Countess' last name in marriage and settles in England to enjoy her wealth, still with no money of his own. Lord Bullingdon, Lady Lyndon's ten-year-old son by Sir Charles, does not approve of the marriage and quickly comes to despise Barry, openly calling him a \"common opportunist\" who does not truly love his mother. Barry retaliates by subjecting Bullingdon to systematic physical abuse. The Countess bears Barry a son, Bryan Patrick, but the marriage is unhappy: Barry is openly unfaithful and enjoys spending his wife's money on self-indulgent luxuries, while keeping his wife in seclusion.\nSome years later, Barry's mother comes to live with him at the Lyndon estate. She privately warns her son that if Lady Lyndon were to die, all her wealth would go to her first-born son Lord Bullingdon, leaving Barry and his son Bryan penniless. Barry's mother advises him to obtain a noble title to protect himself. To further this goal, he cultivates the acquaintance of the influential Lord Wendover and begins to expend even larger sums of money to ingratiate himself to high society. All this effort is wasted, however, during a lavish birthday party Barry throws for Lady Lyndon. A now young adult Lord Bullingdon crashes the event where he publicly enumerates the reasons that he detests his stepfather so dearly, declaring it his intent to leave the family estate for as long as Barry remains there and married to his mother. Barry viciously assaults Bullingdon until he is physically restrained by the guests. This loses Barry the wealthy and powerful friends he has worked to entreat and he is permanently cast out of polite society. Nevertheless, Bullingdon makes good on his word by leaving the estate and England.\nIn contrast to his mistreatment of his stepson, Barry proves an overindulgent and doting father to Bryan, with whom he spends all his time after Bullingdon's departure. He cannot refuse his son anything, and succumbs to Bryan's insistence on receiving a full-grown horse for his ninth birthday. Defying his parents' direct instructions that he ride the horse only in the presence of his father, the spoiled Bryan is thrown from the horse, paralyzed, and dies a couple of days later from his injuries.\nThe grief-stricken Barry turns to alcohol, while Lady Lyndon seeks solace in religion, assisted by the Reverend Samuel Runt, who had been tutor first to Lord Bullingdon and then to Bryan. Left in charge of the families' affairs while Barry and Lady Lyndon grieve, Barry's mother dismisses the Reverend, both because the family no longer needs (nor can afford, due to Barry's spending debts) a tutor and for fear that his influence worsens Lady Lyndon's condition. Plunging even deeper into grief, Lady Lyndon later attempts suicide (though she ingests only enough poison to make herself violently ill). The Reverend and the family's accountant Graham then seek out Lord Bullingdon. Upon hearing of these events, Lord Bullingdon returns to England where he finds Barry drunk in a gentlemen's club, mourning the loss of his son rather than being with Lady Lyndon. Bullingdon demands satisfaction for Barry's public assault, challenging him to a duel.\nThe duel with pistols is held in a tithe barn. A coin toss gives Bullingdon the right of first fire, but he nervously misfires his pistol as he prepares to shoot. Terrified, Bullingdon demands another chance, but is refused, before he vomits in fear. Barry, reluctant to shoot Bullingdon, magnanimously fires into the ground, but the unmoved Bullingdon refuses to let the duel end, claiming he has not received \"satisfaction\". In the second round, Bullingdon shoots Barry in his left leg. At a nearby inn, a surgeon informs Barry that the leg will need to be amputated below the knee if he is to survive.\nWhile Barry is recovering, Bullingdon re-takes control of the Lyndon estate. A few days later, Lord Bullingdon sends a very nervous Graham to the inn with a proposition: Lord Bullingdon will grant Barry an annuity of 500 guineas a year on the condition that he leave England, with payments ending the moment Barry should ever return. Otherwise, with his credit and bank accounts exhausted, Barry's creditors and bill collectors will assuredly see that he is jailed. Defeated in mind and body, Barry accepts. Humiliated, he hobbles on crutches to a carriage.\nThe narrator states that Barry went first back to Ireland with his mother, then once he was fully recovered, he traveled to the European continent to resume his former profession of gambler (though without his former success). Barry kept his word and never returned to England or ever saw Lady Lyndon again. The final scene (set in December 1789) shows a middle-aged Lady Lyndon signing Barry's annuity cheque as her son looks on.\nEpilogue.\n\"It was in the reign of George III that the aforesaid personages lived and quarreled; good or bad, handsome or ugly, rich or poor, they are all equal now.\"\nCast.\nCritic Tim Robey suggests that the film \"makes you realise that the most undervalued aspect of Kubrick's genius could well be his way with actors.\" He adds that the supporting cast is a \"glittering procession of cameos, not from star names but from vital character players.\"\nThe cast featured Leon Vitali as the older Lord Bullingdon, who then became Kubrick's personal assistant, working as the casting director on his following films, and supervising film-to-video transfers for Kubrick. Their relationship lasted until Kubrick's death. The film's cinematographer, John Alcott, appears at the men's club in the non-speaking role of the man asleep in a chair near the title character when Lord Bullingdon challenges Barry to a duel. Kubrick's daughter Vivian also appears (in an uncredited role) as a guest at Bryan's birthday party.\nOther Kubrick featured regulars were Leonard Rossiter (\"\"), Steven Berkoff, Patrick Magee, Godfrey Quigley, Anthony Sharp, and Philip Stone (\"A Clockwork Orange\"). Stone went on to feature in \"The Shining\".\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nAfter completing post production on \"\", Kubrick resumed planning a film about Napoleon. During pre-production, Sergei Bondarchuk and Dino De Laurentiis' \"Waterloo\" was released, and failed at the box office. Reconsidering, Kubrick's financiers pulled funding, and he turned his attention towards an adaptation of Anthony Burgess's 1962 novel \"A Clockwork Orange\". Subsequently, Kubrick showed an interest in Thackeray's \"Vanity Fair\" but dropped the project when a serialised version for television was produced. He told an interviewer, \"At one time, \"Vanity Fair\" interested me as a possible film but, in the end, I decided the story could not be successfully compressed into the relatively short time-span of a feature film ... as soon as I read \"Barry Lyndon\" I became very excited about it.\"\nHaving earned Oscar nominations for \"Dr. Strangelove\", \"2001: A Space Odyssey\" and \"A Clockwork Orange\", Kubrick's reputation in the early 1970s was that of \"a perfectionist auteur who loomed larger over his movies than any concept or star\". His studio\u2014Warner Bros.\u2014was therefore \"eager to bankroll\" his next project, which Kubrick kept \"shrouded in secrecy\" from the press partly due to the furore surrounding the controversially violent \"A Clockwork Orange\" (particularly in the UK) and partly due to his \"long-standing paranoia about the tabloid press.\"\nHaving felt compelled to set aside his plans for a film about Napoleon Bonaparte, Kubrick set his sights on Thackeray's 1844 \"satirical picaresque about the fortune-hunting of an Irish rogue,\" \"Barry Lyndon\", the setting of which allowed Kubrick to take advantage of the copious period research he had done for the now-aborted \"Napoleon\". At the time, Kubrick merely announced that his next film would star Ryan O'Neal (deemed \"a seemingly un-Kubricky choice of leading man\") and Marisa Berenson, a former \"Vogue\" and \"Time\" magazine cover model, and be shot largely in Ireland. So heightened was the secrecy surrounding the film that \"Even Berenson, when Kubrick first approached her, was told only that it was to be an 18th-century costume piece [and] she was instructed to keep out of the sun in the months before production, to achieve the period-specific pallor he required.\"\nPrincipal photography.\nPrincipal photography lasted 300 days, from spring 1973 through to early 1974, with a break for Christmas. The crew arrived in Dublin, Ireland in May 1973. Jan Harlan recalls that Kubrick \"loved his time in Ireland - he rented a lovely house west of Dublin, he loved the scenery and the culture and the people\".\nMany of the exteriors were shot in Ireland, playing \"itself, England, and Prussia during the Seven Years' War.\" Kubrick and cinematographer Alcott drew inspiration from \"the landscapes of Watteau and Gainsborough,\" and also relied on the art direction of Ken Adam and Roy Walker. Alcott, Adam and Walker were among those who would win Oscars for their work on the film.\nSeveral of the interior scenes were filmed in Powerscourt House, an 18th-century mansion in County Wicklow, Republic of Ireland. The house was destroyed in an accidental fire several months after filming (November 1974), so the film serves as a record of the lost interiors, particularly the \"Saloon\" which was used for more than one scene. The Wicklow Mountains are visible, for example, through the window of the saloon during a scene set in Berlin. Other locations included Kells Priory (the English Redcoat encampment) Blenheim Palace, Castle Howard (exteriors of the Lyndon estate), Huntington Castle, Clonegal (exterior), Corsham Court (various interiors and the music room scene), Petworth House (chapel), Stourhead (lake and temple), Longleat, and Wilton House (interior and exterior) in England, Lavenham Guildhall at Lavenham in Suffolk (amputation scene), Dunrobin Castle (exterior and garden as Spa) in Scotland, Dublin Castle in Ireland (the chevalier's home), Ludwigsburg Palace near Stuttgart and Frederick the Great's Neues Palais at Potsdam near Berlin (suggesting Berlin's main street Unter den Linden as construction in Potsdam had just begun in 1763). Some exterior shots were also filmed at Waterford Castle (now a luxury hotel and golf course) and Little Island, Waterford. Moorstown Castle in Tipperary also featured. Several scenes were filmed at Castletown House outside Carrick-on-Suir, Co. Tipperary, and at Youghal, Co. Cork.\nThe filming took place in the backdrop of some of the most intense years of the Troubles in Ireland, during which the Provisional Irish Republican Army (Provisional IRA) was waging an armed campaign in order to bring about a United Ireland.\nOn 30 January 1974 while filming in Dublin City's Phoenix Park shooting had to be cancelled due to the chaos caused by 14 bomb threats.\nOne day a phone call was received and Kubrick was given 24 hours to leave the country, he left within 12 hours. The phone call alleged that the Provisional IRA had him on a hit list and Harlan recalls \"Whether the threat was a hoax or it was real, almost doesn't matter ... Stanley was not willing to take the risk. He was threatened, and he packed his bag and went home\"\nCinematography.\nThe film\u2014as with \"almost every Kubrick film\"\u2014is a \"showcase for [a] major innovation in technique.\" While \"2001: A Space Odyssey\" had featured \"revolutionary effects,\" and \"The Shining\" would later feature heavy use of the Steadicam, \"Barry Lyndon\" saw a considerable number of sequences shot \"without recourse to electric light.\" The film's cinematography was overseen by director of photography John Alcott (who won an Oscar for his work), and is particularly noted for the technical innovations that made some of its most spectacular images possible. To achieve photography without electric lighting \"[f]or the many densely furnished interior scenes\u2026 meant shooting by candlelight,\" which is known to be difficult in still photography, \"let alone with moving images.\"\nKubrick was \"determined not to reproduce the set-bound, artificially lit look of other costume dramas from that time.\" After \"tinker[ing] with different combinations of lenses and film stock,\" the production obtained three super-fast 50mm lenses (Carl Zeiss Planar 50mm \"f\"/0.7) developed by Zeiss for use by NASA in the Apollo moon landings, which Kubrick had discovered. These super-fast lenses \"with their huge aperture (the film actually features the lowest f-stop in film history) and fixed focal length\" were problematic to mount, and were extensively modified into three versions by Cinema Products Corp. for Kubrick so to gain a wider angle of view, with input from optics expert Richard Vetter of Todd-AO. The rear element of the lens had to be 2.5\u00a0mm away from the film plane, requiring special modification to the rotating camera shutter. This allowed Kubrick and Alcott to shoot scenes lit in candlelight to an average lighting volume of only three candela, \"recreating the huddle and glow of a pre-electrical age.\" In addition, Kubrick had the entire film push-developed by one stop.\nAlthough Kubrick and Alcott sought to avoid electric lighting where possible, most shots were achieved with conventional lenses and lighting, but were lit to deliberately mimic natural light rather than for compositional reasons. In addition to potentially seeming more realistic, these methods also gave a particular period look to the film which has often been likened to 18th-century paintings (which were, of course, depicting a world devoid of electric lighting), in particular owing \"a lot to William Hogarth, with whom Thackeray had always been fascinated.\"\nThe film is widely regarded as having a stately, static, painterly quality, mostly due to its lengthy wide angle long shots. To illuminate the more notable interior scenes, artificial lights called \"Mini-Brutes\" were placed outside and aimed through the windows, which were covered in a diffuse material to scatter the light evenly through the room rather than being placed inside for maximum use as most conventional films do. An example of this method occurs in the scene where Barry duels Lord Bullingdon. Though it appears to be lit entirely with natural light, one can see that the light coming in through the cross-shaped windows in the tithe barn appears blue in color, while the main lighting of the scene coming in from the side is not. This is because the light through the cross-shaped windows is daylight from the sun, which when recorded on the film stock used by Kubrick showed up as blue-tinted compared to the incandescent electric light coming in from the side.\nDespite such slight tinting effects, this method of lighting not only gave the look of natural daylight coming in through the windows, but it also protected the historic locations from the damage caused by mounting the lights on walls or ceilings and the heat from the lights. This helped the film \"fit\u2026 perfectly with Kubrick's gilded-cage aesthetic \u2013 the film is consciously a museum piece, its characters pinned to the frame like butterflies.\"\nMusic.\nThe film's period setting allowed Kubrick to indulge his penchant for classical music, and the film score uses pieces by Bach, Vivaldi, Paisiello, Mozart, and Schubert. The piece most associated with the film, however, is the main title music, Handel's Sarabande from the Keyboard suite in D minor (HWV 437). Originally for solo harpsichord, the versions for the main and end titles are performed with orchestral strings, harpsichord, and timpani. The score also includes Irish folk music, including Se\u00e1n \u00d3 Riada's song \"Women of Ireland\", arranged by Paddy Moloney and performed by The Chieftains. \"The British Grenadiers\" also features in scenes with Redcoats marching.\nBox office and reception.\nContemporaneous.\nThe film \"was not the commercial success Warner Bros. had been hoping for\" within the United States, although it fared better in Europe. In the US it earned $9.1 million. Ultimately, the film grossed a worldwide total of $31.5 million on an $11 million budget.\nThis mixed reaction saw the film (in the words of one retrospective review) \"greeted, on its release, with dutiful admiration \u2013 but not love. Critics\u2026 rail[ed] against the perceived coldness of Kubrick's style, the film's self-conscious artistry and slow pace. Audiences, on the whole, rather agreed\u2026\"\nRoger Ebert gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four and wrote that the film \"is almost aggressive in its cool detachment. It defies us to care, it forces us to remain detached about its stately elegance.\" He added, \"This must be one of the most beautiful films ever made.\" Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" called the film \"another fascinating challenge from one of our most remarkable, independent-minded directors.\" Gene Siskel of the \"Chicago Tribune\" gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four and wrote \"I found 'Barry Lyndon' to be quite obvious about its intentions and thoroughly successful in achieving them. Kubrick has taken a novel about a social class and has turned it into an utterly comfortable story that conveys the stunning emptiness of upper-class life only 200 years past.\" He ranked the film fifth on his year-end list of the best films of 1975. Charles Champlin of the \"Los Angeles Times\" called it \"the motion picture equivalent of one of those very large, very heavy, very expensive, very elegant and very dull books that exist solely to be seen on coffee tables. It is ravishingly beautiful and incredibly tedious in about equal doses, a succession of salon quality still photographs\u2014as often as not very still indeed.\" \"The Washington Post\" wrote, \"It's not inaccurate to describe 'Barry Lyndon' as a masterpiece, but it's a deadend masterpiece, an objet d'art rather than a movie. It would be more at home, and perhaps easier to like, on the bookshelf, next to something like 'The Age of the Grand Tour,' than on the silver screen.\" Pauline Kael of \"The New Yorker\" wrote that \"Kubrick has taken a quick-witted story\" and \"controlled it so meticulously that he's drained the blood out of it,\" adding, \"It's a coffee-table movie; we might as well be at a three-hour slide show for art-history majors.\"\nThis \"air of disappointment\" factored into Kubrick's decision for his next film, an adaption of Stephen King's \"The Shining\", a project that would not only please him artistically, but was more likely to succeed financially.\nRe-evaluation.\nIn recent years, the film has gained a more positive reaction. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 91% based on 74 reviews, with an average rating of 8.38. The website's critical consensus reads, \"Cynical, ironic, and suffused with seductive natural lighting, Barry Lyndon is a complex character piece of a hapless man doomed by Georgian society.\" Roger Ebert added the film to his 'Great Movies' list on 9 September 2009 and increased his rating from three-and-a-half stars to four, writing, \"Stanley Kubrick's 'Barry Lyndon,' received indifferently in 1975, has grown in stature in the years since and is now widely regarded as one of the master's best. It is certainly in every frame a Kubrick film: technically awesome, emotionally distant, remorseless in its doubt of human goodness.\"\n\"The Village Voice\" ranked the film at number 46 in its Top 250 \"Best Films of the Century\" list in 1999, based on a poll of critics. Director Martin Scorsese has named \"Barry Lyndon\" as his favourite Kubrick film, and it is also one of Lars von Trier's favourite films. \"Barry Lyndon\" was included on \"Time\"s All-Time 100 best movies list. Quotations from its script have also appeared in such disparate works as Ridley Scott's \"The Duellists\", Scorsese's \"The Age of Innocence\", and Wes Anderson's \"Rushmore\". In the 2012 \"Sight &amp; Sound\" Greatest Films of All Time poll, \"Barry Lyndon\" placed 19th in the directors' poll and 59th in the critics' poll. The film ranked 27th in BBC's 2015 list of the 100 greatest American films.\nIn a list compiled by \"The Irish Times\" critics Tara Brady and Donald Clarke in 2020, \"Barry Lyndon\" was named the greatest Irish film of all time.\nCinematic analysis.\nThe main theme explored in Barry Lyndon is one of fate and destiny. Barry is pushed through life by a series of key events, some of which seem unavoidable. As Roger Ebert says, \"He is a man to whom things happen.\" He declines to eat with the highwaymen Captain Feeney, where he would most likely have been robbed, but is robbed anyway farther down the road. The narrator repeatedly emphasizes the role of fate as he announces events before they unfold on screen, like Bryan's death and Bullingdon seeking satisfaction. This theme of fate is also developed in the recurring motif of the painting. Just like the events featured in the paintings, Barry is participating in events which always were. \nAnother major theme is between father and son. Barry lost his father at a young age and throughout the film he seeks and attaches himself to father-figures. Examples include his uncle, Grogan, and the Chevalier. When given the chance to be a father, Barry loves his son to the point of spoiling him. This contrasts with his role as a father to Lord Bullingdon, whom he disregards and punishes.\nSource novel.\nKubrick based his adapted screenplay on William Makepeace Thackeray's \"The Luck of Barry Lyndon\" (republished as the novel \"Memoirs of Barry Lyndon, Esq.),\" a picaresque tale written and published in serial form in 1844.\nThe film departs from the novel in several ways. In Thackeray's writings, events are related in the first person by Barry himself. A comic tone pervades the work, as Barry proves both a raconteur and an unreliable narrator. Kubrick's film, by contrast, presents the story objectively. Though the film contains voice-over (by actor Michael Hordern), the comments expressed are not Barry's, but those of an omniscient narrator. Kubrick felt that using a first-person narrative would not be useful in a film adaptation:\nKubrick made several changes to the plot, including the addition of the final duel."}
{"id": "4230", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4230", "title": "Cell (biology)", "text": "The cell (from Latin \"cella\", meaning \"small room\") is the basic structural, functional, and biological unit of all known organisms. Cells are the smallest units of life, and hence are often referred to as the \"building blocks of life\". The study of cells is called cell biology, cellular biology, or cytology.\nCells consist of cytoplasm enclosed within a membrane, which contains many biomolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids. Most plant and animal cells are only visible under a light microscope, with dimensions between 1 and 100\u00a0micrometres. Electron microscopy gives a much higher resolution showing greatly detailed cell structure. Organisms can be classified as unicellular (consisting of a single cell such as bacteria) or multicellular (including plants and animals). Most unicellular organisms are classed as microorganisms.\nThe number of cells in plants and animals varies from species to species; it has been estimated that humans contain somewhere around 40 trillion (4\u00d71013) cells. The human brain accounts for around 80 billion of these cells.\nCells were discovered by Robert Hooke in 1665, who named them for their resemblance to cells inhabited by Christian monks in a monastery. Cell theory, first developed in 1839 by Matthias Jakob Schleiden and Theodor Schwann, states that all organisms are composed of one or more cells, that cells are the fundamental unit of structure and function in all living organisms, and that all cells come from pre-existing cells. Cells emerged on Earth at least 3.5 billion years ago.\nCell types.\nCells are of two types: eukaryotic, which contain a nucleus, and prokaryotic, which do not. Prokaryotes are single-celled organisms, while eukaryotes can be either single-celled or multicellular.\nProkaryotic cells.\nProkaryotes include bacteria and archaea, two of the three domains of life. Prokaryotic cells were the first form of life on Earth, characterized by having vital biological processes including cell signaling. They are simpler and smaller than eukaryotic cells, and lack a nucleus, and other membrane-bound organelles. The DNA of a prokaryotic cell consists of a single circular chromosome that is in direct contact with the cytoplasm. The nuclear region in the cytoplasm is called the nucleoid. Most prokaryotes are the smallest of all organisms ranging from 0.5 to 2.0\u00a0\u03bcm in diameter.\nA prokaryotic cell has three regions:\nEukaryotic cells.\nPlants, animals, fungi, slime moulds, protozoa, and algae are all eukaryotic. These cells are about fifteen times wider than a typical prokaryote and can be as much as a thousand times greater in volume. The main distinguishing feature of eukaryotes as compared to prokaryotes is compartmentalization: the presence of membrane-bound organelles (compartments) in which specific activities take place. Most important among these is a cell nucleus, an organelle that houses the cell's DNA. This nucleus gives the eukaryote its name, which means \"true kernel (nucleus)\". Other differences include:\nSubcellular components.\nAll cells, whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic, have a membrane that envelops the cell, regulates what moves in and out (selectively permeable), and maintains the electric potential of the cell. Inside the membrane, the cytoplasm takes up most of the cell's volume. All cells (except red blood cells which lack a cell nucleus and most organelles to accommodate maximum space for hemoglobin) possess DNA, the hereditary material of genes, and RNA, containing the information necessary to build various proteins such as enzymes, the cell's primary machinery. There are also other kinds of biomolecules in cells. This article lists these primary cellular components, then briefly describes their function.\nMembrane.\nThe cell membrane, or plasma membrane, is a biological membrane that surrounds the cytoplasm of a cell. In animals, the plasma membrane is the outer boundary of the cell, while in plants and prokaryotes it is usually covered by a cell wall. This membrane serves to separate and protect a cell from its surrounding environment and is made mostly from a double layer of phospholipids, which are amphiphilic (partly hydrophobic and partly hydrophilic). Hence, the layer is called a phospholipid bilayer, or sometimes a fluid mosaic membrane. Embedded within this membrane is a macromolecular structure called the porosome the universal secretory portal in cells and a variety of protein molecules that act as channels and pumps that move different molecules into and out of the cell. The membrane is semi-permeable, and selectively permeable, in that it can either let a substance (molecule or ion) pass through freely, pass through to a limited extent or not pass through at all. Cell surface membranes also contain receptor proteins that allow cells to detect external signaling molecules such as hormones.\nCytoskeleton.\nThe cytoskeleton acts to organize and maintain the cell's shape; anchors organelles in place; helps during endocytosis, the uptake of external materials by a cell, and cytokinesis, the separation of daughter cells after cell division; and moves parts of the cell in processes of growth and mobility. The eukaryotic cytoskeleton is composed of microtubules, intermediate filaments and microfilaments. In the cytoskeleton of a neuron the intermediate filaments are known as neurofilaments. There are a great number of proteins associated with them, each controlling a cell's structure by directing, bundling, and aligning filaments. The prokaryotic cytoskeleton is less well-studied but is involved in the maintenance of cell shape, polarity and cytokinesis. The subunit protein of microfilaments is a small, monomeric protein called actin. The subunit of microtubules is a dimeric molecule called tubulin. Intermediate filaments are heteropolymers whose subunits vary among the cell types in different tissues. But some of the subunit protein of intermediate filaments include vimentin, desmin, lamin (lamins A, B and C), keratin (multiple acidic and basic keratins), neurofilament proteins (NF\u2013L, NF\u2013M).\nGenetic material.\nTwo different kinds of genetic material exist: deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). Cells use DNA for their long-term information storage. The biological information contained in an organism is encoded in its DNA sequence. RNA is used for information transport (e.g., mRNA) and enzymatic functions (e.g., ribosomal RNA). Transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules are used to add amino acids during protein translation.\nProkaryotic genetic material is organized in a simple circular bacterial chromosome in the nucleoid region of the cytoplasm. Eukaryotic genetic material is divided into different, linear molecules called chromosomes inside a discrete nucleus, usually with additional genetic material in some organelles like mitochondria and chloroplasts (see endosymbiotic theory).\nA human cell has genetic material contained in the cell nucleus (the nuclear genome) and in the mitochondria (the mitochondrial genome). In humans the nuclear genome is divided into 46 linear DNA molecules called chromosomes, including 22 homologous chromosome pairs and a pair of sex chromosomes. The mitochondrial genome is a circular DNA molecule distinct from the nuclear DNA. Although the mitochondrial DNA is very small compared to nuclear chromosomes, it codes for 13 proteins involved in mitochondrial energy production and specific tRNAs.\nForeign genetic material (most commonly DNA) can also be artificially introduced into the cell by a process called transfection. This can be transient, if the DNA is not inserted into the cell's genome, or stable, if it is. Certain viruses also insert their genetic material into the genome.\nOrganelles.\nOrganelles are parts of the cell which are adapted and/or specialized for carrying out one or more vital functions, analogous to the organs of the human body (such as the heart, lung, and kidney, with each organ performing a different function). Both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells have organelles, but prokaryotic organelles are generally simpler and are not membrane-bound.\nThere are several types of organelles in a cell. Some (such as the nucleus and golgi apparatus) are typically solitary, while others (such as mitochondria, chloroplasts, peroxisomes and lysosomes) can be numerous (hundreds to thousands). The cytosol is the gelatinous fluid that fills the cell and surrounds the organelles.\nStructures outside the cell membrane.\nMany cells also have structures which exist wholly or partially outside the cell membrane. These structures are notable because they are not protected from the external environment by the semipermeable cell membrane. In order to assemble these structures, their components must be carried across the cell membrane by export processes.\nCell wall.\nMany types of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells have a cell wall. The cell wall acts to protect the cell mechanically and chemically from its environment, and is an additional layer of protection to the cell membrane. Different types of cell have cell walls made up of different materials; plant cell walls are primarily made up of cellulose, fungi cell walls are made up of chitin and bacteria cell walls are made up of peptidoglycan.\nProkaryotic.\nCapsule.\nA gelatinous capsule is present in some bacteria outside the cell membrane and cell wall. The capsule may be polysaccharide as in pneumococci, meningococci or polypeptide as \"Bacillus anthracis\" or hyaluronic acid as in streptococci.\nCapsules are not marked by normal staining protocols and can be detected by India ink or methyl blue; which allows for higher contrast between the cells for observation.\nFlagella.\nFlagella are organelles for cellular mobility. The bacterial flagellum stretches from cytoplasm through the cell membrane(s) and extrudes through the cell wall. They are long and thick thread-like appendages, protein in nature. A different type of flagellum is found in archaea and a different type is found in eukaryotes.\nFimbriae.\nA fimbria (plural fimbriae also known as a pilus, plural pili) is a short, thin, hair-like filament found on the surface of bacteria. Fimbriae are formed of a protein called pilin (antigenic) and are responsible for the attachment of bacteria to specific receptors on human cells (cell adhesion). There are special types of pili involved in bacterial conjugation.\nCellular processes.\nReplication.\nCell division involves a single cell (called a \"mother cell\") dividing into two daughter cells. This leads to growth in multicellular organisms (the growth of tissue) and to procreation (vegetative reproduction) in unicellular organisms. Prokaryotic cells divide by binary fission, while eukaryotic cells usually undergo a process of nuclear division, called mitosis, followed by division of the cell, called cytokinesis. A diploid cell may also undergo meiosis to produce haploid cells, usually four. Haploid cells serve as gametes in multicellular organisms, fusing to form new diploid cells.\nDNA replication, or the process of duplicating a cell's genome, always happens when a cell divides through mitosis or binary fission. This occurs during the S phase of the cell cycle.\nIn meiosis, the DNA is replicated only once, while the cell divides twice. DNA replication only occurs before meiosis I. DNA replication does not occur when the cells divide the second time, in meiosis II. Replication, like all cellular activities, requires specialized proteins for carrying out the job.\nDNA repair.\nIn general, cells of all organisms contain enzyme systems that scan their DNA for damages and carry out repair processes when damages are detected. Diverse repair processes have evolved in organisms ranging from bacteria to humans. The widespread prevalence of these repair processes indicates the importance of maintaining cellular DNA in an undamaged state in order to avoid cell death or errors of replication due to damages that could lead to mutation. \"E. coli\" bacteria are a well-studied example of a cellular organism with diverse well-defined DNA repair processes. These include: (1) nucleotide excision repair, (2) DNA mismatch repair, (3) non-homologous end joining of double-strand breaks, (4) recombinational repair and (5) light-dependent repair (photoreactivation).\nGrowth and metabolism.\nBetween successive cell divisions, cells grow through the functioning of cellular metabolism. Cell metabolism is the process by which individual cells process nutrient molecules. Metabolism has two distinct divisions: catabolism, in which the cell breaks down complex molecules to produce energy and reducing power, and anabolism, in which the cell uses energy and reducing power to construct complex molecules and perform other biological functions.\nComplex sugars consumed by the organism can be broken down into simpler sugar molecules called monosaccharides such as glucose. Once inside the cell, glucose is broken down to make adenosine triphosphate (ATP), a molecule that possesses readily available energy, through two different pathways.\nProtein synthesis.\nCells are capable of synthesizing new proteins, which are essential for the modulation and maintenance of cellular activities. This process involves the formation of new protein molecules from amino acid building blocks based on information encoded in DNA/RNA. Protein synthesis generally consists of two major steps: transcription and translation.\nTranscription is the process where genetic information in DNA is used to produce a complementary RNA strand. This RNA strand is then processed to give messenger RNA (mRNA), which is free to migrate through the cell. mRNA molecules bind to protein-RNA complexes called ribosomes located in the cytosol, where they are translated into polypeptide sequences. The ribosome mediates the formation of a polypeptide sequence based on the mRNA sequence. The mRNA sequence directly relates to the polypeptide sequence by binding to transfer RNA (tRNA) adapter molecules in binding pockets within the ribosome. The new polypeptide then folds into a functional three-dimensional protein molecule.\nMotility.\nUnicellular organisms can move in order to find food or escape predators. Common mechanisms of motion include flagella and cilia.\nIn multicellular organisms, cells can move during processes such as wound healing, the immune response and cancer metastasis. For example, in wound healing in animals, white blood cells move to the wound site to kill the microorganisms that cause infection. Cell motility involves many receptors, crosslinking, bundling, binding, adhesion, motor and other proteins. The process is divided into three steps \u2013 protrusion of the leading edge of the cell, adhesion of the leading edge and de-adhesion at the cell body and rear, and cytoskeletal contraction to pull the cell forward. Each step is driven by physical forces generated by unique segments of the cytoskeleton.\nNavigation, control and communication.\nIn August 2020, scientists described one way cells \u2013 in particular cells of a slime mold and mouse pancreatic cancer\u2013derived cells \u2013 are able to navigate efficiently through a body and identify the best routes through complex mazes: generating gradients after breaking down diffused chemoattractants which enable them to sense upcoming maze junctions before reaching them, including around corners.\nMulticellularity.\nCell specialization/differentiation.\nMulticellular organisms are organisms that consist of more than one cell, in contrast to single-celled organisms.\nIn complex multicellular organisms, cells specialize into different cell types that are adapted to particular functions. In mammals, major cell types include skin cells, muscle cells, neurons, blood cells, fibroblasts, stem cells, and others. Cell types differ both in appearance and function, yet are genetically identical. Cells are able to be of the same genotype but of different cell type due to the differential expression of the genes they contain.\nMost distinct cell types arise from a single totipotent cell, called a zygote, that differentiates into hundreds of different cell types during the course of development. Differentiation of cells is driven by different environmental cues (such as cell\u2013cell interaction) and intrinsic differences (such as those caused by the uneven distribution of molecules during division).\nOrigin of multicellularity.\nMulticellularity has evolved independently at least 25 times, including in some prokaryotes, like cyanobacteria, myxobacteria, actinomycetes, \"Magnetoglobus multicellularis\" or \"Methanosarcina\". However, complex multicellular organisms evolved only in six eukaryotic groups: animals, fungi, brown algae, red algae, green algae, and plants. It evolved repeatedly for plants (Chloroplastida), once or twice for animals, once for brown algae, and perhaps several times for fungi, slime molds, and red algae. Multicellularity may have evolved from colonies of interdependent organisms, from cellularization, or from organisms in symbiotic relationships.\nThe first evidence of multicellularity is from cyanobacteria-like organisms that lived between 3 and 3.5 billion years ago. Other early fossils of multicellular organisms include the contested Grypania spiralis and the fossils of the black shales of the Palaeoproterozoic Francevillian Group Fossil B Formation in Gabon.\nThe evolution of multicellularity from unicellular ancestors has been replicated in the laboratory, in evolution experiments using predation as the selective pressure.\nOrigins.\nThe origin of cells has to do with the origin of life, which began the history of life on Earth.\nOrigin of the first cell.\nThere are several theories about the origin of small molecules that led to life on the early Earth. They may have been carried to Earth on meteorites (see Murchison meteorite), created at deep-sea vents, or synthesized by lightning in a reducing atmosphere (see Miller\u2013Urey experiment). There is little experimental data defining what the first self-replicating forms were. RNA is thought to be the earliest self-replicating molecule, as it is capable of both storing genetic information and catalyzing chemical reactions (see RNA world hypothesis), but some other entity with the potential to self-replicate could have preceded RNA, such as clay or peptide nucleic acid.\nCells emerged at least 3.5 billion years ago. The current belief is that these cells were heterotrophs. The early cell membranes were probably more simple and permeable than modern ones, with only a single fatty acid chain per lipid. Lipids are known to spontaneously form bilayered vesicles in water, and could have preceded RNA, but the first cell membranes could also have been produced by catalytic RNA, or even have required structural proteins before they could form.\nOrigin of eukaryotic cells.\nThe eukaryotic cell seems to have evolved from a symbiotic community of prokaryotic cells. DNA-bearing organelles like the mitochondria and the chloroplasts are descended from ancient symbiotic oxygen-breathing proteobacteria and cyanobacteria, respectively, which were endosymbiosed by an ancestral archaean prokaryote.\nThere is still considerable debate about whether organelles like the hydrogenosome predated the origin of mitochondria, or vice versa: see the hydrogen hypothesis for the origin of eukaryotic cells."}
{"id": "4231", "revid": "1023821317", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4231", "title": "Buffy the Vampire Slayer (film)", "text": "Buffy the Vampire Slayer is a 1992 American black comedy horror film directed by Fran Rubel Kuzui and starring Kristy Swanson, Donald Sutherland, Paul Reubens, Rutger Hauer, Luke Perry, and Hilary Swank. It follows a Valley girl cheerleader named Buffy who learns that it is her fate to hunt vampires. It was a moderate success at the box office but received mixed reception from critics. The film was taken in a different direction from the one its writer Joss Whedon intended, and five years later, he created the darker and acclaimed TV series of the same name.\nPlot.\nHigh school senior Buffy Summers (Kristy Swanson) attends Hemery High School in Los Angeles; her main concerns are shopping and spending time with her rich, snooty friends and her boyfriend, Jeffrey (Randall Batinkoff). While at school one day, she is approached by a man who calls himself Merrick (Donald Sutherland). He informs her that she is The Slayer, or Chosen One, destined to kill vampires, and he is a Watcher whose duty it is to guide and train her. She initially rejects his claim but is convinced that he's right when he's able to describe a recurring dream of hers in detail. In addition, Buffy is exhibiting uncanny abilities not known to her, including heightened agility, senses, and endurance, yet she repeatedly tries Merrick's patience with her frivolous nature, indifference to slaying, and sharp-tongued remarks.\nAfter several successful outings, Buffy is drawn into conflict with Lothos (Rutger Hauer), a local vampire king and his acolyte, Amilyn (Paul Reubens). Two young men, Oliver Pike (Luke Perry) and Benny (David Arquette), who resented Buffy and her friends due to differing social circles, are out drinking when they're attacked by Amilyn. Benny is turned, but Pike is saved by Merrick. As a vampire, Benny visits Pike and tries to get him to join him. Later, when Pike and his boss are discussing Benny, Pike tells him to run if he sees him.\nAmilyn also abducts Cassandra (Natasha Gregson Wagner), a studious girl from Buffy's class, to sacrifice to Lothos. When her body is found, the news spreads through Los Angeles and Hemery High, but her murder is met with indifference from Buffy's clique.\nWhen Pike realizes there's something wrong with Benny and that he's no longer safe, he decides to leave town. His plan is thwarted, however, when he encounters Amilyn and his gang of vampires. Amilyn hitches a ride on the hood of his van, which crashes into a tree just before Amilyn loses an arm. Buffy and Merrick arrive to rescue him and Amilyn leaves the fight to talk to Lothos. After this encounter, Buffy and Pike start a friendship that eventually becomes romantic, and Pike becomes Buffy's partner in fighting the undead.\nDuring a basketball game, Buffy discovers that one of the players, and a friend of Jeffrey's, is a vampire. After a quick chase to a parade float storage yard, Buffy confronts Lothos, shortly after she and Pike take down his gang. Lothos puts Buffy into a trance, which is broken by Merrick's intervention. Lothos stabs Merrick with the stake he attempted to use on him. Lothos leaves, saying Buffy is not ready. As Merrick dies, he tells Buffy to do things her own way rather than live by the rules of others and gives her one final clue: \"Remember about the music.\"\nBecause of her new life, its responsibilities, and the heartbreak of losing her Watcher, Buffy, emotionally shocked, starts neglecting her Slayer duties. When she arrives at school, she attempts to explain things to her friends, but they refuse to understand her, as they are more concerned with an upcoming school dance. Buffy falls out with them as she realizes she has outgrown their immature, selfish behavior.\nAt the senior dance, Buffy is dismayed to find Jeffrey has dumped her for one of her friends. However, she meets up with Pike, and as they start to dance and kiss, Lothos sends his remaining minions to the school to attack the humans at the dance.\nBuffy confronts the vampires outside, while inside the gym Pike fights and kills the vampiric Benny. After overpowering the vampires, Buffy confronts Lothos inside the school and kills Amilyn. Lothos attempts to ensorcel Buffy again, but when the dance music stops, she remembers Merrick's words and defends herself.\nShe first tries to repel Lothos with a cross, but the vampire king is unimpressed. He grabs the cross, setting it afire, but Buffy uses her hair spray as a makeshift flamethrower and burns him before escaping to the gym. Buffy sees her classmates recovering from the vampire attack, but Lothos bursts into the gym, promising to kill everyone. The Slayer and vampire duel, a wooden flagpole versus a katana. In the end, Buffy stakes Lothos and kills him.\nAs the survivors leave, Buffy and Pike decide to finish their dance. The film ends with the two of them leaving the dance on a motorcycle. A skeptical news crew headed up by Liz Smith interviews the students and the principal about the attack during the credits.\nProduction.\nWriter Whedon sold the film to country singer Dolly Parton's production company, Sandollar, in the fall of 1991. Production was limited to five weeks to accommodate Luke Perry's \"Beverly Hills, 90210\" filming schedule.\nWhedon was involved in an advisory role early in the production but departed after becoming dissatisfied with the direction the film was taking. Executives at 20th Century Fox removed many of Whedon's jokes, believing the humor to be too abstract for audiences. They also disliked the darker elements in Whedon's original script, wanting to make it a lighter comedy. Merrick's suicide was replaced with his being killed by Lothos, and Buffy's burning down her high school gym to kill all the vampires was eliminated altogether.\nAll this led Whedon to finally walk off the set. He has been highly critical of actor Donald Sutherland's behavior on set, describing him as entitled and difficult to work with. Sutherland had a penchant for improvising or altering his lines in the script, which director Rubel Kuzui allowed him to do freely because he was the film's most high-profile star. Whedon felt this made Merrick's dialogue in the film disjointed and unintelligible.\nFilming in Los Angeles included the ballroom of the Park Plaza Hotel, where Merrick lives and trains Buffy; John Marshall High School in Los Feliz; and the gymnasium of University High School in West Los Angeles, where the high school dance and vampire attack was filmed.\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film debuted at #5 at the North American box office and eventually grossed a modest $16,624,456 against a $7 million production budget.\nCritical reception.\nOn review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 36%, based on 53 reviews, with an average rating of 4.4/10. The consensus reads, \"\"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\"s supernatural coming of age tale is let down by poor directing and even poorer plotting -- though Kristy Swanson and Paul Reubens' game performances still manage to slay.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 48 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating \"mixed or average reviews\".\nHome media.\nThe film was released on VHS and Laserdisc in the U.S. in November 1992 and in the U.K. in April 1993 by Fox Video and re-released in 1995 under the Twentieth Century Fox Selections banner. It was released on DVD in the U.S. in 2001 and on Blu-ray in 2011.\nSpin offs.\nTelevision.\nThe film was taken in a different direction from what one of its writers Joss Whedon intended, and five years later, he created the darker and acclaimed TV series of the same name.\nMany of the details given in the film differ from those of the later television series. For example, Buffy's age and history are dissimilar; she's a senior in high school in the film, but the series starts with her as a sophomore. The film does portray who the Buffy of the TV series was before she learned of her destiny as the Slayer: a popular but selfish and superficial cheerleader. In the film, her parents are wealthy but negligent socialites who care little for her and spend their time at parties and golf tournaments; in the TV series, Buffy has a caring, newly divorced mother named Joyce. The supernatural abilities of both vampires and the Slayer are depicted differently. The vampires in the film die like humans; in the TV series, they turn to dust. Unlike the TV series, their faces remain human albeit pale, fanged, and with notched ears, whereas in the TV series, they take on a demonic aspect, especially when newly raised. The TV series suggests that new vampires must consciously learn to maintain a human appearance. In the film, Merrick is hundreds of years old, having lived many lives training many Slayers; in the TV series, Watchers are mortal and specially trained for their role and mission. Merrick's British accent and the manner of his death are different when he appears in flashbacks in the TV series.\nJoss Whedon has expressed his disapproval with the film's interpretation of the script, stating, \"I finally sat down and had written it and somebody had made it into a movie, and I felt like\u00a0\u2014 well, that's not quite her. It's a start, but it's not quite the girl.\"\nAccording to the \"Official Buffy Watcher's Guide\", Whedon wrote the pilot to the TV series as a sequel to his original script, which is why the TV series makes references to events that did not occur in the film. In 1999, Dark Horse Comics released a graphic novel adaptation of Whedon's original script under the title \"The Origin\". Whedon stated: \"The \"Origin\" comic, though I have issues with it, CAN pretty much be accepted as canonical. They did a cool job of combining the movie script with the series, that was nice, and using the series Merrick and not a certain OTHER thespian who shall remain hated.\"\nSoundtrack.\nThe soundtrack does not include every song played in the film, which also included \"Everybody Hurts\" by R.E.M., \"In the Wind\" by War Babies, and \"Inner Mind\" by Eon.\nPossible remake.\nOn May 25, 2009, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" reported that Roy Lee and Doug Davison of Vertigo Entertainment were working with Fran Rubel Kuzui and Kaz Kuzui on a re-envisioning or relaunch of the \"Buffy\" film for the big screen. The film would not be a sequel or prequel to the existing film or television franchise, and Joss Whedon would have no involvement in the project. None of the characters, cast, or crew from the television series would be featured. Television series executive producer Marti Noxon later reflected that this story might have been produced by the studio in order to frighten Whedon into taking the reins of the project. On November 22, 2010, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" confirmed that Warner Bros. had picked up the movie rights to the remake. The film was set for release sometime in 2012. 20th Century Fox, which usually holds the rights to both \"Buffy\" and \"Angel\" television series, would retain merchandising and some distribution rights.\nThe idea of the remake caused wrath among fans of the TV series, since Whedon was not involved. The project did not have any connection with the show and would not conform to the continuity maintained with the \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight\" and \"Season Nine\" comic book titles. Not only the fandom, but the main cast members of both the \"Buffy\" and \"Angel\" series expressed disagreement with the report on Twitter and in recent interviews. Sarah Michelle Gellar said, \"I think it's a horrible idea. To try to do a \"Buffy\" without Joss Whedon... to be incredibly non-eloquent: that's the dumbest idea I've ever heard.\" Proposed shooting locations included Black Wood and other areas in rural England, due to budgetary constraints and the potential setting being outside of the city, an unusual change for the franchise.\nIn December 2011, more than a year after the official reboot announcement, the \"Los Angeles Times\" site reported that Whit Anderson, the writer picked for the new \"Buffy\" movie, had her script rejected by the producers behind the project, and that a new writer was being sought. Sources also stated that \"If you're going to bring it back, you have to do it right. [Anderson] came in with some great ideas and she had reinvented some of the lore and it was pretty cool but in the end there just wasn't enough on the page.\"\nAs of July 2018, Joss Whedon announced at San Diego Comic Con that he was working on a reboot of the series and that it might feature a slayer of color."}
{"id": "4232", "revid": "6938183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4232", "title": "Barter", "text": "In trade, barter (derived from \"baretor\") is a system of exchange in which participants in a transaction directly exchange goods or services for other goods or services without using a medium of exchange, such as money. Economists distinguish barter from gift economies in many ways; barter, for example, features immediate reciprocal exchange, not one delayed in time. Barter usually takes place on a bilateral basis, but may be multilateral (if it is mediated through a trade exchange). In most developed countries, barter usually exists parallel to monetary systems only to a very limited extent. Market actors use barter as a replacement for money as the method of exchange in times of monetary crisis, such as when currency becomes unstable (such as hyperinflation or a deflationary spiral) or simply unavailable for conducting commerce.\nNo ethnographic studies have shown that any present or past society has used barter without any other medium of exchange or measurement, and anthropologists have found no evidence that money emerged from barter. They instead found that gift-giving (credit extended on a personal basis with an inter-personal balance maintained over the long term) was the most usual means of exchange of goods and services. Nevertheless, economists since the times of Adam Smith (1723\u20131790) often inaccurately imagined pre-modern societies as examples to use the inefficiency of barter to explain the emergence of money, of \"the\" economy, and hence of the discipline of economics itself. \nEconomic theory.\nAdam Smith on the origin of money.\nAdam Smith, the father of modern economics, sought to demonstrate that markets (and economies) pre-existed the state. He argued (against conventional wisdom) that money was not the creation of governments. Markets emerged, in his view, out of the division of labor, by which individuals began to specialize in specific crafts and hence had to depend on others for subsistence goods. These goods were first exchanged by barter. Specialization depended on trade, but was hindered by the \"double coincidence of wants\" which barter requires, i.e., for the exchange to occur, each participant must want what the other has. To complete this hypothetical history, craftsmen would stockpile one particular good, be it salt or metal, that they thought no one would refuse. This is the origin of money according to Smith. Money, as a universally desired medium of exchange, allows each half of the transaction to be separated.\nBarter is characterized in Adam Smith's \"The Wealth of Nations\" by a disparaging vocabulary: \"haggling, swapping, dickering.\" It has also been characterized as negative reciprocity, or \"selfish profiteering.\"\nAnthropologists have argued, in contrast, \"that when something resembling barter \"does\" occur in stateless societies it is almost always between strangers.\" Barter occurred between strangers, not fellow villagers, and hence cannot be used to naturalistically explain the origin of money without the state. Since most people engaged in trade knew each other, exchange was fostered through the extension of credit. Marcel Mauss, author of 'The Gift', argued that the first economic contracts were to \"not\" act in one's economic self-interest, and that before money, exchange was fostered through the processes of reciprocity and redistribution, not barter. Everyday exchange relations in such societies are characterized by generalized reciprocity, or a non-calculative familial \"communism\" where each takes according to their needs, and gives as they have.\nAdvantages.\nSince direct barter does not require payment in money, it can be utilized when money is in short supply, when there is little information about the credit worthiness of trade partners, or when there is a lack of trust between those trading.\nBarter is an option to those who cannot afford to store their small supply of wealth in money, especially in hyperinflation situations where money devalues quickly.\nLimitations.\nThe limitations of barter are often explained in terms of its inefficiencies in facilitating exchange in comparison to money.\nIt is said that barter is 'inefficient' because:\nHistory.\nSilent trade.\nOther anthropologists have questioned whether barter is typically between \"total\" strangers, a form of barter known as \"silent trade\". Silent trade, also called silent barter, dumb barter (\"dumb\" here used in its old meaning of \"mute\"), or depot trade, is a method by which traders who cannot speak each other's language can trade without talking. However, Benjamin Orlove has shown that while barter occurs through \"silent trade\" (between strangers), it also occurs in commercial markets as well. \"Because barter is a difficult way of conducting trade, it will occur only where there are strong institutional constraints on the use of money or where the barter symbolically denotes a special social relationship and is used in well-defined conditions. To sum up, multipurpose money in markets is like lubrication for machines - necessary for the most efficient function, but not necessary for the existence of the market itself.\"\nIn his analysis of barter between coastal and inland villages in the Trobriand Islands, Keith Hart highlighted the difference between highly ceremonial gift exchange between community leaders, and the barter that occurs between individual households. The haggling that takes place between strangers is possible because of the larger temporary political order established by the gift exchanges of leaders. From this he concludes that barter is \"an atomized interaction predicated upon the presence of society\" (i.e. that social order established by gift exchange), and not typical between complete strangers.\nTimes of monetary crisis.\nAs Orlove noted, barter may occur in commercial economies, usually during periods of monetary crisis. During such a crisis, currency may be in short supply, or highly devalued through hyperinflation. In such cases, money ceases to be the universal medium of exchange or standard of value. Money may be in such short supply that it becomes an item of barter itself rather than the means of exchange. Barter may also occur when people cannot afford to keep money (as when hyperinflation quickly devalues it).\nAn example of this would be during the Crisis in Bolivarian Venezuela, when Venezuelans resorted to bartering as a result of hyperinflation.\nExchanges.\nEconomic historian Karl Polanyi has argued that where barter is widespread, and cash supplies limited, barter is aided by the use of credit, brokerage, and money as a unit of account (i.e. used to price items). All of these strategies are found in ancient economies including Ptolemaic Egypt. They are also the basis for more recent barter exchange systems.\nWhile one-to-one bartering is practiced between individuals and businesses on an informal basis, organized barter exchanges have developed to conduct third party bartering which helps overcome some of the limitations of barter. A barter exchange operates as a broker and bank in which each participating member has an account that is debited when purchases are made, and credited when sales are made.\nModern barter and trade has evolved considerably to become an effective method of increasing sales, conserving cash, moving inventory, and making use of excess production capacity for businesses around the world. Businesses in a barter earn trade credits (instead of cash) that are deposited into their account. They then have the ability to purchase goods and services from other members utilizing their trade credits \u2013 they are not obligated to purchase from those whom they sold to, and vice versa. The exchange plays an important role because they provide the record-keeping, brokering expertise and monthly statements to each member. Commercial exchanges make money by charging a commission on each transaction either all on the buy side, all on the sell side, or a combination of both. Transaction fees typically run between 8 and 15%. A successful example is ITEX, a barter exchange that sells franchises to brokers, that emerged in the mid 1990\u2019s. At that time, ITEX was the only publicly traded barter exchange and it was novel enough to attract newspaper media attention, with one of its early business members, Karen Earle Lile, being used as an example of how she sold, bought and used ITEX dollars, in all the ways described above, to benefit her business Piano Finders. In 1998, there were an estimated 40,000 barter members Internationally in the ITEX Exchange. \nThroughout the 18th century, retailers began to abandon the prevailing system of bartering. Retailers operating out of the Palais complex in Paris, France were among the first in Europe to abandon the bartering, and adopt fixed-prices thereby sparing their clientele the hassle of bartering. The Palais retailers stocked luxury goods that appealed to the wealthy elite and upper middle classes. Stores were fitted with long glass exterior windows which allowed the emerging middle-classes to window shop and indulge in fantasies, even when they may not have been able to afford the high retail prices. Thus, the Palais-Royal became one of the first examples of a new style of shopping arcade, which adopted the trappings of a sophisticated, modern shopping complex and also changed pricing structures, for both the aristocracy and the middle classes.\nLabour notes.\nThe Owenite socialists in Britain and the United States in the 1830s were the first to attempt to organize barter exchanges. Owenism developed a \"theory of equitable exchange\" as a critique of the exploitative wage relationship between capitalist and labourer, by which all profit accrued to the capitalist. To counteract the uneven playing field between employers and employed, they proposed \"schemes of labour notes based on labour time, thus institutionalizing Owen's demand that human labour, not money, be made the standard of value.\" This alternate currency eliminated price variability between markets, as well as the role of merchants who bought low and sold high. The system arose in a period where paper currency was an innovation. Paper currency was an IOU circulated by a bank (a promise to pay, not a payment in itself). Both merchants and an unstable paper currency created difficulties for direct producers.\nAn alternate currency, denominated in labour time, would prevent profit taking by middlemen; all goods exchanged would be priced only in terms of the amount of labour that went into them as expressed in the maxim 'Cost the limit of price'. It became the basis of exchanges in London, and in America, where the idea was implemented at the New Harmony communal settlement by Josiah Warren in 1826, and in his Cincinnati 'Time store' in 1827. Warren ideas were adopted by other Owenites and currency reformers, even though the labour exchanges were relatively short lived.\nIn England, about 30 to 40 cooperative societies sent their surplus goods to an \"exchange bazaar\" for direct barter in London, which later adopted a similar labour note. The British Association for Promoting Cooperative Knowledge established an \"equitable labour exchange\" in 1830. This was expanded as the National Equitable Labour Exchange in 1832 on Grays Inn Road in London. These efforts became the basis of the British cooperative movement of the 1840s. In 1848, the socialist and first self-designated anarchist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon postulated a system of \"time chits\". In 1875, Karl Marx wrote of \"Labor Certificates\" (\"Arbeitszertifikaten\") in his Critique of the Gotha Program of a \"certificate from society that [the labourer] has furnished such and such an amount of labour\", which can be used to draw \"from the social stock of means of consumption as much as costs the same amount of labour.\"\nMichael Linton this originated the term \"local exchange trading system\" (LETS) in 1983 and for a time ran the Comox Valley LETSystems in Courtenay, British Columbia. LETS networks use interest-free local credit so direct swaps do not need to be made. For instance, a member may earn credit by doing childcare for one person and spend it later on carpentry with another person in the same network. In LETS, unlike other local currencies, no scrip is issued, but rather transactions are recorded in a central location open to all members. As credit is issued by the network members, for the benefit of the members themselves, LETS are considered mutual credit systems.\nLocal currencies.\nThe first exchange system was the Swiss WIR Bank. It was founded in 1934 as a result of currency shortages after the stock market crash of 1929. \"WIR\" is both an abbreviation of Wirtschaftsring (economic circle) and the word for \"we\" in German, reminding participants that the economic circle is also a community.\nIn Australia and New Zealand, the largest barter exchange is Bartercard, founded in 1991, with offices in the United Kingdom, United States, Cyprus, UAE and Thailand. Other than its name suggests, it uses an electronic local currency, the trade dollar.\nBartering in business.\nIn business, barter has the benefit that one gets to know each other, one discourages investments for rent (which is inefficient) and one can impose trade sanctions on dishonest partners.\nAccording to the International Reciprocal Trade Association, the industry trade body, more than 450,000 businesses transacted $10 billion globally in 2008 \u2013 and officials expect trade volume to grow by 15% in 2009.\nIt is estimated that over 450,000 businesses in the United States were involved in barter exchange activities in 2010. There are approximately 400 commercial and corporate barter companies serving all parts of the world. There are many opportunities for entrepreneurs to start a barter exchange. Several major cities in the U.S. and Canada do not currently have a local barter exchange. There are two industry groups in the United States, the National Association of Trade Exchanges (NATE) and the International Reciprocal Trade Association (IRTA). Both offer training and promote high ethical standards among their members. Moreover, each has created its own currency through which its member barter companies can trade. NATE's currency is known as the BANC and IRTA's currency is called Universal Currency (UC).\nIn Canada, barter continues to thrive. The largest b2b barter exchange is Tradebank, founded in 1987. P2P bartering has seen a renaissance in major Canadian cities through Bunz - built as a network of Facebook groups that went on to become a stand-alone bartering based app in January 2016. Within the first year, Bunz accumulated over 75,000 users in over 200 cities worldwide.\nCorporate barter focuses on larger transactions, which is different from a traditional, retail oriented barter exchange. Corporate barter exchanges typically use media and advertising as leverage for their larger transactions. It entails the use of a currency unit called a \"trade-credit\". The trade-credit must not only be known and guaranteed but also be valued in an amount the media and advertising could have been purchased for had the \"client\" bought it themselves (contract to eliminate ambiguity and risk).\nSoviet bilateral trade is occasionally called \"barter trade\", because although the purchases were denominated in U.S. dollars, the transactions were credited to an international clearing account, avoiding the use of hard cash.\nTax implications.\nIn the United States, Karl Hess used bartering to make it harder for the IRS to seize his wages and as a form of tax resistance. Hess explained how he turned to barter in an op-ed for \"The New York Times\" in 1975. However the IRS now requires barter exchanges to be reported as per the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982. Barter exchanges are considered taxable revenue by the IRS and must be reported on a 1099-B form. According to the IRS, \"The fair market value of goods and services exchanged must be included in the income of both parties.\"\nOther countries, though, do not have the reporting requirement that the U.S. does concerning proceeds from barter transactions, but taxation is handled the same way as a cash transaction. If one barters for a profit, one pays the appropriate tax; if one generates a loss in the transaction, they have a loss. Bartering for business is also taxed accordingly as business income or business expense. Many barter exchanges require that one register as a business.\nRecent developments.\nIn Spain (particularly the Catalonia region) there is a growing number of exchange markets. These barter markets or swap meets work without money. Participants bring things they do not need and exchange them for the unwanted goods of another participant. Swapping among three parties often helps satisfy tastes when trying to get around the rule that money is not allowed.\nOther examples are El Cambalache in San Cristobal de las Casas, Chiapas, Mexico and post-Soviet societies."}
{"id": "4233", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4233", "title": "Berthe Morisot", "text": "Berthe Marie Pauline Morisot (; January 14, 1841\u00a0\u2013 March 2, 1895) was a French painter and a member of the circle of painters in Paris who became known as the Impressionists. \nIn 1864, Morisot exhibited for the first time in the highly esteemed Salon de Paris. Sponsored by the government and judged by Academicians, the Salon was the official, annual exhibition of the Acad\u00e9mie des beaux-arts in Paris. Her work was selected for exhibition in six subsequent Salons until, in 1874, she joined the \"rejected\" Impressionists in the first of their own exhibitions, which included Paul C\u00e9zanne, Edgar Degas, Claude Monet, Camille Pissarro, Pierre-Auguste Renoir and Alfred Sisley. It was held at the studio of the photographer Nadar. Morisot went on to participate in all but one of the following eight impressionist exhibitions, between 1874 and 1886.\nMorisot was married to Eug\u00e8ne Manet, the brother of her friend and colleague \u00c9douard Manet.\nShe was described by Gustave Geffroy in 1894 as one of \"les trois grandes dames\" of Impressionism alongside Marie Bracquemond and Mary Cassatt.\nEarly life.\nMorisot was born January 14, 1841, in Bourges, France, into an affluent bourgeois family. Her father, Edm\u00e9 Tiburce Morisot, was the prefect (senior administrator) of the department of Cher. He also studied architecture at \u00c9cole des Beaux Arts. Her mother, Marie-Jos\u00e9phine-Corn\u00e9lie Thomas, was the great-niece of Jean-Honor\u00e9 Fragonard, one of the most prolific Rococo painters of the ancien r\u00e9gime. She had two older sisters, Yves (1838\u20131893) and Edma (1839\u20131921), plus a younger brother, Tiburce, born in 1848. The family moved to Paris in 1852, when Morisot was a child.\nIt was commonplace for daughters of bourgeois families to receive art education, so Berthe and her sisters Yves and Edma were taught privately by Geoffroy-Alphonse Chocarne and Joseph Guichard. Morisot and her sisters initially started taking lessons so that they could each make a drawing for their father for his birthday. In 1857 Guichard, who ran a school for girls in Rue des Moulins, introduced Berthe and Edma to the Louvre gallery where from 1858 they learned by copying paintings. The Morisots were not only forbidden to work at the museum unchaperoned, but they were also totally barred from formal training. Guichard also introduced them to the works of Gavarni.\nAs art students, Berthe and Edma worked closely together until 1869, when Edma married Adolphe Pontillon, a naval officer, moved to Cherbourg, and had less time to paint. Letters between the sisters show a loving relationship, underscored by Berthe's regret at the distance between them and Edma's withdrawal from painting. Edma wholeheartedly supported Berthe's continued work and their families always remained close. Edma wrote \"\u2026 I am often with you in thought, dear Berthe. I\u2019m in your studio and I like to slip away, if only for a quarter of an hour, to breathe that atmosphere that we shared for many years\u2026\".\nHer sister Yves married Theodore Gobillard, a tax inspector, in 1866 and was painted by Edgar Degas as \"Mrs Theodore Gobillard\" (Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City).\nAs a copyist at the Louvre, Morisot met and befriended other artists such as Manet and Monet. In 1861 she was introduced to Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot, the pivotal landscape painter of the Barbizon school who also excelled in figure painting. Under Corot's influence she took up the plein air (outdoors) method of working. By 1863 she was studying under , another Barbizon painter. In the winter of 1863\u201364 she studied sculpture under Aim\u00e9 Millet, but none of her sculpture is known to survive.\nMain periods of Morisot's work.\nTraining, 1857\u20131870.\nIt is hard to trace the stages of Morisot's training and to tell the exact influence of her teachers because she was never pleased with her work and she destroyed nearly all of the artworks she produced before 1869. Her first teacher, Geoffroy-Alphonse Chocarne, taught her the basics of drawing. After several months, Morisot began to take classes taught by Guichard. During this period, she drew mostly ancient classical figures. When Morisot expressed her interests in plein-air painting, Guichard sent her to follow Corot and Oudinot. Painting outdoors, she used watercolors which are easy to carry. At that time, Morisot also became interested in pastel.\nWatercolorist, 1870\u20131874.\nDuring this period, Morisot still found oil painting difficult, and worked mostly in watercolor. Her choice of colors is rather restrained; however, the delicate repetition of hues renders a balanced effect. Due to specific characteristics of watercolors as a medium, Morisot was able to create a translucent atmosphere and feathery touch, which contribute to the freshness in her paintings.\nImpressionism, 1875\u20131885.\nHaving become more confident about oil painting, Morisot worked in oil, watercolor and pastel at the same time, as Degas did. She painted very quickly but did much sketching as preparation, so she could paint \"a mouth, eyes, and a nose with a single brushstroke.\" She made countless studies of her subjects, which were drawn from her life so she became quite familiar with them. When it became inconvenient to paint outdoors, the highly finished watercolors done in the preparatory stages allowed her to continue painting indoors later.\nTurning, 1885\u20131887.\nAfter 1885, drawing began to dominate in Morisot's works. Morisot actively experimented with charcoals and color pencils. Her reviving interest in drawing was motivated by her Impressionist friends, who are known for blurring forms. Morisot put her emphasis on the clarification of the form and lines during this period. In addition, she was influenced by photography and Japonisme. She adopted the style of placing objects away from the center of the composition from Japanese prints of the time.\nSynthesis, 1887\u20131895.\nMorisot started to use the technique of squaring and the medium of tracing paper to transcribe her drawing to the canvas exactly. By employing this new method, Morisot was able to create compositions with more complicated interaction between figures. She stressed the composition and the forms while her Impressionist brushstrokes still remained. Her original synthesis of the Impressionist touch with broad strokes and light reflections, and the graphic approach featured by clear lines, made her late works distinctive.\nStyle and technique.\nBecause she was a female artist, Morisot's paintings were often labeled as being full of \"feminine charm\" by male critics, for their elegance and lightness. In 1890, Morisot wrote in a notebook about her struggles to be taken seriously as an artist: \"I don't think there has ever been a man who treated a woman as an equal and that's all I would have asked for, for I know I'm worth as much as they.\" \nHer light brushstrokes often led to critics using the verb \"effleurer\" (to touch lightly, brush against) to describe her technique. In her early life, Morisot painted in the open air as other Impressionists to look for truths in observation. Around 1880 she began painting on unprimed canvases\u2014a technique Manet and Eva Gonzal\u00e8s also experimented with at the time\u2014and her brushwork became looser. In 1888\u201389, her brushstrokes transitioned from short, rapid strokes to long, sinuous ones that define form. The outer edges of her paintings were often left unfinished, allowing the canvas to show through and increasing the sense of spontaneity. After 1885, she worked mostly from preliminary drawings before beginning her oil paintings. She also worked in oil paint, watercolors, and pastel simultaneously, and sketched using various drawing media. Morisot's works are almost always small in scale.\nMorisot creates a sense of space and depth through the use of color. Although her color palette was somewhat limited, her fellow impressionists regarded her as a \"virtuoso colorist\". She typically made expansive use of white to create a sense of transparency, whether used as a pure white or mixed with other colors. In her large painting, \"The Cherry Tree\", colors are more vivid but are still used to emphasize form.\nInspired by Manet's drawings, she kept the use of color to the minimum when constructing a motif. Responding to the experiments conducted by Manet and Edgar Degas, Morisot used barely tinted whites to harmonize the paintings. Like Degas, she played with three media simultaneously in one painting: watercolor, pastel, and oil paints. In the second half of her career, she learned from Renoir by mimicking his motifs. She also shared an interest in keeping a balance between the density of figures and the atmospheric traits of light with Renoir in her later works.\nSubjects.\nMorisot painted what she experienced on a daily basis. Most of her paintings include domestic scenes of family, children, ladies, and flowers, depicting what women's life was like in the late nineteenth century. Instead of portraying the public space and the society, Morisot preferred private, intimate scenes. It somehow reflects the cultural restrictions of her class and gender at that time. Like her fellow Impressionist Mary Cassatt, she focused on domestic life and portraits in which she could use family and personal friends as models, including her daughter Julie and sister Edma. The stenographic presentation of her daily life conveys a strong hope to stop the fleeting passage of time. By portraying flowers, she used metaphors to celebrate womanhood. Prior to the 1860s, Morisot painted subjects in line with the Barbizon school before turning to scenes of contemporary femininity. Paintings like \"The Cradle\" (1872), in which she depicted current trends for nursery furniture, reflect her sensitivity to fashion and advertising, both of which would have been apparent to her female audience. Her works also include landscapes, garden settings, boating scenes, and theme of boredom or ennui. Later in her career Morisot worked with more ambitious themes, such as nudes. In her late works, she often referred to the past to recall the memory of her earlier life and youth, and her departed companions.\nImpressionism.\nMorisot's first appearance in the Salon de Paris came at the age of twenty-three in 1864, with the acceptance of two landscape paintings. She continued to show regularly in the Salon, to generally favorable reviews, until 1873, the year before the first Impressionist exhibition. She exhibited with the Impressionists from 1874 onwards, only missing the exhibition in 1878 when her daughter was born.\nImpressionism's alleged attachment to brilliant color, sensual surface effects, and fleeting sensory perceptions led a number of critics to assert in retrospect that this style, once primarily the battlefield of insouciant, combative males, was inherently feminine and best suited to women's weaker temperaments, lesser intellectual capabilities, and greater sensibility.\nDuring Morisot's 1874 exhibition with the Impressionists, such as Monet and Manet, Le Figaro critic Albert Wolff noted that the Impressionists consisted of \"five or six lunatics of which one is a woman...[whose] feminine grace is maintained amid the outpourings of a delirious mind.\"\nMorisot's mature career began in 1872. She found an audience for her work with Durand-Ruel, the private dealer, who bought twenty-two paintings. In 1877, she was described by the critic for \"Le Temps\" as the \"one real Impressionist in this group.\" She chose to exhibit under her full maiden name instead of using a pseudonym or her married name. As her skill and style improved, many began to rethink their opinion toward Morisot. In the 1880 exhibition, many reviews judged Morisot among the best, even including \"Le Figaro\" critic Albert Wolff.\nPersonal life.\nMorisot came from an eminent family, the daughter of a government official and the great-niece of a famous Rococo artist Jean-Honor\u00e9 Fragonard. She met her longtime friend and colleague, \u00c9douard Manet, in 1868. By the introduction of Manet, Morisot was married to \u00c9douard's brother, Eug\u00e8ne Manet in 1874. On November 14, 1878, she gave birth to her only child, Julie, who posed frequently for her mother and other Impressionist artists, including Renoir and her uncle \u00c9douard. \nCorrespondence between Morisot and \u00c9douard Manet shows warm affection, and Manet gave her an easel as a Christmas present. Morisot often posed for Manet and there are several portrait painting of Morisot such as \"Repose (Portrait of Berthe Morisot)\" and \"Berthe Morisot with a Bouquet\". Morisot died on March 2, 1895, in Paris, of pneumonia contracted while attending to her daughter Julie's similar illness, and thus making her an orphan at the age of 16. She was interred in the Cimeti\u00e8re de Passy.\nWorks.\nSelection of works.\nThis limited selection is based in part on the book \"Berthe Morisot\" by Charles F. Stuckey, William P. Scott and Susan G. Lindsay, which is in turn drawn from the 1961 catalogue by Marie-Louise Bataille, Rouaart Denis and Georges Wildenstein. There are variations between the dates of execution, first showing and purchase. Titles may vary between sources.\nArt market.\nMorisot's work sold comparatively well. She achieved the two highest prices at a H\u00f4tel Drouot auction in 1875, the \"Interior (Young Woman with Mirror)\" sold for 480 francs, and her pastel \"On the Lawn\" sold for 320 francs. Her works averaged 250 francs, the best relative prices at the auction.\nIn February 2013, Morisot became the highest priced female artist, when \"After Lunch\" (1881), a portrait of a young redhead in a straw hat and purple dress, sold for $10.9\u00a0million at a Christie's auction. The painting achieved roughly three times its upper estimate, exceeding the $10.7\u00a0million for a sculpture by Louise Bourgeois in 2012.\nLegacy.\nShe was portrayed by actress Marine Delterme in a 2012 French biographical TV film directed by Caroline Champetier. The character of Beatrice de Clerval in Elizabeth Kostova's \"The Swan Thieves\" is largely based on Morisot.\nShe was featured as the \"A First Impressionist\" in an article written by Anne Truitt in the \"New York Times\" on June 3, 1990.\nFrom Melissa Burdick Harmon, an editor at \"Biography\" magazine, \"While some of Morisot's work may seem to us today like sweet depictions of babies in cradles, at the time these images were considered extremely intimate, as objects related to infants belonged exclusively to the world of women.\"\nIn 2019, the Mus\u00e9e d'Orsay devoted a temporary exhibition to Berthe Morisot to pay tribute to her work. "}
{"id": "4237", "revid": "1021940592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4237", "title": "Barnard College", "text": "Barnard College of Columbia University is a private women's liberal arts college in New York City. It was founded in 1889 by Annie Nathan Meyer as a response to Columbia University's refusal to admit women and is named after Columbia's 10th president, Frederick Barnard.\nBarnard is officially one of four undergraduate colleges of Columbia University, but has legal and financial autonomy. Students share classes, clubs, fraternities and sororities, sports teams, buildings, and more with Columbia, and receive the Columbia diploma that is signed by both Barnard and Columbia presidents.\nBarnard offers Bachelor of Arts degree programs in about 50 areas of study. Students may also pursue elements of their education at Columbia, the Juilliard School, the Manhattan School of Music, and The Jewish Theological Seminary, which are also based in New York City. Its campus is located in the Upper Manhattan neighborhood of Morningside Heights, stretching along Broadway between 116th and 120th Streets. It is directly across from Columbia's main campus and near several other academic institutions.\nThe college is a member of the Seven Sisters, an association of seven prominent women's liberal arts colleges in the United States of America.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nFor its first 229 years Columbia College of Columbia University admitted only men for undergraduate study. Barnard College was founded in 1889 as a response to Columbia's refusal to admit women into its institution.\nThe college was named after Frederick Augustus Porter Barnard, a deaf American educator and mathematician who served as the 10th president of Columbia from 1864 to 1889. He advocated for equal educational privileges for men and women, preferably in a coeducational setting, and began proposing in 1879 that Columbia admit women. \nColumbia's Board of Trustees repeatedly rejected Barnard's suggestion, but in 1883 agreed to create a detailed syllabus of study for women. While they could not attend Columbia classes, those who passed examinations based on the syllabus would receive a degree. The first such woman graduate received her bachelor's degree in 1887. A former student of the program, Annie Meyer, and other prominent New York women persuaded the board in 1889 to create a women's college connected to Columbia.\nMen and women were evenly represented among the founding Trustees of Barnard College. The males were Rev. Dr. Arthur Brooks (chair of the board), Silas B. Brownell, Frederick R. Coudert, Noah Davis, George Hoadley, Hamilton W. Mabie, George Arthur Plimpton, Jacob Schiff, Francis Lynde Stetson, Henry Van Dyke, and Everett P. Wheeler. The founding female trustees of Barnard College were Augusta Arnold (n\u00e9e Foote), Helen Dawes Brown, Virginia Brownwell (n\u00e9e Swinburne), Caroline Sterling Choate, Annie Nathan Meyer, Laura Rockefeller, Clara C. Stranahan (n\u00e9e Harrison), Henrietta E. Talcott (n\u00e9e Francis), Ella Weed, Alice Williams, and Frances Fisher Wood.\nBarnard College's original 1889 home was a rented brownstone at 343 Madison Avenue, where a faculty of six offered instruction to 14 students in the School of Arts, as well as to 22 \"specials\", who lacked the entrance requirements in Greek and so enrolled in science.\nMorningside campus.\nWhen Columbia University announced in 1892 its impending move to Morningside Heights, Barnard built a new campus nearby with gifts from Mary E. Brinckerhoff, Elizabeth Milbank Anderson and Martha Fiske. Two of these gifts were made with several stipulations attached. Brinckerhoff had offered $100,000 in 1892, on the condition that the Barnard acquire land within 1,000 feet of the Columbia campus within the next four years. The Barnard trustees purchased land between 119th-120th Streets after receiving funds for that purpose in 1895. Anderson, who gave $170,000, requested that Charles A. Rich be hired. Rich designed the Milbank, Brinckerhoff, and Fiske Halls, built in 1897\u20131898; these were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2003. The first classes at the new campus were held in 1897. Despite Brinckerhoff's, Anderson's, and Fiske's gifts, Barnard remained in debt.\nElla Weed supervised the college in its first four years; Emily James Smith succeeded her as Barnard's first dean. Jessica Finch is credited with coining the phrase \"current events\" while teaching at Barnard College in the 1890s. \nAs the college grew it needed additional space, and in 1903 it received the three blocks south of 119th Street from Anderson who had purchased a former portion of the Bloomingdale Asylum site from the New York Hospital. Rich provided a master plan for the campus, but only Brooks Hall was built, being constructed between 1906 and 1908. None of Rich's other plans were carried out. Students' Hall, now known as Barnard Hall, was built in 1916 to a design by Arnold Brunner. Hewitt Hall was the last structure to be erected, in 1926\u20131927. All three buildings were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2003. An inability to raise funds precluded the construction of any other buildings.\nBy the mid-20th century Barnard had succeeded in its original goal of providing a top tier education to women. Between 1920 and 1974, only the much larger Hunter College and University of California, Berkeley produced more women graduates who later received doctorate degrees. In the 1970s, Barnard faced considerable pressure to merge with Columbia, which was fiercely resisted by its president, Jacquelyn Mattfeld.\nAcademics.\nBarnard students are able to pursue a Bachelor of Arts degree in about 50 areas of study. Joint programs for the Bachelor of Science and other degrees exist with Columbia University, Juilliard School, and The Jewish Theological Seminary. The most popular majors at the college include Economics, English, Political Science, History, Psychology, Biological Sciences, Neuroscience, and Computer Science.\nThe liberal arts general education requirements are collectively called Foundations. Students must take two courses in the sciences (one of which must be accompanied by a laboratory course), study a single foreign language for two semesters, and take two courses in the arts/humanities as well as two in the social sciences. In addition, students must complete at least one three-credit course in each of the following categories, known as the Modes of Thinking: Thinking Locally\u2014New York City, Thinking through Global Inquiry, Thinking about Social Difference, Thinking with Historical Perspective, Thinking Quantitatively and Empirically, and Thinking Technologically and Digitally. The use of AP or IB credit to fulfill these requirements is very limited, but Foundations courses may overlap with major or minor requirements. In addition to the distributional requirements and the Modes of Thinking, students must complete a first-year seminar, a first-year writing course, and one semester of physical education. Foundations replaced the old general education requirements, called the Nine Ways of Knowing, in 2016.\nAdmissions.\nAdmissions to Barnard is considered most selective by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\". It is the most selective women's college in the nation; in 2017, Barnard had the lowest acceptance rate of the five Seven Sisters that remain single-sex in admissions.\nThe class of 2023's admission rate was 11.8% of the 9,320 applicants, the lowest acceptance rate in the institution's history. The early-decision admission rate for the class of 2023 was 23.9%, out of 1,221 applications. The median SAT Composite score of enrolled students was 1440, with median subscores of 720 in Math and 715 in Evidence-Based Reading and Writing. The median ACT Composite score was 33.\nIn 2015 Barnard announced that it would admit transgender women who \"consistently live and identify as women, regardless of the gender assigned to them at birth\", and would continue to support and enroll those students who transitioned to males after they had already been admitted.\nRankings.\nBarnard was ranked tied at 22nd overall, tied for 29th out of 50 \"Most Innovative Schools\", tied for 57th out of 63 schools for \"Best Undergraduate Teaching\" and 81st out of 102 schools for \"Best Value\" for 2021 among U.S. liberal arts colleges by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\". \"Forbes\" ranked Barnard the 19th best liberal arts college in 2019, which also ranked it 50th among 650 universities, liberal arts colleges and service academies.\nCampus.\nLibrary.\n While students are allowed to use the libraries at Columbia University, Barnard has always maintained a library of its own. Lehman Hall was the site of Barnard's Wollman Library from its opening in 1959 until 2015. In August 2016, Lehman Hall was demolished to make way for a new library facility. Barnard's Milstein Center for Teaching and Learning opened in September 2018. In 2016, portions of the Barnard Library were relocated to the former LeFrak Gymnasium, the first two floors of Barnard Hall. 18,000 volumes were also moved to the Milstein rooms in Columbia University's Butler Library. The relocation plans proved to be contentious among faculty at the college, who objected to sending a large portion of the library's holdings off site, as well as a \"lack of transparency surrounding the decision-making process\", according to \"Library Journal\".\nThe LeFrak Center housed study space, librarians' offices, the zine collection, course reserves, and new books acquired after July 2015-. The Barnard Library also encompasses the Archives and Special Collections, a repository of official and student publications, photographs, letters, alumnae scrapbooks and other material that documents Barnard's history from its founding in 1889 to the present day. Among the collections are the Ntozake Shange papers and various student publications.\nBarnard Public Safety Shuttle operates around the campus area.\nZine Collection.\nBorne of a proposal by longtime zinester Jenna Freedman, Barnard collects zines in an effort to document third-wave feminism and Riot Grrrl culture. According to Freedman, zine collections such as Barnard's provide a home for the voices of young women otherwise not represented in library collections. The Zine Collection's website states: \n, the library had approximately 4,000 different zines available to library patrons, including zines about race, gender, sexuality, childbirth, motherhood, politics, and relationships. The library keeps a collection of zines for lending and another archived collection in the Barnard Archives. Both collections are catalogued in \"CLIO\", the Columbia/Barnard Online public access catalog.\nStudent life.\nStudent organizations.\nEvery Barnard student is part of the Student Government Association (SGA), which elects a representative student government. SGA aims to facilitate the expression of opinions on matters that directly affect the Barnard community.\nStudent groups include theatre and vocal music groups, language clubs, literary magazines, a freeform radio station called WBAR, a biweekly magazine called the \"Barnard Bulletin\", community service groups, and others.\nBarnard students can also join extracurricular activities or organizations at Columbia University, while Columbia University students are allowed in most, but not all, Barnard organizations. Barnard's McIntosh Activities Council (commonly known as McAC), named after the first President of Barnard, Millicent McIntosh, organizes various community focused events on campus, such as Big Sub and Midnight Breakfast. McAC is made up of five sub-committees which are the Mosaic committee (formerly known as Multicultural), the Wellness committee, the Network committee, the Community committee, and the Action committee. Each committee has a different focus, such as hosting and publicizing identity and cultural events (Mosaic), having health and wellness related events (Wellness), giving students opportunities to be involved with Alumnae and various professionals (Network), planning events that bring the entire student body together (Community), and planning community service events that give back to the surrounding community (Action).\nSororities.\nBarnard students participate in Columbia's six National Panhellenic Conference sororities\u2014Alpha Chi Omega, Alpha Omicron Pi, Delta Gamma, Gamma Phi Beta, Kappa Alpha Theta, and Sigma Delta Tau\u2014and the National Pan-Hellenic Council Sororities- Alpha Kappa Alpha (Lambda chapter) and Delta Sigma Theta (Rho chapter) as well as other sororities in the Multicultural Greek Council. Two National Panhellenic Conference organizations were founded at Barnard College. The Alpha Omicron Pi fraternity, founded on January 2, 1897, left campus during the college's 1913 ban on sororities but returned to establish its Alpha chapter in 2013. The Alpha Epsilon Phi, founded on October 24, 1909, is no longer on campus. , Barnard does not fully recognize the National Panhellenic Conference sororities at Columbia, but it does provide some funding to account for Barnard students living in Columbia housing through these organizations.\nTraditions.\nTake Back the Night: Each April, Barnard and Columbia students participate in the Take Back the Night march and speak-out. This annual event grew out of a 1988 Seven Sisters conference. The march has grown from under 200 participants in 1988 to more than 2,500 in 2007.\nMidnight Breakfast marks the beginning of finals week. As a highly popular event and long-standing college tradition, Midnight Breakfast is hosted by the student-run activities council, McAC (McIntosh Activities Council). In addition to providing standard breakfast foods, each year's theme is also incorporated into the menu. Past themes have included \"I YUMM the 90s,\" \"Grease,\" and \"Take Me Out to the Ballgame.\" The event is a school-wide affair as college deans, trustees and the president serve food to about a thousand students. It takes place the night before finals begin every semester.\nBig Sub: Towards the beginning of each fall semester, Barnard College supplies a 700+ feet long subway sandwich. Students from the college can take as much of the sub as they can carry. The sub has kosher, dairy free, vegetarian, and vegan sections. This event is organized by the student-run activities council, McAC.\nAcademic affiliations.\nRelationship with Columbia University.\nThe \"Barnard Bulletin\" in 1976 described the relationship between the college and Columbia University as \"intricate and ambiguous\". Barnard president Debora Spar said in 2012 that \"the relationship is admittedly a complicated one, a unique one and one that may take a few sentences to explain to the outside community\".\nOutside sources often describe Barnard as part of Columbia; \"The New York Times\" in 2013, for example, called Barnard \"an undergraduate women's college of Columbia University\". Its front gates state \"Barnard College of Columbia University\". Barnard describes itself as \"both an independently incorporated educational institution and an official college of Columbia University\" that is \"one of the University's four colleges, but we're largely autonomous, with our own leadership and purse strings\", and advises students to state \"Barnard College, Columbia University\" or \"Barnard College of Columbia University\" on r\u00e9sum\u00e9s. Facebook includes Barnard students and alumnae within the Columbia interest group.\nColumbia describes Barnard as an affiliated institution that is a faculty of the university or is \"in partnership with\" it. Both the college and Columbia evaluate Barnard faculty for tenure, and Barnard graduates receive Columbia diploma; signed by both the Barnard and the Columbia presidents.\nBefore coeducation at Columbia.\nSmith and Columbia president Seth Low worked to open Columbia classes to Barnard students. By 1900 they could attend Columbia classes in philosophy, political science, and several scientific fields. That year Barnard formalized an affiliation with the university which made available to its students the instruction and facilities of Columbia. Franz Boas, who taught at both Columbia and Barnard in the early 1900s, was among those faculty members who reportedly found Barnard students superior to their male Columbia counterparts. From 1955 Columbia and Barnard students could register for the other school's classes with the permission of the instructor; from 1973 no permission was needed.\nExcept for Columbia College, by the 1940s other undergraduate and graduate divisions of Columbia University admitted women. Columbia president William J. McGill predicted in 1970 that Barnard College and Columbia College would merge within five years. In 1973 Columbia and Barnard signed a three-year agreement to increase sharing classrooms, facilities, and housing, and cooperation in faculty appointments, which they described as \"integration without assimilation\"; by the mid-1970s most Columbia dormitories were coed. The university's financial difficulties during the decade increased its desire to merge to end what Columbia described as the \"anachronism\" of single-sex education, but Barnard resisted doing so because of Columbia's large debt, rejecting in 1975 Columbia dean Peter Pouncey's proposal to merge Barnard and the three Columbia undergraduate schools. The 1973\u20131976 chairwoman of the board at Barnard, Eleanor Thomas Elliott, led the resistance to this takeover. The college's marketing emphasized the Columbia relationship, however, the \"Bulletin\" in 1976 stating that Barnard described it as identical to the one between Harvard College and Radcliffe College (\"who are merged in practically everything but name at this point\").\nAfter Barnard rejected subsequent merger proposals from Columbia and a one-year extension to the 1973 agreement expired, in 1977 the two schools began discussing their future relationship. By 1979 the relationship had so deteriorated that Barnard officials stopped attending meetings. Because of an expected decline in enrollment, in 1980 a Columbia committee recommended that Columbia College begin admitting women without Barnard's cooperation. A 1981 committee found that Columbia was no longer competitive with other Ivy League universities without women, and that admitting women would not affect Barnard's applicant pool. That year Columbia president Michael Sovern agreed for the two schools to cooperate in admitting women to Columbia, but Barnard faculty's opposition caused president Ellen Futter to reject the agreement.\nA decade of negotiations for a Columbia-Barnard merger akin to Harvard and Radcliffe had failed. In January 1982, the two schools instead announced that Columbia College would begin admitting women in 1983, and Barnard's control over tenure for its faculty would increase; previously, a committee on which Columbia faculty outnumbered Barnard's three to two controlled the latter's tenure. Applications to Columbia rose 56% that year, making admission more selective, and nine Barnard students transferred to Columbia. Eight students admitted to both Columbia and Barnard chose Barnard, while 78 chose Columbia. Within a few years, however, selectivity rose at both schools as they received more women applicants than expected.\nAfter coeducation.\nThe Columbia-Barnard affiliation continued. Barnard pays Columbia about $5\u00a0million a year under the terms of the \"interoperate relationship\", which the two schools renegotiate every 15 years. Despite the affiliation Barnard is legally and financially separate from Columbia, with an independent faculty and board of trustees. It is responsible for its own separate admissions, health, security, guidance and placement services, and has its own alumnae association. Nonetheless, Barnard students participate in the academic, social, athletic and extracurricular life of the broader University community on a reciprocal basis. The affiliation permits the two schools to share some academic resources; for example, only Barnard has an urban studies department, and only Columbia has a computer science department. Most Columbia classes are open to Barnard students and vice versa. Barnard students and faculty are represented in the University Senate, and student organizations such as the \"Columbia Daily Spectator\" are open to all students. Barnard students play on Columbia athletics teams, and Barnard uses Columbia email, telephone and network services.\nBarnard athletes compete in the Ivy League (NCAA Division I) through the Columbia/Barnard Athletic Consortium, which was established in 1983. Through this arrangement, Barnard is the only women's college offering DivisionI athletics. There are 15 intercollegiate teams, and students also compete at the intramural and club levels. From 1975\u20131983, before the establishment of the Columbia/Barnard Athletic Consortium, Barnard students competed as the \"Barnard Bears\". Prior to 1975, students referred to themselves as the \"Barnard honeybears\".\nSeven Sisters.\nEstablished within the Barnard Student Government Association (SGA), The Seven Sisters Governing Board represents Barnard College as part of the Seven Sisters Coalition, which is a group of representatives from student councils of the historic Seven Sisters colleges. The reps on the coordinating board of Seven Sisters Coalition are rotating every year to hold the annual Seven Sisters Conference in a serious but informal setting. The first Seven Sisters Conference was hosted by SGA student representatives at Barnard College in 2009. In fall 2013, the conference was hosted by Vassar College during the first weekend of November. The major topic focused on inner college collaborations and differences in student government structures among Seven Sisters Colleges. The Seven Sisters Coordinating Board of Barnard brought six Barnard student representatives to attend the Fall Semester conference, which was hosted at Vassar College in the past fall semester. Based on the Coalition Coordinating Board Constitution established in February 2013, Students delegates were initiating projects in the aspects of public relations, alumni outreach and website management to promote the presence and development of the seven sisters culture. Meanwhile, The Barnard delegates engaged in discussions about the various structures of the student governments among the historic seven sisters colleges.\nControversies.\nIn the spring of 1960, Columbia University president Grayson Kirk complained to the president of Barnard that Barnard students were wearing inappropriate clothing. The garments in question were pants and Bermuda shorts. The administration forced the student council to institute a dress code. Students would be allowed to wear shorts and pants only at Barnard and only if the shorts were no more than two inches above the knee and the pants were not tight. Barnard women crossing the street to enter the Columbia campus wearing shorts or pants were required to cover themselves with a long coat.\nIn March 1968, \"The New York Times\" ran an article on students who cohabited, identifying one of the persons they interviewed as a student at Barnard College from New Hampshire named \"Susan\". Barnard officials searched their records for women from New Hampshire and were able to determine that \"Susan\" was the pseudonym of a student (Linda LeClair) who was living with her boyfriend, a student at Columbia University. She was called before Barnard's student-faculty administration judicial committee, where she faced the possibility of expulsion. A student protest included a petition signed by 300 other Barnard women, admitting that they too had broken the regulations against cohabitating. The judicial committee reached a compromise and the student was allowed to remain in school, but was denied use of the college cafeteria and barred from all social activities. The student briefly became a focus of intense national attention. She eventually dropped out of Barnard.\nAdministration.\nThe following lists all the Presidents and Deans of Barnard College from 1889 to present.\nNotable people.\nBarnard College has graduated many prominent leaders in science, religion, politics, the Peace Corps, medicine, law, education, communications, theater, and business; and acclaimed actors, architects, artists, astronauts, engineers, human rights activists, inventors, musicians, philanthropists, and writers. Among these include: United Nations Development Programme Representative of Japan, Akiko Yuge (1975), academic Louise Holland (1914), author Zora Neale Hurston, author and political activist Grace Lee Boggs (1935), television host Ronnie Eldridge (1952), Phyllis E. Grann CEO of Penguin Putnam, U.S. Representative Helen Gahagan (1924), CEO of CARE USA and chair of the Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS Helene D. Gayle (1970), President of the American Civil Liberties Union Susan Herman (1968), Chief Judge of the New York Court of Appeals Judith Kaye (1958), Chair of the National Labor Relations Board Wilma B. Liebman (1971), musician and performance artist Laurie Anderson (1969), actress, activist and gubernatorial candidate Cynthia Nixon (1988), author of \"The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants\" Ann Brashares (1989), actress from Grey's Anatomy Kelly McCreary (2003), writer and director Greta Gerwig (2004), and Disney Channel actress Christy Carlson Romano (2015)."}
{"id": "4238", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4238", "title": "Bronx, New York", "text": ""}
{"id": "4240", "revid": "136745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4240", "title": "Benedictines", "text": "The Benedictines, officially the Order of Saint Benedict (, abbreviated as OSB), are a monastic religious order of the Catholic Church following the Rule of Saint Benedict. They are also sometimes called the Black Monks, in reference to the colour of their religious habits. They were founded by Saint Benedict of Nursia, a 6th-century monk who laid the foundations of Benedictine monasticism through the formulation of his Rule of Saint Benedict.\nDespite being called an order, the Benedictines do not operate under a single hierarchy but are instead organised as a collection of autonomous monasteries; they do not have a superior general or motherhouse with universal jurisdiction. The order is represented internationally by the Benedictine Confederation, an organisation set up in 1893 to represent the order's shared interests.\nHistorical development.\nThe monastery at Subiaco in Italy, established by Saint Benedict of Nursia 529, was the first of the dozen monasteries he founded. He later founded the Abbey of Monte Cassino. There is no evidence, however, that he intended to found an order and the Rule of Saint Benedict presupposes the autonomy of each community. When Monte Cassino was sacked by the Lombards about the year 580, the monks fled to Rome, and it seems probable that this constituted an important factor in the diffusion of a knowledge of Benedictine monasticism.\nIt was from the monastery of St. Andrew in Rome that Augustine, the prior, and his forty companions set forth in 595 on their mission for the evangelization of England. At various stopping places during the journey, the monks left behind them traditions concerning their rule and form of life, and probably also some copies of the Rule. L\u00e9rins Abbey, for instance, founded by Honoratus in 375, probably received its first knowledge of the Benedictine Rule from the visit of St. Augustine and his companions in 596.\nGregory of Tours says that at Ainay Abbey, in the sixth century, the monks \"followed the rules of Basil, Cassian, Caesarius, and other fathers, taking and using whatever seemed proper to the conditions of time and place\", and doubtless the same liberty was taken with the Benedictine Rule when it reached them. In Gaul and Switzerland, it supplemented the much stricter Irish or Celtic Rule introduced by Columbanus and others. In many monasteries it eventually entirely displaced the earlier codes.\nBy the ninth century, however, the Benedictine had become the standard form of monastic life throughout the whole of Western Europe, excepting Scotland, Wales, and Ireland, where the Celtic observance still prevailed for another century or two. Largely through the work of Benedict of Aniane, it became the rule of choice for monasteries throughout the Carolingian empire.\nMonastic scriptoria flourished from the ninth through the twelfth centuries. Sacred Scripture was always at the heart of every monastic scriptorium. As a general rule those of the monks who possessed skill as writers made this their chief, if not their sole active work. An anonymous writer of the ninth or tenth century speaks of six hours a day as the usual task of a scribe, which would absorb almost all the time available for active work in the day of a medieval monk.\nIn the Middle Ages monasteries were often founded by the nobility. Cluny Abbey was founded by William I, Duke of Aquitaine in 910. The abbey was noted for its strict adherence to the Rule of St. Benedict. The abbot of Cluny was the superior of all the daughter houses, through appointed priors.\nOne of the earliest reforms of Benedictine practice was that initiated in 980 by Romuald, who founded the Camaldolese community.\nThe dominance of the Benedictine monastic way of life began to decline towards the end of the twelfth century, which saw the rise of the Franciscans and Dominicans. Benedictines took a fourth vow of \"stability\", which professed loyalty to a particular foundation. Not being bound by location, the mendicants were better able to respond to an increasingly \"urban\" environment. This decline was further exacerbated by the practice of appointing a commendatory abbot, a lay person, appointed by a noble to oversee and to protect the goods of the monastery. Often, however, this resulted in the appropriation of the assets of monasteries at the expense of the community which they were intended to support.\nEngland.\nThe English Benedictine Congregation is the oldest of the nineteen Benedictine congregations. Augustine of Canterbury and his monks established the first English Benedictine monastery at Canterbury soon after their arrival in 597. Other foundations quickly followed. Through the influence of Wilfrid, Benedict Biscop, and Dunstan, the Benedictine Rule spread with extraordinary rapidity, and in the North it was adopted in most of the monasteries that had been founded by the Celtic missionaries from Iona. Many of the episcopal sees of England were founded and governed by the Benedictines, and no fewer than nine of the old cathedrals were served by the black monks of the priories attached to them. Monasteries served as hospitals and places of refuge for the weak and homeless. The monks studied the healing properties of plants and minerals to alleviate the sufferings of the sick.\nGermany was evangelized by English Benedictines. Willibrord and Boniface preached there in the seventh and eighth centuries and founded several abbeys.\nIn the English Reformation, all monasteries were dissolved and their lands confiscated by the Crown, forcing their Catholic members to flee into exile on the Continent. During the 19th century they were able to return to England, including to Selby Abbey in Yorkshire, one of the few great monastic churches to survive the Dissolution.\nSt. Mildred's Priory, on the Isle of Thanet, Kent, was built in 1027 on the site of an abbey founded in 670 by the daughter of the first Christian King of Kent. Currently the priory is home to a community of Benedictine nuns. Five of the most notable English abbeys are the Basilica of St Gregory the Great at Downside, commonly known as Downside Abbey, The Abbey of St Edmund, King and Martyr commonly known as Douai Abbey in Upper Woolhampton, Reading, Berkshire, Ealing Abbey in Ealing, West London, and Worth Abbey. Prinknash Abbey, used by Henry VIII as a hunting lodge, was officially returned to the Benedictines four hundred years later, in 1928. During the next few years, so-called Prinknash Park was used as a home until it was returned to the order.\nSt. Lawrence's Abbey in Ampleforth, Yorkshire was founded in 1802. In 1955, Ampleforth set up a daughter house, a priory at St. Louis, Missouri which became independent in 1973 and became Saint Louis Abbey in its own right in 1989.\nAs of 2015, the English Congregation consists of three abbeys of nuns and ten abbeys of monks. Members of the congregation are found in England, Wales, the United States of America, Peru and Zimbabwe.\nIn England there are also houses of the Subiaco Cassinese Congregation: Farnborough, Prinknash, and Chilworth: the Solesmes Congregation, Quarr and St Cecilia's on the Isle of Wight, as well as a diocesan monastery following the Rule of St Benedict: The Community of Our Lady of Glastonbury.\nSince the Oxford Movement, there has also been a modest flourishing of Benedictine monasticism in the Anglican Church and Protestant Churches. Anglican Benedictine Abbots are invited guests of the Benedictine Abbot Primate in Rome at Abbatial gatherings at Sant'Anselmo. There are an estimated 2,400 celibate Anglican Religious (1,080 men and 1,320 women) in the Anglican Communion as a whole, some of whom have adopted the Rule of St. Benedict.\nIn 1168 local Benedictine monks instigated the anti-semitic blood libel of Harold of Gloucester as a template for explaining later deaths. According to historian Joe Hillaby, the Benedictine blood libel of Harold was crucially important because for the first time an unexplained child death occurring near the Easter festival was arbitrarily linked to Jews in the vicinity by local Christian churchmen: \"they established a pattern quickly taken up elsewhere. Within three years the first ritual murder charge was made in France.\"\nMonastic libraries in England.\nThe forty-eighth rule of Saint Benedict prescribes extensive and habitual \"holy reading\" for the brethren. Three primary types of reading were done by the monks during this time. Monks would read privately during their personal time, as well as publicly during services and at meal times. In addition to these three mentioned in the Rule, monks would also read in the infirmary. Monasteries were thriving centers of education, with monks and nuns actively encouraged to learn and pray according to the law of St Benedict of Nursia, the collection of functional and religious guidelines advised monks on how they ought to go. Part of this law offered guidelines on understanding. Section 38 states that \u2018these brothers\u2019 meals should usually be accompanied by reading, and that they were to feed and drink at silence while one being said loudly. Although somewhat extreme at times, it was probably necessary in order for them to gain the discipline needed to copy such lengthy texts. An anonymous writer of the 9th or 10th century speaks of six hours a day as the usual task of a scribe, which would absorb almost all the time available for active work in the day of a medieval monk. For instance, copying the Bible would typically take up to 15 months to complete.\nHowever, Benedictine monks were disallowed worldly possessions, thus necessitating the preservation and collection of sacred texts in monastic libraries for communal use. For the sake of convenience, the books in the monastery were housed in a few different places, namely the sacristy, which contained books for the choir and other liturgical books, the rectory, which housed books for public reading such as sermons and lives of the saints, and the library, which contained the largest collection of books and was typically in the cloister.\nThe first record of a monastic library in England is in Canterbury. To assist with Augustine of Canterbury's English mission, Pope Gregory the Great gave him nine books which included the Gregorian Bible in two volumes, the Psalter of Augustine, two copies of the Gospels, two martyrologies, an Exposition of the Gospels and Epistles, and a Psalter. Theodore of Tarsus brought Greek books to Canterbury more than seventy years later, when he founded a school for the study of Greek.\nFrance.\nMonasteries were among the institutions of the Catholic Church swept away during the French Revolution. Monasteries were again allowed to form in the 19th century under the Bourbon Restoration. Later that century, under the Third French Republic, laws were enacted preventing religious teaching. The original intent was to allow secular schools. Thus in 1880 and 1882, Benedictine teaching monks were effectively exiled; this was not completed until 1901.\nGermany.\nSaint Blaise Abbey in the Black Forest of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg is believed to have been founded around the latter part of the tenth century. Other houses either reformed by, or founded as priories of, St. Blasien were: Muri Abbey (1082), Ochsenhausen Abbey (1093), G\u00f6ttweig Abbey (1094), Stein am Rhein Abbey (before 1123) and Pr\u00fcm Abbey (1132). It also had significant influence on the abbeys of Alpirsbach (1099), Ettenheimm\u00fcnster (1124) and Sulzburg (ca. 1125), and the priories of Weitenau (now part of Steinen, ca. 1100), B\u00fcrgel (before 1130) and Sitzenkirch (ca. 1130).\nSwitzerland.\nThe abbey of Our Lady of the Angels was founded in 1120.\nUnited States.\nThe first Benedictine to live in the United States was Pierre-Joseph Didier. He came to the United States in 1790 from Paris and served in the Ohio and St. Louis areas until his death. The first actual Benedictine monastery founded was Saint Vincent Archabbey, located in Latrobe, Pennsylvania. It was founded in 1832 by Boniface Wimmer, a German monk, who sought to serve German immigrants in America. In 1856, Wimmer started to lay the foundations for St. John's Abbey in Minnesota. In 1876, Father Herman Wolfe, of Saint Vincent Archabbey established Belmont Abbey in North Carolina. By the time of his death in 1887, Wimmer had sent Benedictine monks to Kansas, New Jersey, North Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Illinois, and Colorado.\nWimmer also asked for Benedictine sisters to be sent to America by St. Walburg Convent in Eichst\u00e4tt, Bavaria. In 1852, Sister Benedicta Riepp and two other sisters founded St. Marys, Pennsylvania. Soon they would send sisters to Michigan, New Jersey, and Minnesota.\nBy 1854, Swiss monks began to arrive and founded St. Meinrad Abbey in Indiana, and they soon spread to Arkansas and Louisiana. They were soon followed by Swiss sisters.\nThere are now over 100 Benedictine houses across America. Most Benedictine houses are part of one of four large Congregations: American-Cassinese, Swiss-American, St. Scholastica, and St. Benedict. The congregations mostly are made up of monasteries that share the same lineage. For instance the American-Cassinese congregation included the 22 monasteries that descended from Boniface Wimmer.\nBenedictine vow and life.\nThe sense of community was a defining characteristic of the order since the beginning.\nSection 17 in chapter 58 of the Rule of Saint Benedict states the solemn promise candidates for reception into a Benedictine community are required to make: a promise of stability (i.e. to remain in the same community), \"conversatio morum\" (an idiomatic Latin phrase suggesting \"conversion of manners\"; see below) and obedience to the community's superior. This solemn commitment tends to be referred to as the \"Benedictine vow\" and is the Benedictine antecedent and equivalent of the evangelical counsels professed by candidates for reception into a religious order.\nMuch scholarship over the last fifty years has been dedicated to the translation and interpretation of \"conversatio morum\". The older translation \"conversion of life\" has generally been replaced with phrases such as \"[conversion to] a monastic manner of life\", drawing from the Vulgate's use of \"conversatio\" as a translation of \"citizenship\" or \"homeland\" in Philippians 3:20. Some scholars have claimed that the vow formula of the Rule is best translated as \"to live in this place as a monk, in obedience to its rule and abbot.\"\nBenedictine abbots and abbesses have full jurisdiction of their abbey and thus absolute authority over the monks or nuns who are resident. This authority includes the power to assign duties, to decide which books may or may not be read, to regulate comings and goings, and to punish and to excommunicate, in the sense of an enforced isolation from the monastic community.\nA tight communal timetablethe horariumis meant to ensure that the time given by God is not wasted but used in God's service, whether for prayer, work, meals, spiritual reading or sleep.\nAlthough Benedictines do not take a vow of silence, hours of strict silence are set, and at other times silence is maintained as much as is practically possible. Social conversations tend to be limited to communal recreation times. But such details, like the many other details of the daily routine of a Benedictine house that the Rule of St Benedict leaves to the discretion of the superior, are set out in its 'customary'. A ' customary' is the code adopted by a particular Benedictine house, adapting the Rule to local conditions.\nIn the Roman Catholic Church, according to the norms of the 1983 Code of Canon Law, a Benedictine abbey is a \"religious institute\" and its members are therefore members of the consecrated life. While Canon Law 588 \u00a71 explains that Benedictine monks are \"neither clerical nor lay\", they can, however, be ordained.\nSome monasteries adopt a more active ministry in living the monastic life, running schools or parishes; others are more focused on contemplation, with more of an emphasis on prayer and work within the confines of the cloister.\nBenedictines' rules contained ritual purification, and inspired by Benedict of Nursia encouragement for the practice of therapeutic bathing; Benedictine monks played a role in the development and promotion of spas.\nOrganization.\nBenedictine monasticism is fundamentally different from other Western religious orders insofar as its individual communities are not part of a religious order with \"Generalates\" and \"Superiors General\". Each Benedictine house is independent and governed by an abbot.\nIn modern times, the various groups of autonomous houses (national, reform, etc.) have formed themselves loosely into congregations (for example, Cassinese, English, Solesmes, Subiaco, Camaldolese, Sylvestrines). These, in turn, are represented in the Benedictine Confederation that came into existence through Pope Leo XIII's Apostolic Brief \"Summum semper\" on 12 July 1893. This organization facilitates dialogue of Benedictine communities with each other and the relationship between Benedictine communities and other religious orders and the church at large. The Abbot Primate resides at the Monastery of Sant\u2019 Anselmo in Rome.\nIn 1313 Bernardo Tolomei established the Order of Our Lady of Mount Olivet. The community adopted the Rule of St. Benedict and received canonical approval in 1344. The Olivetans are part of the Benedictine Confederation.\nOther orders.\nThe Rule of Saint Benedict is also used by a number of religious orders that began as reforms of the Benedictine tradition such as the Cistercians and Trappists. These groups are separate congregations and not members of the Benedictine Confederation.\nAlthough Benedictines are traditionally Catholic, there are also some communities that follow the Rule of Saint Benedict within the Anglican Communion, Eastern Orthodox Church, and Lutheran Church.\nNotable Benedictines.\nOblates.\nBenedictine Oblates endeavor to embrace the spirit of the Benedictine vow in their own life in the world. Oblates are affiliated with a particular monastery."}
{"id": "4241", "revid": "32263862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4241", "title": "Bayezid I", "text": "Bayezid I (, , nicknamed Y\u0131ld\u0131r\u0131m, , \"Lightning, Thunderbolt\", often \"Bajazet\"; \u2013 8 March 1403) was the Ottoman Sultan from 1389 to 1402. He was the son of Murad I and G\u00fcl\u00e7i\u00e7ek Hatun. He built one of the largest armies in the known world at the time and unsuccessfully besieged Constantinople. He adopted the title of \"Sultan-i R\u00fbm\", \"R\u00fbm\" being an old Islamic name for the Roman Empire. He decisively defeated the Crusaders at Nicopolis (in modern Bulgaria) in 1396, and was himself defeated and captured by Timur at the Battle of Ankara in 1402 and died in captivity in March 1403, triggering the Ottoman Interregnum.\nBiography.\nBayezid\u2019s first major role was as governor of K\u00fctahya, a city that he earned by marrying the daughter of Germiyanid ruler. He was an impetuous soldier, earning the nickname \"Lightning\" in a battle against the Karamanids.\nBayezid ascended to the throne following the death of his father, Murad I, who was killed by Serbian knight Milo\u0161 Obili\u0107 during (15 June), or immediately after (16 June), the Battle of Kosovo in 1389, the battle in which Serbia became a vassal of the Ottoman Sultanate. Immediately after obtaining the throne, he had his younger brother strangled to avoid a plot. In 1390, Bayezid took as a wife Princess Olivera Despina, the daughter of Prince Lazar of Serbia, who also lost his life in Kosovo. Bayezid recognized Stefan Lazarevi\u0107, the son of Lazar, as the new Serbian leader - later despot - with considerable autonomy.\n Upper Serbia resisted the Ottomans until General Pasha Yi\u011fit Bey captured Skopje in 1391, converting the city into an important base of operations.\nEfforts to unify Anatolia.\nMeanwhile, the sultan began unifying Anatolia under his rule. Forcible expansion into Muslim territories could have endangered the Ottoman relationship with the gazis, who were an important source of warriors for this ruling house on the European frontier. Thus Bayezid began the practice of first securing \"fatwa\"s, or legal rulings from Islamic scholars, to justify wars against these Muslim states. However, Bayezid suspected the loyalty of his Muslim Turkoman followers, so he relied heavily on his Serbian and Byzantine vassal troops in these conquests.\nIn a single campaign over the summer and fall of 1390, Bayezid conquered the beyliks of Aydin, Saruhan and Menteshe. His major rival Sulayman, the emir of Karaman, responded by allying himself with the ruler of Sivas, Kadi Burhan al-Din and the remaining Turkish beyliks. Nevertheless, Bayezid pushed on and overwhelmed the remaining beyliks (Hamid, Teke, and Germiyan), as well as taking the cities of Ak\u015fehir and Ni\u011fde, as well as their capital Konya from the Karaman. At this point, Bayezid accepted peace proposals from Karaman (1391), concerned that further advances would antagonize his Turkoman followers and lead them to ally with Kadi Burhan al-Din. Once peace had been made with Karaman, Bayezid moved north against Kastamonu which had given refuge to many fleeing from his forces, and conquered both that city as well as Sinop. However, his subsequent campaign was stopped by Burhan al-Din at the Battle of K\u0131rkdilim.\nFrom 1389 to 1395 he conquered Bulgaria and northern Greece. In 1394 Bayezid crossed the River Danube to attack Wallachia, ruled at that time by Mircea the Elder. The Ottomans were superior in number, but on 10 October 1394 (or 17 May 1395), in the Battle of Rovine, on forested and swampy terrain, the Wallachians won the fierce battle and prevented Bayezid's army from advancing beyond the Danube.\nIn 1394, Bayezid laid siege to Constantinople, the capital of the Byzantine Empire. Anadoluhisar\u0131 fortress was built between 1393 and 1394 as part of preparations for the second Ottoman siege of Constantinople, which took place in 1395. On the urgings of the Byzantine emperor Manuel II Palaeologus, a new crusade was organized to defeat him. This proved unsuccessful: in 1396 the Christian allies, under the leadership of the King of Hungary and future Holy Roman Emperor (in 1433) Sigismund, were defeated in the Battle of Nicopolis. Bayezid built the magnificent Ulu Cami in Bursa, to celebrate this victory.\nThus the siege of Constantinople continued, lasting until 1402. The beleaguered Byzantines had their reprieve when Bayezid fought the Timurid Empire in the east. At this time, the empire of Bayezid included Thrace (except Constantinople), Macedonia, Bulgaria, and parts of Serbia in Europe. In Asia, his domains extended to the Taurus Mountains. His army was considered one of the best in the Islamic world.\nClash with Timur.\nIn 1397, Bayezid defeated the emir of Karaman in Ak\u00e7ay, killing him and annexing his territory. In 1398, the sultan conquered the Djanik emirate and the territory of Burhan al-Din, violating the accord with the Turco-Mongol warlord Timur. Finally, Bayezid occupied Elbistan and Malatya.\nIn 1400, Timur succeeded in rousing the local Turkic beyliks who had been vassals of the Ottomans to join him in his attack on Bayezid, who was also considered one of the most powerful rulers in the Muslim world during that period. Years of insulting letters had passed between Timur and Bayezid. Both rulers insulted each other in their own way while Timur preferred to undermine Bayezid's position as a ruler and play down the significance of his military successes.\nThis is the excerpt from one of Timur's letters addressed to Ottoman sultan:\nIn the fateful Battle of Ankara, on 20 July 1402, the Ottoman army was defeated. Bayazid tried to escape, but was captured and taken to Timur. Historians describe their first meeting as follows:\nMany writers claim that Bayezid was mistreated by the Timurids. However, writers and historians from Timur's own court reported that Bayezid was treated well, and that Timur even mourned his death. One of Bayezid's sons, Mustafa \u00c7elebi, was captured with him and held captive in Samarkand until 1405.\nFour of Bayezid's sons, specifically S\u00fcleyman \u00c7elebi, \u0130sa \u00c7elebi, Mehmed \u00c7elebi, and Musa \u00c7elebi, however, escaped from the battlefield and later started a civil war for the Ottoman throne known as the Ottoman Interregnum. After Mehmed's victory, his coronation as Mehmed I, and the death of all four but Mehmed, Bayezid's other son Mustafa \u00c7elebi emerged from hiding and began two failed rebellions against his brother Mehmed and, after Mehmed's death, his nephew Murad II.\nBayezid in captivity.\nIn Europe, the legend of Bayazid's humiliation in captivity was very popular. He was allegedly chained, and forced to watch how his beloved wife, Olivera, served Timur at dinner. According to a legend, Timur took Bayezid with himself everywhere in a barred palanquin or cage, humiliating him in various ways, used Bayezid as a support under his legs, and at dinner had him placed under the table where bones were thrown at him.\nDifferent versions on Bayezid's death existed, too. One of them mentioned the suicide of Bayezid. Allegedly, the Sultan committed suicide through hitting the bars of a cell with his head or taking poison. The version was promoted by Ottoman historians: Lutfi Pasha, Ashik Pasha-Zade. There was also a version where Bayezid was supposedly poisoned by Timur's order. This is considered unlikely, because there is evidence that the Turkic ruler entrusted the care of Bayezid to his personal doctors.\nIn the descriptions of contemporaries and witnesses of the events, neither a cell nor humiliation is mentioned.\nGerman traveller and writer Johann Schiltberger did not write anything about the cell, bars or violent death. Another contemporary, Jean II Le Maingre, who witnessed Bayezid's captivity, wrote nothing about the cell or poisoning as well. Clavijo, who came to Timur's court in 1404 as part of the embassy and visited Constantinople on his return trip, also did not mention the cell. All Greek sources of the first decade of the 15th century are equally silent about the cell. Sharafaddin Yazdi (? -1454) in \"Zafar-nama\" wrote that Bayezid was treated with respect, and at his request, Turco-Mongols found his son among the captives and brought him to his father. Regarding Bayezid's wife, Sharafaddin wrote that Timur sent her and his daughters to her husband. Olivera allegedly became a Muslim under the influence of Timur.\nFirst references to a disrespectful attitude towards Bayazid appear in the works of ibn Arabshah (1389-1450) and Constantine of Ostrovica. Ibn Arabshah wrote that \u201cBayezid\u2019s heart was broken to pieces\u201d when he saw that his wives and concubines were serving at a banquet.\nIbn Arabshah wrote the following about the captivity of Bayezid:\nHowever, this is just a \u201cflowery style\u201d, and not a real cell. According to literary historian H.A.R. Gibb, \u201cthe flowery elegance of style has also affected historiography. Most of the authors of the Timurid era succumbed to its influence \u201d.\nConstantine of Ostrovica wrote neither about the cell, nor about the nudity of Bayezid's wife; though he did write that Bayezid committed suicide. In the story of Constantine, just like in that of ibn Arabshah, the sultan was so struck by the fact that his wife carried wine to a feast that he poisoned himself with a poison from his ring.\nOttoman historian Mehmed Neshri (1450-1520) described Bayezid's imprisonment and mentioned the cell twice. According to him, Timur asked Bayezid what he would do in Timur's place with regard to the captive. \u201cI would have planted him in an iron cage,\u201d Bayezid answered. To which Timur replied: \"This is a bad answer.\" He ordered to prepare the cage and the Sultan was put into it.\nThe complete set of legends may perhaps be found in the work of Pope Pius II \"Asiae Europaeque elegantissima descriptio\", written in 1450-1460 (published in 1509): Bayezid is kept in a cage, fed with garbage under the table, Timur uses Bayezid as a support to get on or off a horse. Further development can be found in later authors, such as Theodore Spandounes. The first version of his story was written in Italian and completed in 1509, and a French translation was published in 1519. In these versions of the text, Spandounes wrote only about the golden chains and that the sultan was used as a stand. Spandounes added the cell only in later versions of the text. Later versions of the text also include a description of the public humiliation of Bayezid's wife:\nFamily.\nHis mother was G\u00fcl\u00e7i\u00e7ek Hatun, who was of ethnic Greek descent.\nBayezid had five consorts\nPersonality.\nAccording to the British orientalist, Lord Kinross, Bayezid was distinguished by haste, impulsivity, unpredictability and imprudence. He cared little for state affairs, which he entrusted to his governors. As Kinross writes, between campaigns Bayezid was often engaged in pleasures: gluttony, drunkenness and debauchery. The courtyard of the sultan was famous for its luxury and was comparable to the Byzantine court during its heyday.\nAt the same time, the sultan was a talented commander. In all 13 years of his reign, Bayezid suffered only one defeat, which eventually turned out to be fatal for him. Despite his lust for earthly pleasures, Bayezid was a religious man and used to spend hours in his personal mosque in Bursa. He also kept Islamic theologians in his circle.\nEvaluation of rule.\nBayezid managed to expand the territory of his empire to the Danube and the Euphrates. However, Sultan's policy led to a humiliating defeat at Ankara and to the collapse of his state. The Ottoman Empire declined to the size of a beylik from the time of Orhan, but even that territory was divided by Timur and given to the two sons of Bayezid. Small beyliks gained independence again thanks to Timur, who wanted to conquer China in the last years of his life, and therefore did not complete the defeat of the Ottomans. The victory at Ankara marked the beginning of the Ottoman interregnum, which lasted 10 years.\nIn fiction.\nThe defeat of Bayezid became a popular subject for later Western writers, composers, and painters. They embellished the legend that he was taken by Timur to Samarkand with a cast of characters to create an oriental fantasy that has maintained its appeal. Christopher Marlowe's play \"Tamburlaine the Great\" was first performed in London in 1587, three years after the formal opening of English-Ottoman trade relations when William Harborne sailed for Constantinople as an agent of the Levant Company.\nIn 1648, the play \"Le Gran Tamerlan et Bejezet\" by Jean Magnon appeared in London, and in 1725, Handel's \"Tamerlano\" was first performed and published in London; Vivaldi's version of the story, \"Bajazet\", was written in 1735. Magnon had given Bayezid an intriguing wife and daughter; the Handel and Vivaldi renditions included, as well as Tamerlane and Bayezid and his daughter, a prince of Byzantium and a princess of Trebizond (Trabzon) in a passionate love story. A cycle of paintings in Schloss Eggenberg, near Graz in Austria, translated the theme to a different medium; this was completed in the 1670s shortly before the Ottoman army attacked the Habsburgs in central Europe.\nThe historical novel \"The Grand Cham\" (1921) by Harold Lamb focuses on the quest of its European hero to gain the assistance of Tamerlane in defeating Bayezid. Bayezid (spelled Bayazid) is a central character in the Robert E. Howard story \"Lord of Samarcand,\" where he commits suicide at Tamerlane's victory banquet. Bayazid is a main character in the novel \"The Walls of Byzantium\" (2013) by James Heneage.\nIn popular culture.\nSultan Bayazit was portrayed in the Serbian 1989 historical drama film \"Battle of Kosovo\", as a participant of the Battle of Kosovo by actor Branislav Le\u010di\u0107, and in the Romanian historical drama \"Mircea (Proud heritage)\" by Ion Ritiu as a young Sultan who fought in the battles of Rovine, Nicopolis and Angora."}
{"id": "4242", "revid": "26254750", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4242", "title": "Bayezid II", "text": "Bayezid II (, December 1447 \u2013 26 May 1512, Turkish: \"II. Bayezid\") was the eldest son and successor of Mehmed II, ruling as Sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1481 to 1512. During his reign, Bayezid II consolidated the Ottoman Empire and thwarted a Safavid rebellion soon before abdicating his throne to his son, Selim I. He evacuated Sephardi Jews from Spain after the proclamation of the Alhambra Decree, and resettling them throughout Ottoman lands, especially in Salonica.\nEarly life.\nBayezid II was the son of Mehmed II (1432\u20131481) and G\u00fclbahar Hatun. \nThere are sources that claim that Bayezid was the son of M\u00fckrime Hatun. This would make Ay\u015fe Hatun a first cousin of Bayezid II. However, the marriage of M\u00fckrime Hatun took place two years after Bayezid was born and the whole arrangement was not to Mehmed's liking. G\u00fclbahar Hatun is generally accepted as the real mother of Bayezid II.\nBorn in Demotika, Bayezid II was educated in Amasya and later served there as a bey for 27 years. In 1473, he fought in the Battle of Otlukbeli against the Aq Qoyunlu.\nBayezid II married G\u00fclbahar Hatun, who was the mother of Bayezid II's successor, Selim I and nephew of Sitti\u015fah Hatun.\nFight for the throne.\nBayezid II's overriding concern was the quarrel with his brother Cem Sultan, who claimed the throne and sought military backing from the Mamluks in Egypt. Having been defeated by his brother's armies, Cem sought protection from the Knights of St. John in Rhodes. Eventually, the Knights handed Cem over to Pope Innocent VIII (1484\u20131492). The Pope thought of using Cem as a tool to drive the Turks out of Europe, but as the papal crusade failed to come to fruition, Cem died in Naples.\nReign.\nBayezid II ascended the Ottoman throne in 1481. Like his father, Bayezid II was a patron of western and eastern culture. Unlike many other sultans, he worked hard to ensure a smooth running of domestic politics, which earned him the epithet of \"the Just\". Throughout his reign, Bayezid II engaged in numerous campaigns to conquer the Venetian possessions in Morea, accurately defining this region as the key to future Ottoman naval power in the Eastern Mediterranean. The last of these wars ended in 1501 with Bayezid II in control of the whole Peloponnese. Rebellions in the east, such as that of the Qizilbash, plagued much of Bayezid II's reign and were often backed by the shah of Persia, Ismail I, who was eager to promote Shi'ism to undermine the authority of the Ottoman state. Ottoman authority in Anatolia was indeed seriously threatened during this period and at one point Bayezid II's vizier, Had\u0131m Ali Pasha, was killed in battle against the \u015eahkulu rebellion.\nJewish and Muslim immigration.\nIn July 1492, the new state of Spain expelled its Jewish and Muslim populations as part of the Spanish Inquisition. Bayezid II sent out the Ottoman Navy under the command of admiral Kemal Reis to Spain in 1492 in order to evacuate them safely to Ottoman lands. He sent out proclamations throughout the empire that the refugees were to be welcomed. He granted the refugees the permission to settle in the Ottoman Empire and become Ottoman citizens. He ridiculed the conduct of Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile in expelling a class of people so useful to their subjects. \"You venture to call Ferdinand a wise ruler,\" he said to his courtiers, \"he who has impoverished his own country and enriched mine!\" Bayezid addressed a firman to all the governors of his European provinces, ordering them not only to refrain from repelling the Spanish refugees, but to give them a friendly and welcome reception. He threatened with death all those who treated the Jews harshly or refused them admission into the empire. Moses Capsali, who probably helped to arouse the sultan's friendship for the Jews, was most energetic in his assistance to the exiles. He made a tour of the communities and was instrumental in imposing a tax upon the rich, to ransom the Jewish victims of the persecution.\nThe Muslims and Jews of al-Andalus contributed much to the rising power of the Ottoman Empire by introducing new ideas, methods and craftsmanship. The first printing press in Constantinople (now Istanbul) was established by the Sephardic Jews in 1493. It is reported that under Bayezid's reign, Jews enjoyed a period of cultural flourishing, with the presence of such scholars as the Talmudist and scientist Mordecai Comtino; astronomer and poet Solomon ben Elijah Sharbi\u1e6d ha-Zahab; Shabbethai ben Malkiel Cohen, and the liturgical poet Menahem Tamar.\nSuccession.\nDuring Bayezid II's final years, on 14 September 1509, Constantinople was devastated by an earthquake, and a succession battle developed between his sons Selim and Ahmet. Ahmet unexpectedly captured Karaman, and began marching to Constantinople to exploit his triumph. Fearing for his safety, Selim staged a revolt in Thrace but was defeated by Bayezid and forced to flee back to the Crimean peninsula. Bayezid II developed fears that Ahmet might in turn kill him to gain the throne, so he refused to allow his son to enter Constantinople.\nWhen Selim returned from Crimea and, with support from the Janissaries, he forced his father to abdicate the throne on 25 April 1512. Bayezid departed for retirement in his native Dimetoka, but he died on 26 May 1512 at Havsa, before reaching his destination and only a month after his abdication. He was buried next to the Bayezid Mosque in Istanbul.\nLegacy.\nBayezid was praised in a ghazal of Abd\u00fcrrezzak Bah\u015f\u0131, a scribe who came to Constantinople from Samarkand in the second half of the 15th century that worked at the courts of Mehmed II and Bayezid II, and wrote in Chagatai with the Old Uyghur alphabet:\nBayezid II ordered al-\u02bfAtufi, the librarian of Topkap\u0131 Palace, to prepare a register. The library\u2019s diverse holdings reflect a cosmopolitanism that was encyclopaedic in scope.\nWives and children.\nBayezid had seven consorts:\nBayezid had eight sons:\nBayezid had eleven daughters:"}
{"id": "4243", "revid": "39218216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4243", "title": "Boxing", "text": "Boxing is a combat sport in which two people, usually wearing protective gloves and other protective equipment such as hand wraps and mouthguards, throw punches at each other for a predetermined amount of time in a boxing ring.\nAmateur boxing is both an Olympic and Commonwealth Games sport and is a standard fixture in most international games\u2014it also has its own World Championships. Boxing is overseen by a referee over a series of one-to-three-minute intervals called rounds.\nA winner can be resolved before the completion of the rounds when a referee deems an opponent incapable of continuing, disqualification of an opponent, or resignation of an opponent. When the fight reaches the end of its final round with both opponents still standing, the judges' scorecards determine the victor. In the event that both fighters gain equal scores from the judges, professional bouts are considered a draw. In Olympic boxing, because a winner must be declared, judges award the contest to one fighter on technical criteria.\nWhile humans have fought in hand-to-hand combat since the dawn of human history, the earliest evidence of fist-fighting sporting contests date back to the ancient Near East in the 3rd and 2nd millennia BC. The earliest evidence of boxing rules date back to Ancient Greece, where boxing was established as an Olympic game in 688 BC. Boxing evolved from 16th- and 18th-century prizefights, largely in Great Britain, to the forerunner of modern boxing in the mid-19th century with the 1867 introduction of the Marquess of Queensberry Rules.\nHistory.\nAncient history.\nThe earliest known depiction of boxing comes from a Sumerian relief in Iraq from the 3rd millennium BC. A relief sculpture from Egyptian Thebes (c. 1350 BC) shows both boxers and spectators. These early Middle-Eastern and Egyptian depictions showed contests where fighters were either bare-fisted or had a band supporting the wrist. The earliest evidence of fist fighting with the use of gloves can be found on Minoan Crete (c. 1500\u20131400 BC).\nVarious types of boxing existed in ancient India. The earliest references to musti-yuddha come from classical Vedic epics such as the \"Ramayana\" and \"Rig Veda\". The \"Mahabharata\" describes two combatants boxing with clenched fists and fighting with kicks, finger strikes, knee strikes and headbutts. Duels (\"niyuddham\") were often fought to the death. During the period of the Western Satraps, the ruler Rudradaman\u2014in addition to being well-versed in \"the great sciences\" which included Indian classical music, Sanskrit grammar, and logic\u2014was said to be an excellent horseman, charioteer, elephant rider, swordsman and boxer. The \"Gurbilas Shemi\", an 18th-century Sikh text, gives numerous references to musti-yuddha.\nIn Ancient Greece boxing was a well developed sport and enjoyed consistent popularity. In Olympic terms, it was first introduced in the 23rd Olympiad, 688 BC. The boxers would wind leather thongs around their hands in order to protect them. There were no rounds and boxers fought until one of them acknowledged defeat or could not continue. Weight categories were not used, which meant heavyweights had a tendency to dominate. The style of boxing practiced typically featured an advanced left leg stance, with the left arm semi-extended as a guard, in addition to being used for striking, and with the right arm drawn back ready to strike. It was the head of the opponent which was primarily targeted, and there is little evidence to suggest that targeting the body was common.\nBoxing was a popular spectator sport in Ancient Rome. Fighters protected their knuckles with leather thongs wrapped around their fists. Eventually harder leather was used and the thong became a weapon. Metal studs were introduced to the thongs to make the cestus. Fighting events were held at Roman amphitheatres.\nEarly London prize ring rules.\nRecords of Classical boxing activity disappeared after the fall of the Western Roman Empire when the wearing of weapons became common once again and interest in fighting with the fists waned. However, there are detailed records of various fist-fighting sports that were maintained in different cities and provinces of Italy between the 12th and 17th centuries. There was also a sport in ancient Rus called Kulachniy Boy or \"Fist Fighting\".\nAs the wearing of swords became less common, there was renewed interest in fencing with the fists. The sport would later resurface in England during the early 16th century in the form of bare-knuckle boxing sometimes referred to as prizefighting. The first documented account of a bare-knuckle fight in England appeared in 1681 in the \"London Protestant Mercury\", and the first English bare-knuckle champion was James Figg in 1719. This is also the time when the word \"boxing\" first came to be used. This earliest form of modern boxing was very different. Contests in Mr. Figg's time, in addition to fist fighting, also contained fencing and cudgeling. On 6 January 1681, the first recorded boxing match took place in Britain when Christopher Monck, 2nd Duke of Albemarle (and later Lieutenant Governor of Jamaica) engineered a bout between his butler and his butcher with the latter winning the prize.\nEarly fighting had no written rules. There were no weight divisions or round limits, and no referee. In general, it was extremely chaotic. An early article on boxing was published in Nottingham, 1713, by Sir Thomas Parkyns, a successful Wrestler from Bunny, Nottinghamshire, who had practised the techniques he described. The article, a single page in his manual of wrestling and fencing, \"Progymnasmata: The inn-play, or Cornish-hugg wrestler\", described a system of headbutting, punching, eye-gouging, chokes, and hard throws, not recognized in boxing today.\nThe first boxing rules, called the Broughton's rules, were introduced by champion Jack Broughton in 1743 to protect fighters in the ring where deaths sometimes occurred. Under these rules, if a man went down and could not continue after a count of 30 seconds, the fight was over. Hitting a downed fighter and grasping below the waist were prohibited. Broughton encouraged the use of 'mufflers', a form of padded bandage or mitten, to be used in 'jousting' or sparring sessions in training, and in exhibition matches.\nThese rules did allow the fighters an advantage not enjoyed by today's boxers; they permitted the fighter to drop to one knee to end the round and begin the 30-second count at any time. Thus a fighter realizing he was in trouble had an opportunity to recover. However, this was considered \"unmanly\" and was frequently disallowed by additional rules negotiated by the Seconds of the Boxers. In modern boxing, there is a three-minute limit to rounds (unlike the downed fighter ends the round rule). Intentionally going down in modern boxing will cause the recovering fighter to lose points in the scoring system. Furthermore, as the contestants did not have heavy leather gloves and wristwraps to protect their hands, they used different punching technique to preserve their hands because the head was a common target to hit full out. Almost all period manuals have powerful straight punches with the whole body behind them to the face (including forehead) as the basic blows.\nThe London Prize Ring Rules introduced measures that remain in effect for professional boxing to this day, such as outlawing butting, gouging, scratching, kicking, hitting a man while down, holding the ropes, and using resin, stones or hard objects in the hands, and biting.\nMarquess of Queensberry rules (1867).\nIn 1867, the Marquess of Queensberry rules were drafted by John Chambers for amateur championships held at Lillie Bridge in London for Lightweights, Middleweights and Heavyweights. The rules were published under the patronage of the Marquess of Queensberry, whose name has always been associated with them.\nThere were twelve rules in all, and they specified that fights should be \"a fair stand-up boxing match\" in a 24-foot-square or similar ring. Rounds were three minutes with one-minute rest intervals between rounds. Each fighter was given a ten-second count if he was knocked down, and wrestling was banned.\nThe introduction of gloves of \"fair-size\" also changed the nature of the bouts. An average pair of boxing gloves resembles a bloated pair of mittens and are laced up around the wrists.\nThe gloves can be used to block an opponent's blows. As a result of their introduction, bouts became longer and more strategic with greater importance attached to defensive maneuvers such as slipping, bobbing, countering and angling. Because less defensive emphasis was placed on the use of the forearms and more on the gloves, the classical forearms outwards, torso leaning back stance of the bare knuckle boxer was modified to a more modern stance in which the torso is tilted forward and the hands are held closer to the face.\nLate 19th and early 20th centuries.\nThrough the late nineteenth century, the martial art of boxing or prizefighting was primarily a sport of dubious legitimacy. Outlawed in England and much of the United States, prizefights were often held at gambling venues and broken up by police. Brawling and wrestling tactics continued, and riots at prizefights were common occurrences. Still, throughout this period, there arose some notable bare knuckle champions who developed fairly sophisticated fighting tactics.\nThe English case of \"R v. Coney\" in 1882 found that a bare-knuckle fight was an assault occasioning actual bodily harm, despite the consent of the participants. This marked the end of widespread public bare-knuckle contests in England.\nThe first world heavyweight champion under the Queensberry Rules was \"Gentleman Jim\" Corbett, who defeated John L. Sullivan in 1892 at the Pelican Athletic Club in New Orleans.\nThe first instance of film censorship in the United States occurred in 1897 when several states banned the showing of prize fighting films from the state of Nevada, where it was legal at the time.\nThroughout the early twentieth century, boxers struggled to achieve legitimacy. They were aided by the influence of promoters like Tex Rickard and the popularity of great champions such as John L. Sullivan.\nModern boxing.\nThe modern sport arose from illegal venues and outlawed prizefighting and has become a multibillion-dollar commercial enterprise. A majority of young talent still comes from poverty-stricken areas around the world. Places like Mexico, Africa, South America, and Eastern Europe prove to be filled with young aspiring athletes who wish to become the future of boxing. Even in the U.S., places like the inner cities of New York, and Chicago have given rise to promising young talent. According to Rubin, \"boxing lost its appeal with the American middle class, and most of who boxes in modern America come from the streets and are street fighters\".\nRules.\nThe \"Marquess of Queensberry rules\" have been the general rules governing modern boxing since their publication in 1867.\nA boxing match typically consists of a determined number of three-minute rounds, a total of up to 9 to 12 rounds. A minute is typically spent between each round with the fighters in their assigned corners receiving advice and attention from their coach and staff. The fight is controlled by a referee who works within the ring to judge and control the conduct of the fighters, rule on their ability to fight safely, count knocked-down fighters, and rule on fouls.\nUp to three judges are typically present at ringside to score the bout and assign points to the boxers, based on punches and elbows that connect, defense, knockdowns, hugging and other, more subjective, measures. Because of the open-ended style of boxing judging, many fights have controversial results, in which one or both fighters believe they have been \"robbed\" or unfairly denied a victory. Each fighter has an assigned corner of the ring, where his or her coach, as well as one or more \"seconds\" may administer to the fighter at the beginning of the fight and between rounds. Each boxer enters into the ring from their assigned corners at the beginning of each round and must cease fighting and return to their corner at the signalled end of each round.\nA bout in which the predetermined number of rounds passes is decided by the judges, and is said to \"go the distance\". The fighter with the higher score at the end of the fight is ruled the winner. With three judges, unanimous and split decisions are possible, as are draws. A boxer may win the bout before a decision is reached through a knock-out; such bouts are said to have ended \"inside the distance\". If a fighter is knocked down during the fight, determined by whether the boxer touches the canvas floor of the ring with any part of their body other than the feet as a result of the opponent's punch and not a slip, as determined by the referee, the referee begins counting until the fighter returns to his or her feet and can continue. Some jurisdictions require the referee to count to eight regardless of if the fighter gets up before.\nShould the referee count to ten, then the knocked-down boxer is ruled \"knocked out\" (whether unconscious or not) and the other boxer is ruled the winner by knockout (KO). A \"technical knock-out\" (TKO) is possible as well, and is ruled by the referee, fight doctor, or a fighter's corner if a fighter is unable to safely continue to fight, based upon injuries or being judged unable to effectively defend themselves. Many jurisdictions and sanctioning agencies also have a \"three-knockdown rule\", in which three knockdowns in a given round result in a TKO. A TKO is considered a knockout in a fighter's record. A \"standing eight\" count rule may also be in effect. This gives the referee the right to step in and administer a count of eight to a fighter that he or she feels may be in danger, even if no knockdown has taken place. After counting the referee will observe the fighter, and decide if he or she is fit to continue. For scoring purposes, a standing eight count is treated as a knockdown.\nIn general, boxers are prohibited from hitting below the belt, holding, tripping, pushing, biting, or spitting. The boxer's shorts are raised so the opponent is not allowed to hit to the groin area with intent to cause pain or injury. Failure to abide by the former may result in a foul. They also are prohibited from kicking, head-butting, or hitting with any part of the arm other than the knuckles of a closed fist (including hitting with the elbow, shoulder or forearm, as well as with open gloves, the wrist, the inside, back or side of the hand). They are prohibited as well from hitting the back, back of the head or neck (called a \"rabbit-punch\") or the kidneys. They are prohibited from holding the ropes for support when punching, holding an opponent while punching, or ducking below the belt of their opponent (dropping below the waist of your opponent, no matter the distance between).\nIf a \"clinch\" \u2013 a defensive move in which a boxer wraps his or her opponents arms and holds on to create a pause \u2013 is broken by the referee, each fighter must take a full step back before punching again (alternatively, the referee may direct the fighters to \"punch out\" of the clinch). When a boxer is knocked down, the other boxer must immediately cease fighting and move to the furthest neutral corner of the ring until the referee has either ruled a knockout or called for the fight to continue.\nViolations of these rules may be ruled \"fouls\" by the referee, who may issue warnings, deduct points, or disqualify an offending boxer, causing an automatic loss, depending on the seriousness and intentionality of the foul. An intentional foul that causes injury that prevents a fight from continuing usually causes the boxer who committed it to be disqualified. A fighter who suffers an accidental low-blow may be given up to five minutes to recover, after which they may be ruled knocked out if they are unable to continue. Accidental fouls that cause injury ending a bout may lead to a \"no contest\" result, or else cause the fight to go to a decision if enough rounds (typically four or more, or at least three in a four-round fight) have passed.\nUnheard of in the modern era, but common during the early 20th Century in North America, a \"newspaper decision (NWS)\" might be made after a no decision bout had ended. A \"no decision\" bout occurred when, by law or by pre-arrangement of the fighters, if both boxers were still standing at the fight's conclusion and there was no knockout, no official decision was rendered and neither boxer was declared the winner. But this did not prevent the pool of ringside newspaper reporters from declaring a consensus result among themselves and printing a newspaper decision in their publications. Officially, however, a \"no decision\" bout resulted in neither boxer winning or losing. Boxing historians sometimes use these unofficial newspaper decisions in compiling fight records for illustrative purposes only. Often, media outlets covering a match will personally score the match, and post their scores as an independent sentence in their report.\nProfessional vs. amateur boxing.\nThroughout the 17th to 19th centuries, boxing bouts were motivated by money, as the fighters competed for prize money, promoters controlled the gate, and spectators bet on the result.\nThe modern Olympic movement revived interest in amateur sports, and amateur boxing became an Olympic sport in 1908. In their current form, Olympic and other amateur bouts are typically limited to three or four rounds, scoring is computed by points based on the number of clean blows landed, regardless of impact, and fighters wear protective headgear, reducing the number of injuries, knockdowns, and knockouts. Currently scoring blows in amateur boxing are subjectively counted by ringside judges, but the Australian Institute for Sport has demonstrated a prototype of an Automated Boxing Scoring System, which introduces scoring objectivity, improves safety, and arguably makes the sport more interesting to spectators. Professional boxing remains by far the most popular form of the sport globally, though amateur boxing is dominant in Cuba and some former Soviet republics. For most fighters, an amateur career, especially at the Olympics, serves to develop skills and gain experience in preparation for a professional career. Western boxers typically participate in one Olympics and then turn pro, Cubans and other socialist countries have an opportunity to collect multiple medals. In 2016, professional boxers were admitted in the Olympic Games and other tournaments sanctioned by AIBA. This was done in part to level the playing field and give all of the athletes the same opportunities government-sponsored boxers from socialist countries and post-Soviet republics have. However, professional organizations strongly opposed that decision.\nAmateur boxing.\nAmateur boxing may be found at the collegiate level, at the Olympic Games, Commonwealth Games, Asian Games, etc. In many other venues sanctioned by amateur boxing associations. Amateur boxing has a point scoring system that measures the number of clean blows landed rather than physical damage. Bouts consist of three rounds of three minutes in the Olympic and Commonwealth Games, and three rounds of three minutes in a national ABA (Amateur Boxing Association) bout, each with a one-minute interval between rounds.\nCompetitors wear protective headgear and gloves with a white strip or circle across the knuckle. There are cases however, where white ended gloves are not required but any solid color may be worn. The white end is just a way to make it easier for judges to score clean hits. Each competitor must have their hands properly wrapped, pre-fight, for added protection on their hands and for added cushion under the gloves. Gloves worn by the fighters must be twelve ounces in weight unless the fighters weigh under , thus allowing them to wear ten ounce gloves. A punch is considered a scoring punch only when the boxers connect with the white portion of the gloves. Each punch that lands cleanly on the head or torso with sufficient force is awarded a point. A referee monitors the fight to ensure that competitors use only legal blows. A belt worn over the torso represents the lower limit of punches \u2013 any boxer repeatedly landing low blows below the belt is disqualified. Referees also ensure that the boxers don't use holding tactics to prevent the opponent from swinging. If this occurs, the referee separates the opponents and orders them to continue boxing. Repeated holding can result in a boxer being penalized or ultimately disqualified. Referees will stop the bout if a boxer is seriously injured, if one boxer is significantly dominating the other or if the score is severely imbalanced. Amateur bouts which end this way may be noted as \"RSC\" (referee stopped contest) with notations for an outclassed opponent (RSCO), outscored opponent (RSCOS), injury (RSCI) or head injury (RSCH).\nProfessional boxing.\nProfessional bouts are usually much longer than amateur bouts, typically ranging from ten to twelve rounds, though four-round fights are common for less experienced fighters or club fighters. There are also some two- and three-round professional bouts, especially in Australia. Through the early 20th century, it was common for fights to have unlimited rounds, ending only when one fighter quit, benefiting high-energy fighters like Jack Dempsey. Fifteen rounds remained the internationally recognized limit for championship fights for most of the 20th century until the early 1980s, when the death of boxer Kim Duk-koo eventually prompted the World Boxing Council and other organizations sanctioning professional boxing to reduce the limit to twelve rounds.\nHeadgear is not permitted in professional bouts, and boxers are generally allowed to take much more damage before a fight is halted. At any time, the referee may stop the contest if he believes that one participant cannot defend himself due to injury. In that case, the other participant is awarded a technical knockout win. A technical knockout would also be awarded if a fighter lands a punch that opens a cut on the opponent, and the opponent is later deemed not fit to continue by a doctor because of the cut. For this reason, fighters often employ cutmen, whose job is to treat cuts between rounds so that the boxer is able to continue despite the cut. If a boxer simply quits fighting, or if his corner stops the fight, then the winning boxer is also awarded a technical knockout victory. In contrast with amateur boxing, professional male boxers have to be bare-chested.\nBoxing styles.\nDefinition of style.\n\"Style\" is often defined as the strategic approach a fighter takes during a bout. No two fighters' styles are alike, as each is determined by that individual's physical and mental attributes. Three main styles exist in boxing: outside fighter (\"boxer\"), brawler (or \"slugger\"), and Inside fighter (\"swarmer\"). These styles may be divided into several special subgroups, such as counter puncher, etc. The main philosophy of the styles is, that each style has an advantage over one, but disadvantage over the other one. It follows the rock paper scissors scenario - boxer beats brawler, brawler beats swarmer, and swarmer beats boxer.\nBoxer/out-fighter.\nA classic \"boxer\" or stylist (also known as an \"out-fighter\") seeks to maintain distance between himself and his opponent, fighting with faster, longer range punches, most notably the jab, and gradually wearing his opponent down. Due to this reliance on weaker punches, out-fighters tend to win by point decisions rather than by knockout, though some out-fighters have notable knockout records. They are often regarded as the best boxing strategists due to their ability to control the pace of the fight and lead their opponent, methodically wearing him down and exhibiting more skill and finesse than a brawler. Out-fighters need reach, hand speed, reflexes, and footwork.\nNotable out-fighters include Muhammad Ali, Larry Holmes, Joe Calzaghe, Wilfredo G\u00f3mez, Salvador S\u00e1nchez, Cecilia Br\u00e6khus, Gene Tunney, Ezzard Charles, Willie Pep, Meldrick Taylor, Ricardo \"Finito\" L\u00f3pez, Floyd Mayweather Jr., Roy Jones Jr., Sugar Ray Leonard, Miguel V\u00e1zquez, Sergio \"Maravilla\" Mart\u00ednez, Vitali Klitschko, Wladimir Klitschko and Guillermo Rigondeaux. This style was also used by fictional boxer Apollo Creed.\nBoxer-puncher.\nA boxer-puncher is a well-rounded boxer who is able to fight at close range with a combination of technique and power, often with the ability to knock opponents out with a combination and in some instances a single shot. Their movement and tactics are similar to that of an out-fighter (although they are generally not as mobile as an out-fighter), but instead of winning by decision, they tend to wear their opponents down using combinations and then move in to score the knockout. A boxer must be well rounded to be effective using this style.\nNotable boxer-punchers include Muhammad Ali, Canelo \u00c1lvarez, Sugar Ray Leonard, Roy Jones Jr., Wladimir Klitschko, Vasyl Lomachenko, Lennox Lewis, Joe Louis, Wilfredo G\u00f3mez, Oscar De La Hoya, Archie Moore, Miguel Cotto, Nonito Donaire, Sam Langford, Henry Armstrong, Sugar Ray Robinson, Tony Zale, Carlos Monz\u00f3n, Alexis Arg\u00fcello, \u00c9rik Morales, Terry Norris, Marco Antonio Barrera, Naseem Hamed, Thomas Hearns, Julian Jackson and Gennady Golovkin.\nCounter puncher.\nCounter punchers are slippery, defensive style fighters who often rely on their opponent's mistakes in order to gain the advantage, whether it be on the score cards or more preferably a knockout. They use their well-rounded defense to avoid or block shots and then immediately catch the opponent off guard with a well placed and timed punch. A fight with a skilled counter-puncher can turn into a war of attrition, where each shot landed is a battle in itself. Thus, fighting against counter punchers requires constant feinting and the ability to avoid telegraphing one's attacks. To be truly successful using this style they must have good reflexes, a high level of prediction and awareness, pinpoint accuracy and speed, both in striking and in footwork.\nNotable counter punchers include Muhammad Ali, Joe Calzaghe, Vitali Klitschko, Evander Holyfield, Max Schmeling, Chris Byrd, Jim Corbett, Jack Johnson, Bernard Hopkins, Laszlo Papp, Jerry Quarry, Anselmo Moreno, James Toney, Marvin Hagler, Juan Manuel M\u00e1rquez, Humberto Soto, Floyd Mayweather Jr., Roger Mayweather, Pernell Whitaker, Sergio Gabriel Martinez and Guillermo Rigondeaux. This style of boxing is also used by fictional boxer Little Mac.\nCounter punchers usually wear their opponents down by causing them to miss their punches. The more the opponent misses, the faster they tire, and the psychological effects of being unable to land a hit will start to sink in. The counter puncher often tries to outplay their opponent entirely, not just in a physical sense, but also in a mental and emotional sense. This style can be incredibly difficult, especially against seasoned fighters, but winning a fight without getting hit is often worth the pay-off. They usually try to stay away from the center of the ring, in order to outmaneuver and chip away at their opponents. A large advantage in counter-hitting is the forward momentum of the attacker, which drives them further into your return strike. As such, knockouts are more common than one would expect from a defensive style.\nBrawler/slugger.\nA brawler is a fighter who generally lacks finesse and footwork in the ring, but makes up for it through sheer punching power. Many brawlers tend to lack mobility, preferring a less mobile, more stable platform and have difficulty pursuing fighters who are fast on their feet. They may also have a tendency to ignore combination punching in favor of continuous beat-downs with one hand and by throwing slower, more powerful single punches (such as hooks and uppercuts). Their slowness and predictable punching pattern (single punches with obvious leads) often leaves them open to counter punches, so successful brawlers must be able to absorb a substantial amount of punishment. However, not all brawler/slugger fighters are not mobile; some can move around and switch styles if needed but still have the brawler/slugger style such as Wilfredo G\u00f3mez, Prince Naseem Hamed and Danny Garc\u00eda.\nA brawler's most important assets are power and chin (the ability to absorb punishment while remaining able to continue boxing). Examples of this style include George Foreman, Rocky Marciano, Julio C\u00e9sar Ch\u00e1vez, Roberto Dur\u00e1n, Danny Garc\u00eda, Wilfredo G\u00f3mez, Sonny Liston, John L. Sullivan, Max Baer, Prince Naseem Hamed, Ray Mancini, David Tua, Arturo Gatti, Micky Ward, Brandon R\u00edos, Ruslan Provodnikov, Michael Katsidis, James Kirkland, Marcos Maidana, Jake LaMotta, Manny Pacquiao, and Ireland's John Duddy. This style of boxing was also used by fictional boxers Rocky Balboa and James \"Clubber\" Lang.\nBrawlers tend to be more predictable and easy to hit but usually fare well enough against other fighting styles because they train to take punches very well. They often have a higher chance than other fighting styles to score a knockout against their opponents because they focus on landing big, powerful hits, instead of smaller, faster attacks. Oftentimes they place focus on training on their upper body instead of their entire body, to increase power and endurance. They also aim to intimidate their opponents because of their power, stature and ability to take a punch.\nSwarmer/in-fighter.\nIn-fighters/swarmers (sometimes called \"pressure fighters\") attempt to stay close to an opponent, throwing intense flurries and combinations of hooks and uppercuts. Mainly Mexican, Irish, Irish-American, Puerto Rican, and Mexican-American boxers popularized this style. A successful in-fighter often needs a good \"chin\" because swarming usually involves being hit with many jabs before they can maneuver inside where they are more effective. In-fighters operate best at close range because they are generally shorter and have less reach than their opponents and thus are more effective at a short distance where the longer arms of their opponents make punching awkward. However, several fighters tall for their division have been relatively adept at in-fighting as well as out-fighting.\nThe essence of a swarmer is non-stop aggression. Many short in-fighters use their stature to their advantage, employing a bob-and-weave defense by bending at the waist to slip underneath or to the sides of incoming punches. Unlike blocking, causing an opponent to miss a punch disrupts his balance, this permits forward movement past the opponent's extended arm and keeps the hands free to counter. A distinct advantage that in-fighters have is when throwing uppercuts, they can channel their entire bodyweight behind the punch; Mike Tyson was famous for throwing devastating uppercuts. Marvin Hagler was known for his hard \"chin\", punching power, body attack and the stalking of his opponents. Some in-fighters, like Mike Tyson, have been known for being notoriously hard to hit. The key to a swarmer is aggression, endurance, chin, and bobbing-and-weaving.\nNotable in-fighters include Henry Armstrong, Aaron Pryor, Julio C\u00e9sar Ch\u00e1vez, Jack Dempsey, Shawn Porter, Miguel Cotto, Joe Frazier, Danny Garc\u00eda, Mike Tyson, Manny Pacquiao, Rocky Marciano, Wayne McCullough, James Braddock, Gerry Penalosa, Harry Greb, David Tua, James Toney and Ricky Hatton. This style was also used by the \"Street Fighter\" character Balrog.\nCombinations of styles.\nAll fighters have primary skills with which they feel most comfortable, but truly elite fighters are often able to incorporate auxiliary styles when presented with a particular challenge. For example, an out-fighter will sometimes plant his feet and counter punch, or a slugger may have the stamina to pressure fight with his power punches.\nOld history of the development of boxing and its prevalence contribute to fusion of various types of martial arts and the emergence of new ones that are based on them. For example, a combination of boxing and sportive sambo techniques gave rise to a combat sambo.\nStyle matchups.\nThere is a generally accepted rule of thumb about the success each of these boxing styles has against the others. In general, an in-fighter has an advantage over an out-fighter, an out-fighter has an advantage over a brawler, and a brawler has an advantage over an in-fighter; these form a cycle with each style being stronger relative to one, and weaker relative to another, with none dominating, as in rock paper scissors. Naturally, many other factors, such as the skill level and training of the combatants, determine the outcome of a fight, but the widely held belief in this relationship among the styles is embodied in the clich\u00e9 amongst boxing fans and writers that \"styles make fights.\"\nBrawlers tend to overcome swarmers or in-fighters because, in trying to get close to the slugger, the in-fighter will invariably have to walk straight into the guns of the much harder-hitting brawler, so, unless the former has a very good chin and the latter's stamina is poor, the brawler's superior power will carry the day. A famous example of this type of match-up advantage would be George Foreman's knockout victory over Joe Frazier in their original bout \"The Sunshine Showdown\".\nAlthough in-fighters struggle against heavy sluggers, they typically enjoy more success against out-fighters or boxers. Out-fighters prefer a slower fight, with some distance between themselves and the opponent. The in-fighter tries to close that gap and unleash furious flurries. On the inside, the out-fighter loses a lot of his combat effectiveness, because he cannot throw the hard punches. The in-fighter is generally successful in this case, due to his intensity in advancing on his opponent and his good agility, which makes him difficult to evade. For example, the swarming Joe Frazier, though easily dominated by the slugger George Foreman, was able to create many more problems for the boxer Muhammad Ali in their three fights. Joe Louis, after retirement, admitted that he hated being crowded, and that swarmers like untied/undefeated champ Rocky Marciano would have caused him style problems even in his prime.\nThe boxer or out-fighter tends to be most successful against a brawler, whose slow speed (both hand and foot) and poor technique makes him an easy target to hit for the faster out-fighter. The out-fighter's main concern is to stay alert, as the brawler only needs to land one good punch to finish the fight. If the out-fighter can avoid those power punches, he can often wear the brawler down with fast jabs, tiring him out. If he is successful enough, he may even apply extra pressure in the later rounds in an attempt to achieve a knockout. Most classic boxers, such as Muhammad Ali, enjoyed their best successes against sluggers.\nAn example of a style matchup was the historical fight of Julio C\u00e9sar Ch\u00e1vez, a swarmer or in-fighter, against Meldrick Taylor, the boxer or out-fighter (see Julio C\u00e9sar Ch\u00e1vez vs. Meldrick Taylor). The match was nicknamed \"Thunder Meets Lightning\" as an allusion to punching power of Ch\u00e1vez and blinding speed of Taylor. Ch\u00e1vez was the epitome of the \"Mexican\" style of boxing. Taylor's hand and foot speed and boxing abilities gave him the early advantage, allowing him to begin building a large lead on points. Ch\u00e1vez remained relentless in his pursuit of Taylor and due to his greater punching power Ch\u00e1vez slowly punished Taylor. Coming into the later rounds, Taylor was bleeding from the mouth, his entire face was swollen, the bones around his eye socket had been broken, he had swallowed a considerable amount of his own blood, and as he grew tired, Taylor was increasingly forced into exchanging blows with Ch\u00e1vez, which only gave Ch\u00e1vez a greater chance to cause damage. While there was little doubt that Taylor had solidly won the first three quarters of the fight, the question at hand was whether he would survive the final quarter. Going into the final round, Taylor held a secure lead on the scorecards of two of the three judges. Ch\u00e1vez would have to knock Taylor out to claim a victory, whereas Taylor merely needed to stay away from the Mexican legend. However, Taylor did not stay away, but continued to trade blows with Ch\u00e1vez. As he did so, Taylor showed signs of extreme exhaustion, and every tick of the clock brought Taylor closer to victory unless Ch\u00e1vez could knock him out.\nWith about a minute left in the round, Ch\u00e1vez hit Taylor squarely with several hard punches and stayed on the attack, continuing to hit Taylor with well-placed shots. Finally, with about 25 seconds to go, Ch\u00e1vez landed a hard right hand that caused Taylor to stagger forward towards a corner, forcing Ch\u00e1vez back ahead of him. Suddenly Ch\u00e1vez stepped around Taylor, positioning him so that Taylor was trapped in the corner, with no way to escape from Ch\u00e1vez' desperate final flurry. Ch\u00e1vez then nailed Taylor with a tremendous right hand that dropped the younger man. By using the ring ropes to pull himself up, Taylor managed to return to his feet and was given the mandatory 8-count. Referee Richard Steele asked Taylor twice if he was able to continue fighting, but Taylor failed to answer. Steele then concluded that Taylor was unfit to continue and signaled that he was ending the fight, resulting in a TKO victory for Ch\u00e1vez with only two seconds to go in the bout.\nEquipment.\nSince boxing involves forceful, repetitive punching, precautions must be taken to prevent damage to bones in the hand. Most trainers do not allow boxers to train and spar without wrist wraps and boxing gloves. Hand wraps are used to secure the bones in the hand, and the gloves are used to protect the hands from blunt injury, allowing boxers to throw punches with more force than if they did not use them. Gloves have been required in competition since the late nineteenth century, though modern boxing gloves are much heavier than those worn by early twentieth-century fighters. Prior to a bout, both boxers agree upon the weight of gloves to be used in the bout, with the understanding that lighter gloves allow heavy punchers to inflict more damage. The brand of gloves can also affect the impact of punches, so this too is usually stipulated before a bout. Both sides are allowed to inspect the wraps and gloves of the opponent to help ensure both are within agreed upon specifications and no tampering has taken place.\nA mouthguard is important to protect the teeth and gums from injury, and to cushion the jaw, resulting in a decreased chance of knockout. Both fighters must wear soft soled shoes to reduce the damage from accidental (or intentional) stepping on feet. While older boxing boots more commonly resembled those of a professional wrestler, modern boxing shoes and boots tend to be quite similar to their amateur wrestling counterparts.\nBoxers practice their skills on several types of punching bags. A small, tear-drop-shaped \"speed bag\" is used to hone reflexes and repetitive punching skills, while a large cylindrical \"heavy bag\" filled with sand, a synthetic substitute, or water is used to practice power punching and body blows. The double-end bag is usually connected by elastic on the top and bottom and moves randomly upon getting struck and helps the fighter work on accuracy and reflexes. In addition to these distinctive pieces of equipment, boxers also use sport-nonspecific training equipment to build strength, speed, agility, and stamina. Common training equipment includes free weights, rowing machines, jump rope, and medicine balls.\nBoxers also use punch/focus mitts in which a trainer calls out certain combinations and the fighter strikes the mitts accordingly. This is a great exercise for stamina as the boxer isn't allowed to go at his own pace but that of the trainer, typically forcing the fighter to endure a higher output and volume than usual. In addition, they also allow trainers to make boxers utilize footwork and distances more accurately.\nBoxing matches typically take place in a boxing ring, a raised platform surrounded by ropes attached to posts rising in each corner. The term \"ring\" has come to be used as a metaphor for many aspects of prize fighting in general.\nTechnique.\nStance.\nThe modern boxing stance differs substantially from the typical boxing stances of the 19th and early 20th centuries. The modern stance has a more upright vertical-armed guard, as opposed to the more horizontal, knuckles-facing-forward guard adopted by early 20th century hook users such as Jack Johnson.\nIn a fully upright stance, the boxer stands with the legs shoulder-width apart and the rear foot a half-step in front of the lead man. Right-handed or orthodox boxers lead with the left foot and fist (for most penetration power). Both feet are parallel, and the right heel is off the ground. The lead (left) fist is held vertically about six inches in front of the face at eye level. The rear (right) fist is held beside the chin and the elbow tucked against the ribcage to protect the body. The chin is tucked into the chest to avoid punches to the jaw which commonly cause knock-outs and is often kept slightly off-center. Wrists are slightly bent to avoid damage when punching and the elbows are kept tucked in to protect the ribcage. Some boxers fight from a crouch, leaning forward and keeping their feet closer together. The stance described is considered the \"textbook\" stance and fighters are encouraged to change it around once it's been mastered as a base. Case in point, many fast fighters have their hands down and have almost exaggerated footwork, while brawlers or bully fighters tend to slowly stalk their opponents. In order to retain their stance boxers take 'the first step in any direction with the foot already leading in that direction.'\nDifferent stances allow for bodyweight to be differently positioned and emphasised; this may in turn alter how powerfully and explosively a type of punch can be delivered. For instance, a crouched stance allows for the bodyweight to be positioned further forward over the lead left leg. If a lead left hook is thrown from this position, it will produce a powerful springing action in the lead leg and produce a more explosive punch. This springing action could not be generated effectively, for this punch, if an upright stance was used or if the bodyweight was positioned predominantly over the back leg. Mike Tyson was a keen practitioner of a crouched stance and this style of power punching. The preparatory positioning of the bodyweight over the bent lead leg is also known as an isometric preload.\nLeft-handed or southpaw fighters use a mirror image of the orthodox stance, which can create problems for orthodox fighters unaccustomed to receiving jabs, hooks, or crosses from the opposite side. The southpaw stance, conversely, is vulnerable to a straight right hand.\nNorth American fighters tend to favor a more balanced stance, facing the opponent almost squarely, while many European fighters stand with their torso turned more to the side. The positioning of the hands may also vary, as some fighters prefer to have both hands raised in front of the face, risking exposure to body shots.\nPunches.\nThere are four basic punches in boxing: the jab, cross, hook and uppercut. Any punch other than a jab is considered a power punch. If a boxer is right-handed (orthodox), his left hand is the lead hand and his right hand is the rear hand. For a left-handed boxer or southpaw, the hand positions are reversed. For clarity, the following discussion will assume a right-handed boxer.\nThese different punch types can be thrown in rapid succession to form combinations or \"combos.\" The most common is the jab and cross combination, nicknamed the \"one-two combo.\" This is usually an effective combination, because the jab blocks the opponent's view of the cross, making it easier to land cleanly and forcefully.\nA large, swinging circular punch starting from a cocked-back position with the arm at a longer extension than the hook and all of the fighter's weight behind it is sometimes referred to as a \"roundhouse,\" \"haymaker,\" \"overhand,\" or sucker-punch. Relying on body weight and centripetal force within a wide arc, the roundhouse can be a powerful blow, but it is often a wild and uncontrolled punch that leaves the fighter delivering it off balance and with an open guard.\nWide, looping punches have the further disadvantage of taking more time to deliver, giving the opponent ample warning to react and counter. For this reason, the haymaker or roundhouse is not a conventional punch, and is regarded by trainers as a mark of poor technique or desperation. Sometimes it has been used, because of its immense potential power, to finish off an already staggering opponent who seems unable or unlikely to take advantage of the poor position it leaves the puncher in.\nAnother unconventional punch is the rarely used bolo punch, in which the opponent swings an arm out several times in a wide arc, usually as a distraction, before delivering with either that or the other arm.\nAn illegal punch to the back of the head or neck is known as a rabbit punch.\nBoth the hook and uppercut may be thrown with both hands, resulting in differing footwork and positioning from that described above if thrown by the other hand. Generally the analogous opposite is true of the footwork and torso movement.\nDefense.\nThere are several basic maneuvers a boxer can use in order to evade or block punches, depicted and discussed below.\nRing corner.\nIn boxing, each fighter is given a corner of the ring where he rests in between rounds for 1 minute and where his trainers stand. Typically, three men stand in the corner besides the boxer himself; these are the trainer, the assistant trainer and the cutman. The trainer and assistant typically give advice to the boxer on what he is doing wrong as well as encouraging him if he is losing. The cutman is a cutaneous doctor responsible for keeping the boxer's face and eyes free of cuts, blood and excessive swelling. This is of particular importance because many fights are stopped because of cuts or swelling that threaten the boxer's eyes.\nIn addition, the corner is responsible for stopping the fight if they feel their fighter is in grave danger of permanent injury. The corner will occasionally throw in a white towel to signify a boxer's surrender (the idiomatic phrase \"to throw in the towel\", meaning to give up, derives from this practice). This can be seen in the fight between Diego Corrales and Floyd Mayweather. In that fight, Corrales' corner surrendered despite Corrales' steadfast refusal.\nHealth concerns.\nKnocking a person unconscious or even causing a concussion may cause permanent brain damage. There is no clear division between the force required to knock a person out and the force likely to kill a person.\nIn March 1981, neurosurgeon Dr. Fred Sonstein sought to use CAT scans in an attempt to track the degeneration of boxers' cognitive functions after seeing the decline of Bennie Briscoe. From 1980 to 2007, more than 200 amateur boxers, professional boxers and Toughman fighters died due to ring or training injuries. In 1983, editorials in the \"Journal of the American Medical Association\" called for a ban on boxing. The editor, Dr. George Lundberg, called boxing an \"obscenity\" that \"should not be sanctioned by any civilized society.\" Since then, the British, Canadian and Australian Medical Associations have called for bans on boxing.\nSupporters of the ban state that boxing is the only sport where hurting the other athlete is the goal. Dr. Bill O'Neill, boxing spokesman for the British Medical Association, has supported the BMA's proposed ban on boxing: \"It is the only sport where the intention is to inflict serious injury on your opponent, and we feel that we must have a total ban on boxing.\" Opponents respond that such a position is misguided opinion, stating that amateur boxing is scored solely according to total connecting blows with no award for \"injury\". They observe that many skilled professional boxers have had rewarding careers without inflicting injury on opponents by accumulating scoring blows and avoiding punches winning rounds scored 10-9 by the 10-point must system, and they note that there are many other sports where concussions are much more prevalent.\nIn 2007, one study of amateur boxers showed that protective headgear did not prevent brain damage, and another found that amateur boxers faced a high risk of brain damage. The Gothenburg study analyzed temporary levels of neurofilament light in cerebral spinal fluid which they conclude is evidence of damage, even though the levels soon subside. More comprehensive studies of neurological function on larger samples performed by Johns Hopkins University in 1994 and accident rates analyzed by National Safety Council in 2017 show amateur boxing is a comparatively safe sport.\nIn 1997, the American Association of Professional Ringside Physicians was established to create medical protocols through research and education to prevent injuries in boxing.\nProfessional boxing is forbidden in Iceland, Iran and North Korea. It was banned in Sweden until 2007 when the ban was lifted but strict restrictions, including four three-minute rounds for fights, were imposed. Boxing was banned in Albania from 1965 until the fall of Communism in 1991. Norway legalized professional boxing in December 2014.\nPossible health benefits.\nLike other active and dynamic sports, boxing may be argued to provide some general benefits, such as fat burning, increased muscle tone, strong bones and ligaments, cardiovascular fitness, muscular endurance, improved core stability, co-ordination and body awareness, strength and power, stress relief and self-esteem.\nSome claim that with a careful and thoughtful approach, boxing can be quite beneficial to health. One example is Gemma Ruegg, a two-weight regional champion from Bournemouth in Dorset, who boxed throughout her pregnancy and returned to the ring three weeks after giving birth to her daughter. Earlier, boxing helped her to get rid of alcohol addiction and depression.\nBoxing Hall of Fame.\nThe sport of boxing has two internationally recognized boxing halls of fame; the International Boxing Hall of Fame (IBHOF). In 2013, The Boxing Hall of Fame Las Vegas opened in Las Vegas, NV founded by Steve Lott, former assistant manager for Mike Tyson.\nThe International Boxing Hall of Fame opened in Canastota in 1989. The first inductees in 1990 included Jack Johnson, Benny Leonard, Jack Dempsey, Henry Armstrong, Sugar Ray Robinson, Archie Moore, and Muhammad Ali. Other world-class figures include Salvador Sanchez, Jose Napoles, Roberto \"Manos de Piedra\" Dur\u00e1n, Ricardo Lopez, Gabriel \"Flash\" Elorde, Vicente Saldivar, Ismael Laguna, Eusebio Pedroza, Carlos Monz\u00f3n, Azumah Nelson, Rocky Marciano, Pipino Cuevas and Ken Buchanan. The Hall of Fame's induction ceremony is held every June as part of a four-day event. The fans who come to Canastota for the Induction Weekend are treated to a number of events, including scheduled autograph sessions, boxing exhibitions, a parade featuring past and present inductees, and the induction ceremony itself.\nThe Boxing Hall of Fame Las Vegas features the $75 million ESPN Classic Sports fight film and tape library and radio broadcast collection. The collection includes the fights of all the great champions including: Muhammad Ali, Mike Tyson, George Foreman, Roberto Dur\u00e1n, Marvin Hagler, Jack Dempsey, Joe Louis, Joe Frazier, Rocky Marciano and Sugar Ray Robinson. It is this exclusive fight film library that will separate the Boxing Hall of Fame Las Vegas from the other halls of fame which do not have rights to any video of their sports. The inaugural inductees included Muhammad Ali, Henry Armstrong, Tony Canzoneri, Ezzard Charles, Julio C\u00e9sar Ch\u00e1vez Sr., Jack Dempsey, Roberto Dur\u00e1n, Joe Louis, and Sugar Ray Robinson\nBoxing rankings.\nThere are various organization and websites, that rank boxers in both weight class and pound-for-pound manner."}
{"id": "4246", "revid": "3563616", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4246", "title": "Bollywood", "text": "Hindi cinema, often known as Bollywood and formerly as \"Bombay cinema\", is the Indian Hindi-language film industry based in Mumbai (formerly Bombay). The term is a portmanteau of \"Bombay\" and \"Hollywood\". The industry is related to Cinema of South India and other Indian film industries, making up Indian cinema\u2014the world's largest by number of feature films produced.\nIn 2017, Indian cinema produced 1,986 feature films, with Bollywood as its largest filmmaker, producing 364 Hindi films the same year. Bollywood represents 43 percent of Indian net box-office revenue; Tamil and Telugu cinema represent 36 percent, and the remaining regional cinema constituted 21 percent in 2014. Bollywood is one of the largest centres of film production in the world. In 2001 ticket sales, Indian cinema (including Bollywood) reportedly sold an estimated 3.6 billion tickets worldwide, compared to Hollywood's 2.6 billion tickets sold. Bollywood films tend to use vernacular Hindustani, mutually intelligible by people who self-identify as speaking either Hindi or Urdu, and modern Bollywood movies increasingly incorporate elements of Hinglish.\nThe most popular commercial genre in Bollywood since the 1970s has been the masala film, which freely mixes different genres including action, comedy, romance, drama and melodrama along with musical numbers. Masala films generally fall under the musical film genre, of which Indian cinema has been the largest producer since the 1960s when it exceeded the American film industry's total musical output after musical films declined in the West; the first Indian musical talkie was \"Alam Ara\" (1931), several years after the first Hollywood musical talkie \"The Jazz Singer\" (1927). Alongside commercial masala films, a distinctive genre of art films known as parallel cinema has also existed, presenting realistic content and avoidance of musical numbers. In more recent years, the distinction between commercial masala and parallel cinema has been gradually blurring, with an increasing number of mainstream films adopting the conventions which were once strictly associated with parallel cinema.\nEtymology.\n\"Bollywood\" is a portmanteau derived from Bombay (the former name of Mumbai) and \"Hollywood\", a shorthand reference for the American film industry which is based in Hollywood, California.\nThe term \"Tollywood\", for the Tollygunge-based cinema of West Bengal, predated \"Bollywood\". It was used in a 1932 \"American Cinematographer\" article by Wilford E. Deming, an American engineer who helped produce the first Indian sound picture.\n\"Bollywood\" was probably invented in Bombay-based film trade journals in the 1960s or 1970s, though the exact inventor varies by account. Film journalist Bevinda Collaco claims she coined the term for the title of her column in \"Screen\" magazine. Her column entitled \"On the Bollywood Beat\" covered studio news and celebrity gossip. Other sources state that lyricist, filmmaker and scholar Amit Khanna was its creator. It's unknown if it was derived from \"Hollywood\" through \"Tollywood\", or was inspired directly by \"Hollywood\".\nThe term has been criticised by some film journalists and critics, who believe it implies that the industry is a poor cousin of Hollywood.\n\"Bollywood\" has since inspired a long list of Hollywood-inspired nicknames.\nHistory.\nEarly history (1890s\u20131940s).\nIn 1897, a film presentation by Professor Stevenson featured a stage show at Calcutta's Star Theatre. With Stevenson's encouragement and camera, Hiralal Sen, an Indian photographer, made a film of scenes from that show, \"The Flower of Persia\" (1898). \"The Wrestlers\" (1899) by H. S. Bhatavdekar showed a wrestling match at the Hanging Gardens in Bombay.\nDadasaheb Phalke's silent \"Raja Harishchandra\" (1913) is the first feature film made in India. By the 1930s, the industry was producing over 200 films per year. The first Indian sound film, Ardeshir Irani's \"Alam Ara\" (1931), was commercially successful. With a great demand for talkies and musicals, Bollywood and the other regional film industries quickly switched to sound films.\nChallenges and Market Expansion (1930s-1940s).\nThe 1930s and 1940s were tumultuous times; India was buffeted by the Great Depression, World War II, the Indian independence movement, and the violence of the Partition. Although most Bollywood films were unabashedly escapist, a number of filmmakers tackled tough social issues or used the struggle for Indian independence as a backdrop for their films. Irani made the first Hindi colour film, \"Kisan Kanya\", in 1937. The following year, he made a colour version of \"Mother India\". However, colour did not become a popular feature until the late 1950s. At this time, lavish romantic musicals and melodramas were cinematic staples.\nThe decade of the 1940s saw an expansion of the Bollywood's commercial market and its presence in the national consciousness. The year 1943 saw the arrival of Indian cinema's first 'blockbuster' offering, the movie Kismet, which grossed in excess of the important barrier of one crore (10 million) rupees, made on a budget of only two lakh (0.2 million) rupees. Kismet tackled contemporary issues, especially those arising from the Indian Independence movement, and went on to become \"the longest running hit of Indian cinema\", a title it held till the 1970s. Film personalities like Bimal Roy, Sahir Ludhianvi and Prithviraj Kapoor participated in the creation of a national movement against colonial rule in India, while simultaneously leveraging the popular political movement to increase their own visibility and popularity. Themes from the Independence Movement deeply influenced Bollywood directors, screen-play writers, and lyricists, who saw their films in the context of social reform and the problems of the common people.\nAlthough the 1947 partition of India, divided the country into the Republic of India and Pakistan, it precipitated the migration of film-making talent from film making centers like Lahore and Calcutta, which bore the brunt of the partition violence. These events further consolidated the Mumbai film industry's position as the preeminent center for film production in India.\nGolden Age (late 1940s\u20131960s).\nThe period from the late 1940s to the early 1960s, after India's independence, is regarded by film historians as the Golden Age of Hindi cinema. Some of the most critically acclaimed Hindi films of all time were produced during this time. Examples include \"Pyaasa\" (1957) and \"Kaagaz Ke Phool\" (1959), directed by Guru Dutt and written by Abrar Alvi; \"Awaara\" (1951) and \"Shree 420\" (1955), directed by Raj Kapoor and written by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas, and \"Aan\" (1952), directed by Mehboob Khan and starring Dilip Kumar. The films explored social themes, primarily dealing with working-class life in India (particularly urban life) in the first two examples. \"Awaara\" presented the city as both nightmare and dream, and \"Pyaasa\" critiqued the unreality of urban life.\nMehboob Khan's \"Mother India\" (1957), a remake of his earlier \"Aurat\" (1940), was the first Indian film nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film; it lost by a single vote. \"Mother India\" defined conventional Hindi cinema for decades. It spawned a genre of dacoit films, in turn defined by \"Gunga Jumna\" (1961). Written and produced by Dilip Kumar, \"Gunga Jumna\" was a dacoit crime drama about two brothers on opposite sides of the law (a theme which became common in Indian films during the 1970s). Some of the best-known epic films of Hindi cinema were also produced at this time, such as K. Asif's \"Mughal-e-Azam\" (1960). Other acclaimed mainstream Hindi filmmakers during this period included Kamal Amrohi and Vijay Bhatt.\nThe three most popular male Indian actors of the 1950s and 1960s were Dilip Kumar, Raj Kapoor, and Dev Anand, each with a unique acting style. Kapoor adopted Charlie Chaplin's tramp; Anand modeled himself on suave Hollywood stars like Gregory Peck and Cary Grant, and Kumar pioneered a form of method acting which predated Hollywood method actors such as Marlon Brando. Kumar, who was described as \"the ultimate method actor\" by Satyajit Ray, inspired future generations of Indian actors. Much like Brando's influence on Robert De Niro and Al Pacino, Kumar had a similar influence on Amitabh Bachchan, Naseeruddin Shah, Shah Rukh Khan and Nawazuddin Siddiqui. Veteran actresses such as Suraiya, Nargis, Sumitra Devi, Madhubala, Meena Kumari, Waheeda Rehman, Nutan, Sadhana, Mala Sinha and Vyjayanthimala have had their share of influence on Hindi cinema.\nWhile commercial Hindi cinema was thriving, the 1950s also saw the emergence of a parallel cinema movement. Although the movement (emphasising social realism) was led by Bengali cinema, it also began gaining prominence in Hindi cinema. Early examples of parallel cinema include \"Dharti Ke Lal\" (1946), directed by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas and based on the Bengal famine of 1943,; \"Neecha Nagar\" (1946) directed by Chetan Anand and written by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas, and Bimal Roy's \"Do Bigha Zamin\" (1953). Their critical acclaim and the latter's commercial success paved the way for Indian neorealism and the Indian New Wave (synonymous with parallel cinema). Internationally acclaimed Hindi filmmakers involved in the movement included Mani Kaul, Kumar Shahani, Ketan Mehta, Govind Nihalani, Shyam Benegal, and Vijaya Mehta.\nAfter the social-realist film \"Neecha Nagar\" received the Palme d'Or at the inaugural 1946 Cannes Film Festival, Hindi films were frequently in competition for Cannes' top prize during the 1950s and early 1960s and some won major prizes at the festival. Guru Dutt, overlooked during his lifetime, received belated international recognition during the 1980s. Film critics polled by the British magazine \"Sight &amp; Sound\" included several of Dutt's films in a 2002 list of greatest films, and Time's All-Time 100 Movies lists \"Pyaasa\" as one of the greatest films of all time.\nDuring the late 1960s and early 1970s, the industry was dominated by musical romance films with romantic-hero leads.\nClassic Bollywood (1970s\u20131980s).\nBy 1970, Hindi cinema was thematically stagnant and dominated by musical romance films. The arrival of screenwriting duo Salim\u2013Javed (Salim Khan and Javed Akhtar) was a paradigm shift, revitalising the industry. They began the genre of gritty, violent, Bombay underworld crime films early in the decade with films such as \"Zanjeer\" (1973) and \"Deewaar\" (1975). Salim-Javed reinterpreted the rural themes of Mehboob Khan's \"Mother India\" (1957) and Dilip Kumar's \"Gunga Jumna\" (1961) in a contemporary urban context, reflecting the socio-economic and socio-political climate of 1970s India and channeling mass discontent, disillusionment and the unprecedented growth of slums with anti-establishment themes and those involving urban poverty, corruption and crime. Their \"angry young man\", personified by Amitabh Bachchan, reinterpreted Dilip Kumar's performance in \"Gunga Jumna\" in a contemporary urban context and anguished urban poor.\nBy the mid-1970s, romantic confections had given way to gritty, violent crime films and action films about gangsters (the Bombay underworld) and bandits (dacoits). Salim-Javed's writing and Amitabh Bachchan's acting popularised the trend with films such as \"Zanjeer\" and (particularly) \"Deewaar\", a crime film inspired by \"Gunga Jumna\" which pitted \"a policeman against his brother, a gang leader based on real-life smuggler Haji Mastan\" (Bachchan); according to Danny Boyle, \"Deewaar\" was \"absolutely key to Indian cinema\". In addition to Bachchan, several other actors followed by riding the crest of the trend (which lasted into the early 1990s). Actresses from the era include Hema Malini, Jaya Bachchan, Raakhee, Shabana Azmi, Zeenat Aman, Parveen Babi, Rekha, Dimple Kapadia, Smita Patil, Jaya Prada and Padmini Kolhapure.\nThe name \"Bollywood\" was coined during the 1970s, when the conventions of commercial Bollywood films were defined. Key to this was the masala film, which combines a number of genres (action, comedy, romance, drama, melodrama, and musical). The masala film was pioneered early in the decade by filmmaker Nasir Hussain, and the Salim-Javed screenwriting duo, pioneering the Bollywood-blockbuster format. \"Yaadon Ki Baarat\" (1973), directed by Hussain and written by Salim-Javed, has been identified as the first masala film and the first quintessentially Bollywood film. Salim-Javed wrote more successful masala films during the 1970s and 1980s. Masala films made Amitabh Bachchan the biggest Bollywood star of the period. A landmark of the genre was \"Amar Akbar Anthony\" (1977), directed by Manmohan Desai and written by Kader Khan, and Desai continued successfully exploiting the genre.\nBoth genres (masala and violent-crime films) are represented by the blockbuster \"Sholay\" (1975), written by Salim-Javed and starring Amitabh Bachchan. It combined the dacoit film conventions of \"Mother India\" and \"Gunga Jumna\" with spaghetti Westerns, spawning the Dacoit Western (also known as the curry Western) which was popular during the 1970s.\nSome Hindi filmmakers, such as Shyam Benegal, Mani Kaul, Kumar Shahani, Ketan Mehta, Govind Nihalani and Vijaya Mehta, continued to produce realistic parallel cinema throughout the 1970s. Although the art film bent of the Film Finance Corporation was criticised during a 1976 Committee on Public Undertakings investigation which accused the corporation of not doing enough to encourage commercial cinema, the decade saw the rise of commercial cinema with films such as \"Sholay\" (1975) which consolidated Amitabh Bachchan's position as a star. The devotional classic \"Jai Santoshi Ma\" was also released that year.\nBy 1983, the Bombay film industry was generating an estimated annual revenue of ( 7 billion, ), equivalent to (, 111.33 billion) when adjusted for inflation. By 1986, India's annual film output had increased from 741 films produced annually to 833 films annually, making India the world's largest film producer. The most internationally acclaimed Hindi film of the 1980s was Mira Nair's \"Salaam Bombay!\" (1988), which won the Camera d'Or at the 1988 Cannes Film Festival and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film.\nNew Bollywood (1990s\u2013present).\nHindi cinema experienced another period of stagnation during the late 1980s with a box-office decline due to increasing violence, a decline in musical quality, and a rise in video piracy. One of the turning points came with such films as \"Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak\" (1988), presenting a blend of youthfulness, family entertainment, emotional intelligence and strong melodies, all of which lured audiences back to the big screen. It brought back the template for Bollywood musical romance films which went on to define 1990s Hindi cinema.\nKnown since the 1990s as \"New Bollywood\", contemporary Bollywood is linked to economic liberalization in India during the early 1990s. Early in the decade, the pendulum swung back toward family-centered romantic musicals. \"Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak\" (1988) was followed by blockbusters such as \"Maine Pyar Kiya\" (1989), \"Hum Aapke Hain Kaun\" (1994), \"Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge\" (1995), \"Raja Hindustani\" (1996), \"Dil To Pagal Hai\" (1997) and \"Kuch Kuch Hota Hai\" (1998), introducing a new generation of popular actors, including the three Khans: Aamir Khan, Shah Rukh Khan, and Salman Khan, who have starred in most of the top ten highest-grossing Bollywood films. The Khans and have had successful careers since the late 1980s and early 1990s, and have dominated the Indian box office for three decades. Shah Rukh Khan was the most successful Indian actor for most of the 1990s and 2000s, and Aamir Khan has been the most successful Indian actor since the mid 2000s. Action and comedy films, starring such actors as Akshay Kumar and Govinda.\nThe decade marked the entrance of new performers in art and independent films, some of which were commercially successful. The most influential example was \"Satya\" (1998), directed by Ram Gopal Varma and written by Anurag Kashyap. Its critical and commercial success led to the emergence of a genre known as Mumbai noir: urban films reflecting the city's social problems. This led to a resurgence of parallel cinema by the end of the decade. The films featured actors whose performances were often praised by critics.\nThe 2000s saw increased Bollywood recognition worldwide due to growing (and prospering) NRI and Desi communities overseas. The growth of the Indian economy and a demand for quality entertainment in this era led the country's film industry to new heights in production values, cinematography and screenwriting as well as technical advances in areas such as special effects and animation. Some of the largest production houses, among them Yash Raj Films and Dharma Productions were the producers of new modern films. Some popular films of the decade were \"Kaho Naa... Pyaar Hai\" (2000), \"Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham...\" (2001), \"\" (2001), \"Lagaan\" (2001), \"Koi... Mil Gaya\" (2003), \"Kal Ho Naa Ho\" (2003), \"Veer-Zaara\" (2004), \"Rang De Basanti\" (2006), \"Lage Raho Munna Bhai\" (2006), \"Dhoom 2\" (2006), \"Krrish\" (2006), and \"Jab We Met\" (2007), among others, showing the rise of new movie stars.\nDuring the 2010s, the industry saw established stars such as making big-budget masala films like \"Dabangg\" (2010), \"Singham\" (2011)\",\" \"Ek Tha Tiger\" (2012), \"Son of Sardaar\" (2012), \"Rowdy Rathore\" (2012), \"Chennai Express\" (2013), \"Kick\" (2014) and \"Happy New Year\" (2014) with much-younger actresses. Although the films were often not praised by critics, they were commercially successful. Some of the films starring Aamir Khan have been credited with redefining and modernising the masala film with a distinct brand of socially conscious cinema.\nMost stars from the 2000s continued successful careers into the next decade, and the 2010s saw a new generation of popular actors in different films. Among new conventions, female-centred films such as \"The Dirty Picture\" (2011), \"Kahaani\" (2012), and \"Queen\" (2014), \"Parched\" (2015), Pink (2016) started gaining wide financial success.\nInfluences on Bollywood.\nMoti Gokulsing and Wimal Dissanayake identify six major influences which have shaped Indian popular cinema:\nSharmistha Gooptu identifies Indo-Persian-Islamic culture as a major influence. During the early 20th century, Urdu was the lingua franca of popular cultural performance across northern India and established in popular performance art traditions such as nautch dancing, Urdu poetry, and Parsi theater. Urdu and related Hindi dialects were the most widely understood across northern India, and Hindustani became the standard language of early Indian talkies. Films based on \"Persianate adventure-romances\" led to a popular genre of \"\"Arabian Nights\" cinema\".\nScholars Chaudhuri Diptakirti and Rachel Dwyer and screenwriter Javed Akhtar identify Urdu literature as a major influence on Hindi cinema. Most of the screenwriters and scriptwriters of classic Hindi cinema came from Urdu literary backgrounds, from Khwaja Ahmad Abbas and Akhtar ul Iman to Salim\u2013Javed and Rahi Masoom Raza; a handful came from other Indian literary traditions, such as Bengali and Hindi literature. Most of Hindi cinema's classic scriptwriters wrote primarily in Urdu, including Salim-Javed, Gulzar, Rajinder Singh Bedi, Inder Raj Anand, Rahi Masoom Raza and Wajahat Mirza. Urdu poetry and the ghazal tradition strongly influenced filmi (Bollywood lyrics). Javed Akhtar was also greatly influenced by Urdu novels by Pakistani author Ibn-e-Safi, such as the \"Jasoosi Dunya\" and \"Imran\" series of detective novels; they inspired, for example, famous Bollywood characters such as Gabbar Singh in \"Sholay\" (1975) and Mogambo in \"Mr. India\" (1987).\nTodd Stadtman identifies several foreign influences on 1970s commercial Bollywood masala films, including New Hollywood, Italian exploitation films, and Hong Kong martial arts cinema. After the success of Bruce Lee films (such as \"Enter the Dragon\") in India, \"Deewaar\" (1975) and other Bollywood films incorporated fight scenes inspired by 1970s martial arts films from Hong Kong cinema until the 1990s. Bollywood action scenes emulated Hong Kong rather than Hollywood, emphasising acrobatics and stunts and combining kung fu (as perceived by Indians) with Indian martial arts such as pehlwani.\nInfluence of Bollywood.\nIndia.\nPerhaps Bollywood's greatest influence has been on India's national identity, where (with the rest of Indian cinema) it has become part of the \"Indian story\". In India, Bollywood is often associated with India's national identity. According to economist and Bollywood biographer Meghnad Desai, \"Cinema actually has been the most vibrant medium for telling India its own story, the story of its struggle for independence, its constant struggle to achieve national integration and to emerge as a global presence\".\nScholar Brigitte Schulze has written that Indian films, most notably Mehboob Khan's \"Mother India\" (1957), played a key role in shaping the Republic of India's national identity in the early years after independence from the British Raj; the film conveyed a sense of Indian nationalism to urban and rural citizens alike. Bollywood has long influenced Indian society and culture as the biggest entertainment industry; many of the country's musical, dancing, wedding and fashion trends are Bollywood-inspired. Bollywood fashion trendsetters have included Madhubala in \"Mughal-e-Azam\" (1960) and Madhuri Dixit in \"Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!\" (1994).\nBollywood has also had a socio-political impact on Indian society, reflecting Indian politics. In classic 1970s Bollywood films, Bombay underworld crime films written by Salim\u2013Javed and starring Amitabh Bachchan such as \"Zanjeer\" (1973) and \"Deewaar\" (1975) reflected the socio-economic and socio-political realities of contemporary India. They channeled growing popular discontent and disillusionment and state failure to ensure welfare and well-being at a time of inflation, shortages, loss of confidence in public institutions, increasing crime and the unprecedented growth of slums. Salim-Javed and Bachchan's films dealt with urban poverty, corruption and organised crime; they were perceived by audiences as anti-establishment, often with an \"angry young man\" protagonist presented as a vigilante or anti-hero whose suppressed rage voiced the anguish of the urban poor.\nOverseas.\nBollywood has been a significant form of soft power for India, increasing its influence and changing overseas perceptions of India. In Germany, Indian stereotypes included bullock carts, beggars, sacred cows, corrupt politicians, and catastrophes before Bollywood and the IT industry transformed global perceptions of India. According to author Roopa Swaminathan, \"Bollywood cinema is one of the strongest global cultural ambassadors of a new India.\" Its role in expanding India's global influence is comparable to Hollywood's similar role with American influence.\nDuring the 2000s, Bollywood began influencing musical films in the Western world and was instrumental role in reviving the American musical film. Baz Luhrmann said that his musical film, \"Moulin Rouge!\" (2001), was inspired by Bollywood musicals; the film incorporated a Bollywood-style dance scene with a song from the film \"China Gate\". The critical and financial success of \"Moulin Rouge!\" began a renaissance of Western musical films such as \"Chicago\", \"Rent\", and \"Dreamgirls\".\nIndian film composer A. R. Rahman wrote the music for Andrew Lloyd Webber's \"Bombay Dreams\", and a musical version of \"Hum Aapke Hain Koun\" was staged in London's West End. The Bollywood sports film \"Lagaan\" (2001) was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, and two other Bollywood films (2002's \"Devdas\" and 2006's \"Rang De Basanti\") were nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language.\nDanny Boyle's \"Slumdog Millionaire\" (2008), which won four Golden Globes and eight Academy Awards, was inspired by Bollywood films and is considered an \"homage to Hindi commercial cinema\". It was also inspired by Mumbai-underworld crime films, such as \"Deewaar\" (1975), \"Satya\" (1998), \"Company\" (2002) and \"Black Friday\" (2007). \"Deewaar\" had a Hong Kong remake, \"The Brothers\" (1979), which inspired John Woo's internationally acclaimed breakthrough \"A Better Tomorrow\" (1986); the latter was a template for Hong Kong action cinema's heroic bloodshed genre. \"Angry young man\" 1970s epics such as \"Deewaar\" and \"Amar Akbar Anthony\" (1977) also resemble the heroic-bloodshed genre of 1980s Hong Kong action cinema.\nThe influence of \"filmi\" may be seen in popular music worldwide. Technopop pioneers Haruomi Hosono and Ryuichi Sakamoto of the Yellow Magic Orchestra produced a 1978 electronic album, \"Cochin Moon\", based on an experimental fusion of electronic music and Bollywood-inspired Indian music. Truth Hurts' 2002 song \"Addictive\", produced by DJ Quik and Dr. Dre, was lifted from Lata Mangeshkar's \"Thoda Resham Lagta Hai\" in \"Jyoti\" (1981). The Black Eyed Peas' Grammy Award winning 2005 song \"Don't Phunk with My Heart\" was inspired by two 1970s Bollywood songs: \"Ye Mera Dil Yaar Ka Diwana\" from \"Don\" (1978) and \"Ae Nujawan Hai Sub\" from \"Apradh\" (1972). Both songs were composed by Kalyanji Anandji, sung by Asha Bhosle, and featured the dancer Helen.\nThe Kronos Quartet re-recorded several R. D. Burman compositions sung by Asha Bhosle for their 2005 album, \"You've Stolen My Heart: Songs from R.D. Burman's Bollywood\", which was nominated for Best Contemporary World Music Album at the 2006 Grammy Awards. \"Filmi\" music composed by A. R. Rahman (who received two Academy Awards for the \"Slumdog Millionaire\" soundtrack) has frequently been sampled by other musicians, including the Singaporean artist Kelly Poon, the French rap group La Caution and the American artist Ciara. Many Asian Underground artists, particularly those among the overseas Indian diaspora, have also been inspired by Bollywood music.\nGenres.\nBollywood films are primarily musicals, and are expected to have catchy song-and-dance numbers woven into the script. A film's success often depends on the quality of such musical numbers. A film's music and song and dance portions are usually produced first and these are often released before the film itself, increasing its audience.\nIndian audiences expect value for money, and a good film is generally referred to as \"paisa vasool\", (literally \"money's worth\"). Songs, dances, love triangles, comedy and dare-devil thrills are combined in a three-hour show (with an intermission). These are called \"masala films\", after the Hindi word for a spice mixture. Like \"masalas\", they are a mixture of action, comedy and romance; most have heroes who can fight off villains single-handedly. Bollywood plots have tended to be melodramatic, frequently using formulaic ingredients such as star-crossed lovers, angry parents, love triangles, family ties, sacrifice, political corruption, kidnapping, villains, kind-hearted courtesans, long-lost relatives and siblings, reversals of fortune and serendipity.\nParallel cinema films, in and outside Bollywood, tended to be less popular at the box office. A large Indian diaspora in English-speaking countries and increased Western influence in India have nudged Bollywood films closer to Hollywood.\nAccording to film critic Lata Khubchandani, \"Our earliest films ... had liberal doses of sex and kissing scenes in them. Strangely, it was after Independence the censor board came into being and so did all the strictures.\" Although Bollywood plots feature Westernised urbanites dating and dancing in clubs rather than pre-arranged marriages, traditional Indian culture continues to exist outside the industry and is an element of resistance by some to Western influences. Bollywood plays a major role, however, in Indian fashion. Studies have indicated that some people, unaware that changing fashion in Bollywood films is often influenced by globalisation, consider the clothes worn by Bollywood actors as authentically Indian.\nCasts and crews.\nBollywood employs people from throughout India. It attracts thousands of aspiring actors hoping for a break in the industry. Models and beauty contestants, television actors, stage actors and ordinary people come to Mumbai with the hope of becoming a star. As in Hollywood, very few succeed. Since many Bollywood films are shot abroad, many foreign extras are employed.\nVery few non-Indian actors are able to make a mark in Bollywood, although many have tried. There have been exceptions, however, and the hit film \"Rang De Basanti\" starred the English Alice Patten. \"Kisna\", \"Lagaan\", and \"\" also featured foreign actors, and Australian-born actress Emma Brown Garett has starred in a few Indian films.\nBollywood can be insular, and relatives of film-industry figures have an edge in obtaining coveted roles in films or being part of a film crew. However, industry connections are no guarantee of a long career: competition is fierce, and film-industry scions will falter if they do not succeed at the box office. Stars such as Dilip Kumar, Dharmendra, Amitabh Bachchan, Rajesh Khanna, Anil Kapoor, Sridevi, Madhuri Dixit, Aishwarya Rai and Shah Rukh Khan lacked show-business connections.\nDialogues and lyrics.\nFilm scripts (known as dialogues in Indian English) and their song lyrics are often written by different people. Scripts are usually written in an unadorned Hindustani, which would be understood by the largest possible audience. Bollywood films tend to use a colloquial register of Hindustani, mutually intelligible by Hindi and Urdu speakers. Most of the classic scriptwriters of what is known as Hindi cinema, including Salim\u2013Javed, Gulzar, Rajinder Singh Bedi, Inder Raj Anand, Rahi Masoom Raza and Wajahat Mirza, primarily wrote in Urdu. Salim-Javed wrote in Urdu script, which was then transcribed by an assistant into Devanagari script so Hindi readers could read the Urdu dialogues. During the 1970s, the Urdu writers and screenwriters Krishan Chander and Ismat Chughtai said that \"more than seventy-five per cent of films are made in Urdu\" but were categorised as Hindi films by the government. Urdu poetry has strongly influenced Bollywood songs, whose lyrics also draw from the ghazal tradition (filmi-ghazal). According to Javed Akhtar in 1996, Urdu diction dominates Bollywood film dialogue and lyrics, with about 90% of them written in Urdu script, including his own works as well as those of Majrooh Sultanpuri and Anand Bakshi.\nSome films have used regional dialects to evoke a village setting, or archaic Urdu in medieval historical films. In her book, \"The Cinematic ImagiNation\", Jyotika Virdi wrote about the presence of Urdu in Hindi films: \"Urdu is often used in film titles, screenplay, lyrics, the language of love, war, and martyrdom.\" Virdi notes that although Urdu was widely used in classic Hindi cinema decades after partition because it was widely taught in pre-partition India, its use has declined in modern Hindi cinema: \"The extent of Urdu used in commercial Hindi cinema has not been stable ... the decline of Urdu is mirrored in Hindi films ... It is true that many Urdu words have survived and have become part of Hindi cinema's popular vocabulary. But that is as far as it goes ... For the most part, popular Hindi cinema has forsaken the florid Urdu that was part of its extravagance and retained a 'residual' Urdu\". However, Urdu continues to be used in Bollywood films for dialogues and (particularly) songs.\nContemporary mainstream films also use English; according to the article \"Bollywood Audiences Editorial\", \"English has begun to challenge the ideological work done by Urdu.\" Some film scripts are first written in Latin script. Characters may shift from one language to the other to evoke a particular atmosphere (for example, English in a business setting and Hindi in an informal one). The blend of Hindi, Urdu and English sometimes heard in modern Bollywood films, known as Hinglish, has become increasingly common.\nCinematic language (in dialogues or lyrics) is often melodramatic, invoking God, family, mother, duty, and self-sacrifice. Song lyrics are often about love. Bollywood song lyrics (especially in older films) frequently use the poetic vocabulary of court Urdu, with a number of Persian loanwords. Another source for love lyrics in films such as \"Jhanak Jhanak Payal Baje\" and \"Lagaan\" is the long Hindu tradition of poetry about the loves of Krishna, Radha, and the gopis.\nMusic directors often prefer working with certain lyricists, and the lyricist and composer may be seen as a team. This phenomenon has been compared to the pairs of American composers and songwriters who created classic Broadway musicals.\nSound.\nSound in early Bollywood films was usually not recorded on location (sync sound). It was usually created (or re-created) in the studio, with the actors speaking their lines in the studio and sound effects added later; this created synchronisation problems. Commercial Indian films are known for their lack of ambient sound, and the Arriflex 3 camera necessitated dubbing. \"Lagaan\" (2001) was filmed with sync sound, and several Bollywood films have recorded on-location sound since then.\nFemale makeup artists.\nIn 1955, the Bollywood Cine Costume Make-Up Artist &amp; Hair Dressers' Association (CCMAA) ruled that female makeup artists were barred from membership. The Supreme Court of India ruled in 2014 that the ban violated Indian constitutional guarantees under Article 14 (right to equality), 19(1)(g) (freedom to work) and Article 21 (right to liberty). According to the court, the ban had no \"rationale nexus\" to the cause sought to be achieved and was \"unacceptable, impermissible and inconsistent\" with the constitutional rights guaranteed to India's citizens. The court also found illegal the rule which mandated that for any artist to work in the industry, they must have lived for five years in the state where they intend to work. In 2015, it was announced that Charu Khurana was the first woman registered by the Cine Costume Make-Up Artist &amp; Hair Dressers' Association.\nSong and dance.\nBollywood film music is called \"filmi\" (from the Hindi \"of films\"). Bollywood songs were introduced with Ardeshir Irani's \"Alam Ara\" (1931) song, \"De De Khuda Ke Naam pay pyaare\". Bollywood songs are generally pre-recorded by professional playback singers, with the actors then lip syncing the words to the song on-screen (often while dancing). Although most actors are good dancers, few are also singers; a notable exception was Kishore Kumar, who starred in several major films during the 1950s while having a rewarding career as a playback singer. K. L. Saigal, Suraiyya, and Noor Jehan were known as singers and actors, and some actors in the last thirty years have sung one or more songs themselves.\nSongs can make and break a film, determining whether it will be a flop or a hit: \"Few films without successful musical tracks, and even fewer without any songs and dances, succeed\". Globalization has changed Bollywood music, with lyrics an increasing mix of Hindi and English. Global trends such as salsa, pop and hip hop have influenced the music heard in Bollywood films.\nPlayback singers are featured in the opening credits, and have fans who will see an otherwise-lackluster film to hear their favourites. Notable Bollywood singers are Lata Mangeshkar, Asha Bhosle, Geeta Dutt, Shamshad Begum, Kavita Krishnamurthy, Sadhana Sargam, Alka Yagnik and Shreya Goshal (female), and K. L. Saigal, Talat Mahmood, Mukesh, Mohammed Rafi, Manna Dey, Hemant Kumar, Kishore Kumar, Kumar Sanu, Udit Narayan and Sonu Nigam (male). Kishore Kumar and Mohammed Rafi have been considered the finest singers of Bollywood songs, followed by Lata Mangeshkar (who has recorded thousands of songs for Indian films in her six-decade career). Composers of film music, known as music directors, are also well-known. Remixing of film songs with modern rhythms is common, and producers may release remixed versions of some of their films' songs with the films' soundtrack albums.\nDancing in Bollywood films, especially older films, is modeled on Indian dance: classical dance, dances of north-Indian courtesans (tawaif) or folk dances. In modern films, Indian dance blends with Western dance styles as seen on MTV or in Broadway musicals; Western pop and classical-dance numbers are commonly seen side-by-side in the same film. The hero (or heroine) often performs with a troupe of supporting dancers. Many song-and-dance routines in Indian films contain unrealistically-quick shifts of location or changes of costume between verses of a song. If the hero and heroine dance and sing a duet, it is often staged in natural surroundings or architecturally-grand settings.\nSongs typically comment on the action taking place in the film. A song may be worked into the plot, so a character has a reason to sing. It may externalise a character's thoughts, or presage an event in the film (such as two characters falling in love). The songs are often referred to as a \"dream sequence\", with things happening which would not normally happen in the real world. Song and dance scenes were often filmed in Kashmir but, due to political unrest in Kashmir since the end of the 1980s, they have been shot in western Europe (particularly Switzerland and Austria).\nContemporary Bollywood dancers include Madhuri Dixit, Hrithik Roshan, Aishwarya Rai Bachchan, Sridevi, Meenakshi Seshadri, Malaika Arora Khan, Shahid Kapoor, Katrina Kaif and Tiger Shroff. Older dancers include Helen (known for her cabaret numbers), Madhubala, Vyjanthimala, Padmini, Hema Malini, Mumtaz, Cuckoo Moray, Parveen Babi , Waheeda Rahman, Meena Kumari, and Shammi Kapoor.\nBollywood producers have been releasing a film's soundtrack (as tapes or CDs) before the film's release, hoping that the music will attract audiences; a soundtrack is often more popular than its film. Some producers also release music videos, usually (but not always) with a song from the film.\nFinances.\nBollywood films are multi-million dollar productions, with the most expensive productions costing up to 1 billion (about US$20\u00a0million). The science-fiction film \"Ra.One\" was made on a budget of 1.35 billion (about $27 million), making it the most expensive Bollywood film of all time. Sets, costumes, special effects and cinematography were less than world-class, with some notable exceptions, until the mid-to-late 1990s. As Western films and television are more widely distributed in India, there is increased pressure for Bollywood films to reach the same production levels (particularly in action and special effects). Recent Bollywood films, like \"Krrish\" (2006), have employed international technicians such as Hong Kong-based action choreographer Tony Ching. The increasing accessibility of professional action and special effects, coupled with rising film budgets, have seen an increase in action and science-fiction films.\nSince overseas scenes are attractive at the box office, Mumbai film crews are filming in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, the United States, Europe and elsewhere. Indian producers have also obtained funding for big-budget films shot in India, such as \"Lagaan\" and \"Devdas\".\nFunding for Bollywood films often comes from private distributors and a few large studios. Although Indian banks and financial institutions had been forbidden from lending to film studios, the ban has been lifted. Finances are not regulated; some funding comes from illegitimate sources such as the Mumbai underworld, which is known to influence several prominent film personalities. Mumbai organised-crime hitmen shot Rakesh Roshan, a film director and father of star Hrithik Roshan, in January 2000. In 2001, the Central Bureau of Investigation seized all prints of \"Chori Chori Chupke Chupke\" after the film was found to be funded by members of the Mumbai underworld.\nAnother problem facing Bollywood is widespread copyright infringement of its films. Often, bootleg DVD copies of movies are available before they are released in cinemas. Manufacturing of bootleg DVD, VCD, and VHS copies of the latest movie titles is an established small-scale industry in parts of south and southeast Asia. The Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) estimates that the Bollywood industry loses $100 million annually from unlicensed home videos and DVDs. In addition to the homegrown market, demand for these copies is large amongst portions of the Indian diaspora. Bootleg copies are the only way people in Pakistan can watch Bollywood movies, since the Pakistani government has banned their sale, distribution and telecast. Films are frequently broadcast without compensation by small cable-TV companies in India and other parts of South Asia. Small convenience stores, run by members of the Indian diaspora in the US and the UK, regularly stock tapes and DVDs of dubious provenance; consumer copying adds to the problem. The availability of illegal copies of movies on the Internet also contributes to industry losses.\nSatellite TV, television and imported foreign films are making inroads into the domestic Indian entertainment market. In the past, most Bollywood films could make money; now, fewer do. Most Bollywood producers make money, however, recouping their investments from many sources of revenue (including the sale of ancillary rights). There are increasing returns from theatres in Western countries like the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States, where Bollywood is slowly being noticed. As more Indians migrate to these countries, they form a growing market for upscale Indian films. In 2002, Bollywood sold 3.6 billion tickets and had a total revenue (including theatre tickets, DVDs and television) of $1.3 billion; Hollywood films sold 2.6 billion tickets, and had a total revenue of $51 billion.\nAdvertising.\nA number of Indian artists hand-painted movie billboards and posters. M. F. Husain painted film posters early in his career; human labour was found to be cheaper than printing and distributing publicity material. Most of the large, ubiquitous billboards in India's major cities are now created with computer-printed vinyl. Old hand-painted posters, once considered ephemera, are collectible folk art.\nReleasing film music, or music videos, before a film's release may be considered a form of advertising. A popular tune is believed to help attract audiences. Bollywood publicists use the Internet as a venue for advertising. Most bigger-budget films have a websites on which audiences can view trailers, stills and information on the story, cast, and crew. Bollywood is also used to advertise other products. Product placement, used in Hollywood, is also common in Bollywood.\nInternational filming.\nBollywood's increasing use of international settings such as Switzerland, London, Paris, New York, Mexico, Brazil and Singapore does not necessarily represent the people and cultures of those locales. Contrary to these spaces and geographies being filmed as they are, they are actually Indianised by adding Bollywood actors and Hindi speaking extras to them. While immersing in Bollywood films, viewers get to see their local experiences duplicated in different locations around the world.\nAccording to Shakuntala Rao, \"Media representation can depict India's shifting relation with the world economy, but must retain its 'Indianness' in moments of dynamic hybridity\"; \"Indianness\" (cultural identity) poses a problem with Bollywood's popularity among varied diaspora audiences, but gives its domestic audience a sense of uniqueness from other immigrant groups.\nAwards.\nThe Filmfare Awards are some of the most prominent awards given to Hindi films in India. The Indian screen magazine \"Filmfare\" began the awards in 1954 (recognising the best films of 1953), and they were originally known as the Clare Awards after the magazine's editor. Modeled on the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences' poll-based merit format, individuals may vote in separate categories. A dual voting system was developed in 1956.\nThe National Film Awards were also introduced in 1954. The Indian government has sponsored the awards, given by its Directorate of Film Festivals (DFF), since 1973. The DFF screens Bollywood films, films from the other regional movie industries, and independent/art films. The awards are made at an annual ceremony presided over by the president of India. Unlike the Filmfare Awards, which are chosen by the public and a committee of experts, the National Film Awards are decided by a government panel.\nOther awards ceremonies for Hindi films in India are the Screen Awards (begun in 1995) and the Stardust Awards, which began in 2003. The International Indian Film Academy Awards (begun in 2000) and the Zee Cine Awards, begun in 1998, are held abroad in a different country each year.\nGlobal markets.\nIn addition to their popularity among the Indian diaspora from Nigeria and Senegal to Egypt and Russia, generations of non-Indians have grown up with Bollywood. Indian cinema's early contacts with other regions made inroads into the Soviet Union, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, and China.\nBollywood entered the consciousness of Western audiences and producers during the late 20th century, and Western actors now seek roles in Bollywood films.\nAsia-Pacific.\nSouth Asia.\nBollywood films are also popular in Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Nepal, where Hindustani is widely understood. Many Pakistanis understand Hindi, due to its linguistic similarity to Urdu. Although Pakistan banned the import of Bollywood films in 1965, trade in unlicensed DVDs and illegal cable broadcasts ensured their continued popularity. Exceptions to the ban were made for a few films, such as the colorized re-release of \"Mughal-e-Azam\" and \"Taj Mahal\" in 2006. Early in 2008, the Pakistani government permitted the import of 16 films. More easing followed in 2009 and 2010. Although it is opposed by nationalists and representatives of Pakistan's small film industry, it is embraced by cinema owners who are making a profit after years of low receipts. The most popular actors in Pakistan are the three Khans of Bollywood: Salman, Shah Rukh, and Aamir. The most popular actress is Madhuri Dixit; at India-Pakistan cricket matches during the 1990s, Pakistani fans chanted \"Madhuri dedo, Kashmir lelo!\" (\"Give Madhuri, take Kashmir!\") Bollywood films in Nepal earn more than Nepali films, and Salman Khan, Akshay Kumar and Shah Rukh Khan are popular in the country.\nThe films are also popular in Afghanistan due to its proximity to the Indian subcontinent and their cultural similarities, particularly in music. Popular actors include Shah Rukh Khan, Ajay Devgan, Sunny Deol, Aishwarya Rai, Preity Zinta, and Madhuri Dixit. A number of Bollywood films were filmed in Afghanistan and some dealt with the country, including \"Dharmatma\", \"Kabul Express\", \"Khuda Gawah\" and \"Escape From Taliban\".\nSoutheast Asia.\nBollywood films are popular in Southeast Asia, particularly in maritime Southeast Asia. The three Khans are very popular in the Malay world, including Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore. The films are also fairly popular in Thailand.\nIndia has cultural ties with Indonesia, and Bollywood films were introduced to the country at the end of World War II in 1945. The \"angry young man\" films of Amitabh Bachchan and Salim\u2013Javed were popular during the 1970s and 1980s before Bollywood's popularity began gradually declining in the 1980s and 1990s. It experienced an Indonesian revival with the release of Shah Rukh Khan's \"Kuch Kuch Hota Hai\" (1998) in 2001, which was a bigger box-office success in the country than \"Titanic\" (1997). Bollywood has had a strong presence in Indonesia since then, particularly Shah Rukh Khan films such as \"Mohabbatein\" (2000), \"Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham...\" (2001), \"Kal Ho Naa Ho\", \"Chalte Chalte\" and \"Koi...\u00a0Mil Gaya\" (all 2003), and \"Veer-Zaara\" (2004).\nEast Asia.\nSome Bollywood films have been widely appreciated in China, Japan, and South Korea. Several Hindi films have been commercially successful in Japan, including Mehboob Khan's \"Aan\" (1952, starring Dilip Kumar) and Aziz Mirza's \"Raju Ban Gaya Gentleman\" (1992, starring Shah Rukh Khan). The latter sparked a two-year boom in Indian films after its 1997 release, with \"Dil Se..\" (1998) a beneficiary of the boom. The highest-grossing Hindi film in Japan is \"3 Idiots\" (2009), starring Aamir Khan, which received a Japanese Academy Award nomination. The film was also a critical and commercial success in South Korea.\n\"Dr. Kotnis Ki Amar Kahani\", \"Awaara\", and \"Do Bigha Zamin\" were successful in China during the 1940s and 1950s, and remain popular with their original audience. Few Indian films were commercially successful in the country during the 1970s and 1980s, among them Tahir Hussain's \"Caravan\", \"Noorie\" and \"Disco Dancer\". Indian film stars popular in China included Raj Kapoor, Nargis, and Mithun Chakraborty. Hindi films declined significantly in popularity in China during the 1980s. Films by Aamir Khan have recently been successful, and \"Lagaan\" was the first Indian film with a nationwide Chinese release in 2011. Chinese filmmaker He Ping was impressed by \"Lagaan\" (particularly its soundtrack), and hired its composer A. R. Rahman to score his \"Warriors of Heaven and Earth\" (2003).\nWhen \"3 Idiots\" was released in China, China was the world's 15th-largest film market (partly due to its widespread pirate DVD distribution at the time). The pirate market introduced the film to Chinese audiences, however, and it became a cult hit. According to the Douban film-review site, \"3 Idiots\" is China's 12th-most-popular film of all time; only one domestic Chinese film (\"Farewell My Concubine\") ranks higher, and Aamir Khan acquired a large Chinese fan base as a result. After \"3 Idiots\", several of Khan's other films (including 2007's \"Taare Zameen Par\" and 2008's \"Ghajini\") also developed cult followings. China became the world's second-largest film market (after the United States) by 2013, paving the way for Khan's box-office success with \"Dhoom 3\" (2013), \"PK\" (2014), and \"Dangal\" (2016). The latter is the 16th-highest-grossing film in China, the fifth-highest-grossing non-English language film worldwide, and the highest-grossing non-English foreign film in any market. Several Khan films, including \"Taare Zameen Par\", \"3 Idiots\", and \"Dangal\", are highly rated on Douban. His next film, \"Secret Superstar\" (2017, starring Zaira Wasim), broke \"Dangal\"s record for the highest-grossing opening weekend by an Indian film and cemented Khan's status as \"a king of the Chinese box office\"; \"Secret Superstar\" was China's highest-grossing foreign film of 2018 to date. Khan has become a household name in China, with his success described as a form of Indian soft power improving China\u2013India relations despite political tensions. With Bollywood competing with Hollywood in the Chinese market, the success of Khan's films has driven up the price for Chinese distributors of Indian film imports. Salman Khan's \"Bajrangi Bhaijaan\" and Irrfan Khan's \"Hindi Medium\" were also Chinese hits in early 2018.\nOceania.\nAlthough Bollywood is less successful on some Pacific islands such as New Guinea, it ranks second to Hollywood in Fiji (with its large Indian minority), Australia and New Zealand. Australia also has a large South Asian diaspora, and Bollywood is popular amongst non-Asians in the country as well. Since 1997, the country has been a backdrop for an increasing number of Bollywood films. Indian filmmakers, attracted to Australia's diverse locations and landscapes, initially used the country as a setting for song-and-dance scenes; however, Australian locations now figure in Bollywood film plots. Hindi films shot in Australia usually incorporate Australian culture. Yash Raj Films' \"Salaam Namaste\" (2005), the first Indian film shot entirely in Australia, was the most successful Bollywood film of 2005 in that country. It was followed by the box-office successes \"Heyy Babyy\", (2007) \"Chak De! India\" (2007), and \"Singh Is Kinng\" (2008). Prime Minister John Howard said during a visit to India after the release of \"Salaam Namaste\" that he wanted to encourage Indian filmmaking in Australia to increase tourism, and he appointed Steve Waugh as tourism ambassador to India. Australian actress Tania Zaetta, who appeared in \"Salaam Namaste\" and several other Bollywood films, was eager to expand her career in Bollywood.\nEastern Europe and Central Asia.\nBollywood films are popular in the former Soviet Union (Russia, Eastern Europe, and Central Asia), and have been dubbed into Russian. Indian films were more popular in the Soviet Union than Hollywood films and, sometimes, domestic Soviet films. The first Indian film released in the Soviet Union was \"Dharti Ke Lal\" (1946), directed by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas and based on the Bengal famine of 1943, in 1949. Three hundred Indian films were released in the Soviet Union after that; most were Bollywood films with higher average audience figures than domestic Soviet productions. Fifty Indian films had over 20 million viewers, compared to 41 Hollywood films. Some, such as \"Awaara\" (1951) and \"Disco Dancer\" (1982), had more than 60 million viewers and established actors Raj Kapoor, Nargis, Rishi Kapoor and Mithun Chakraborty in the country.\nAccording to diplomat Ashok Sharma, who served in the Commonwealth of Independent States,\nAfter the collapse of the Soviet film-distribution system, Hollywood filled the void in the Russian film market and Bollywood's market share shrank. A 2007 Russia Today report noted a renewed interest in Bollywood by young Russians.\nIn Poland, Shah Rukh Khan has a large following. He was introduced to Polish audiences with the 2005 release of \"Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham...\" (2001) and his other films, including \"Dil Se..\" (1998), \"Main Hoon Na\" (2004) and \"Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna\" (2006), became hits in the country. Bollywood films are often covered in \"Gazeta Wyborcza\", formerly Poland's largest newspaper.\nThe upcoming movie Squad, is the first Indian film to be shot in Belarus. A majority of the film was shot at Belarusfilm studios, in Minsk.\nMiddle East and North Africa.\nHindi films have become popular in Arab countries,\nand imported Indian films are usually subtitled in Arabic when they are released. Bollywood has progressed in Israel since the early 2000s, with channels dedicated to Indian films on cable television; MBC Bollywood and Zee Aflam show Hindi movies and serials.\nIn Egypt, Bollywood films were popular during the 1970s and 1980s. In 1987, however, they were restricted to a handful of films by the Egyptian government. Amitabh Bachchan has remained popular in the country and Indian tourists visiting Egypt are asked, \"Do you know Amitabh Bachchan?\"\nBollywood movies are regularly screened in Dubai cinemas, and Bollywood is becoming popular in Turkey; \"Barfi!\" was the first Hindi film to have a wide theatrical release in that country. Bollywood also has viewers in Central Asia (particularly Uzbekistan and Tajikistan).\nSouth America.\nBollywood films are not influential in most of South America, although its culture and dance is recognised. Due to significant South Asian diaspora communities in Suriname and Guyana, however, Hindi-language movies are popular. In 2006, \"Dhoom 2\" became the first Bollywood film to be shot in Rio de Janeiro. In January 2012, it was announced that UTV Motion Pictures would begin releasing films in Peru with \"Guzaarish\".\nAfrica.\nHindi films were originally distributed to some parts of Africa by Lebanese businessmen, and \"Mother India\" (1957) continued to be screened in Nigeria decades after its release. Indian movies have influenced Hausa clothing, songs have been covered by Hausa singers, and stories have influenced Nigerian novelists. Stickers of Indian films and stars decorate taxis and buses in Nigeria's Northern Region, and posters of Indian films hang on the walls of tailoring shops and mechanics' garages. Unlike Europe and North America, where Indian films cater to the expatriate marke, Bollywood films became popular in West Africa despite the lack of a significant Indian audience. One possible explanation is cultural similarity: the wearing of turbans, animals in markets; porters carrying large bundles, and traditional wedding celebrations. Within Muslim culture, Indian movies were said to show \"respect\" toward women; Hollywood movies were seen as having \"no shame\". In Indian movies, women are modestly dressed; men and women rarely kiss and there is no nudity, so the films are said to \"have culture\" which Hollywood lacks. The latter \"don't base themselves on the problems of the people\"; Indian films are based on socialist values and the reality of developing countries emerging from years of colonialism. Indian movies permitted a new youth culture without \"becoming Western.\" The first Indian film shot in Mauritius was \"Souten\", starring Rajesh Khanna, in 1983.\nIn South Africa, film imports from India were watched by black and Indian audiences. Several Bollywood figures have travelled to Africa for films and off-camera projects. \"Padmashree Laloo Prasad Yadav\" (2005) was filmed in South Africa. \"Dil Jo Bhi Kahey...\" (2005) was also filmed almost entirely in Mauritius, which has a large ethnic-Indian population.\nBollywood, however, seems to be diminishing in popularity in Africa. New Bollywood films are more sexually explicit and violent. Nigerian viewers observed that older films (from the 1950s and 1960s) had more culture and were less Westernised. The old days of India avidly \"advocating decolonization ... and India's policy was wholly influenced by his missionary zeal to end racial domination and discrimination in the African territories\" were replaced. The emergence of Nollywood (West Africa's film industry) has also contributed to the declining popularity of Bollywood films, as sexualised Indian films became more like American films.\nKishore Kumar and Amitabh Bachchan have been popular in Egypt and Somalia. In Ethiopia, Bollywood movies are shown with Hollywood productions in town square theatres such as the Cinema Ethiopia in Addis Ababa. Less-commercial Bollywood films are also screened elsewhere in North Africa.\nWestern Europe and North America.\nThe first Indian film to be released in the Western world and receive mainstream attention was \"Aan\" (1952), directed by Mehboob Khan and starring Dilip Kumar and Nimmi. It was subtitled in 17 languages and released in 28 countries, including the United Kingdom, the United States, and France. \"Aan\" received significant praise from British critics, and \"The Times\" compared it favourably to Hollywood productions. Mehboob Khan's later Academy Award-nominated \"Mother India\" (1957) was a success in overseas markets, including Europe, Russia, the Eastern Bloc, French territories, and Latin America.\nMany Bollywood films have been commercially successful in the United Kingdom. The most successful Indian actor at the British box office has been Shah Rukh Khan, whose popularity in British Asian communities played a key role in introducing Bollywood to the UK with films such as \"Darr\" (1993), \"Dilwale Dulhaniya Le Jayenge\" (1995), and \"Kuch Kuch Hota Hai\" (1998). \"Dil Se\" (1998) was the first Indian film to enter the UK top ten. A number of Indian films, such as \"Dilwale Dulhaniya Le Jayenge\" and \"Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham\" (2001), have been set in London.\nBollywood is also appreciated in France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Scandinavia. Bollywood films are dubbed in German and shown regularly on the German television channel RTL II. Germany is the second-largest European market for Indian films, after the United Kingdom. The most recognised Indian actor in Germany is Shah Rukh Khan, who has had box-office success in the country with films such as \"Don 2\" (2011) and \"Om Shanti Om\" (2007). He has a large German fan base, particularly in Berlin (where the tabloid \"Die Tageszeitung\" compared his popularity to that of the pope).\nBollywood has experienced revenue growth in Canada and the United States, particularly in the South Asian communities of large cities such as Toronto, Chicago, and New York City. Yash Raj Films, one of India's largest production houses and distributors, reported in September 2005 that Bollywood films in the United States earned about $100 million per year in theatre screenings, video sales and the sale of movie soundtracks; Indian films earn more money in the United States than films from any other non-English speaking country. Since the mid-1990s, a number of Indian films have been largely (or entirely) shot in New York, Los Angeles, Vancouver or Toronto. Films such as \"The Guru\" (2002) and \"\" (2007) attempted to popularise Bollywood for Hollywood.\nPlagiarism.\nPressured by rushed production schedules and small budgets, some Bollywood writers and musicians have been known to plagiarise. Ideas, plot lines, tunes or riffs have been copied from other Indian film industries or foreign films (including Hollywood and other Asian films) without acknowledging the source.\nBefore the 1990s, plagiarism occurred with impunity. Copyright enforcement was lax in India, and few actors or directors saw an official contract. The Hindi film industry was not widely known to non-Indian audiences (except in the Soviet states), who would be unaware that their material had been copied. Audiences may not have been aware of plagiarism, since many in India were unfamiliar with foreign films and music. Although copyright enforcement in India is still somewhat lenient, Bollywood and other film industries are more aware of each other and Indian audiences are more familiar with foreign films and music. Organisations such as the India EU Film Initiative seek to foster a community between filmmakers and industry professionals in India and the European Union.\nA commonly-reported justification for plagiarism in Bollywood is that cautious producers want to remake popular Hollywood films in an Indian context. Although screenwriters generally produce original scripts, many are rejected due to uncertainty about whether a film will be successful. Poorly-paid screenwriters have also been criticised for a lack of creativity. Some filmmakers see plagiarism in Bollywood as an integral part of globalisation, with which Western (particularly American) culture is embedding itself into Indian culture. Vikram Bhatt, director of \"Raaz\" (a remake of \"What Lies Beneath\") and \"Kasoor\" (a remake of \"Jagged Edge\"), has spoken about the influence of American culture and Bollywood's desire to produce box-office hits based along the same lines: \"Financially, I would be more secure knowing that a particular piece of work has already done well at the box office. Copying is endemic everywhere in India. Our TV shows are adaptations of American programmes. We want their films, their cars, their planes, their Diet Cokes and also their attitude. The American way of life is creeping into our culture.\" According to Mahesh Bhatt, \"If you hide the source, you're a genius. There's no such thing as originality in the creative sphere\".\nAlthough very few cases of film-copyright violations have been taken to court because of a slow legal process, the makers of \"Partner\" (2007) and \"Zinda\" (2005) were targeted by the owners and distributors of the original films: \"Hitch\" and \"Oldboy\". The American studio 20th Century Fox brought Mumbai-based B. R. Films to court over the latter's forthcoming \"Banda Yeh Bindaas Hai\", which Fox alleged was an illegal remake of \"My Cousin Vinny\". B. R. Films eventually settled out of court for about $200,000, paving the way for its film's release. Some studios comply with copyright law; in 2008, Orion Pictures secured the rights to remake Hollywood's \"Wedding Crashers\".\nMusic.\nThe Pakistani Qawwali musician Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan had a big impact on Bollywood music, inspiring numerous Indian musicians working in Bollywood, especially during the 1990s. However, there were many instances of Indian music directors plagiarising Khan's music to produce hit filmi songs. Several popular examples include Viju Shah's hit song \"Tu Cheez Badi Hai Mast Mast\" in \"Mohra\" (1994) being plagiarised from Khan's popular Qawwali song \"Dam Mast Qalandar\", \"Mera Piya Ghar Aya\" used in \"Yaarana\" (1995), and \"Sanoo Ek Pal Chain Na Aaye\" in \"Judaai\" (1997). Despite the significant number of hit Bollywood songs plagiarised from his music, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan was reportedly tolerant towards the plagiarism. One of the Bollywood music directors who frequently plagiarised him, Anu Malik, claimed that he loved Khan's music and was actually showing admiration by using his tunes. However, Khan was reportedly aggrieved when Malik turned his spiritual \"Allah Hoo, Allah Hoo\" into \"I Love You, I Love You\" in \"Auzaar\" (1997). Khan said \"he has taken my devotional song \"Allahu\" and converted it into \"I love you\". He should at least respect my religious songs.\"\nBollywood soundtracks also plagiarised Guinean singer Mory Kant\u00e9, particularly his 1987 album \"Akwaba Beach\". His song, \"Tama\", inspired two Bollywood songs: Bappi Lahiri's \"Tamma Tamma\" in \"Thanedaar\" (1990) and \"Jumma Chumma\" in Laxmikant\u2013Pyarelal's soundtrack for \"Hum\" (1991). The latter also featured \"Ek Doosre Se\", which copied Kant\u00e9's \"Inch Allah\". His song \"Y\u00e9 k\u00e9 y\u00e9 k\u00e9\" was used as background music in the 1990 Bollywood film \"Agneepath\", inspired the Bollywood song \"Tamma Tamma\" in \"Thanedaar\"."}
{"id": "4248", "revid": "41538998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4248", "title": "Bowls", "text": "Bowls, or lawn bowls, is a sport in which the objective is to roll biased balls so that they stop close to a smaller ball called a \"jack\" or \"kitty\". It is played on a bowling green, which may be flat (for \"flat-green bowls\") or convex or uneven (for \"crown green bowls\"). It is normally played outdoors (although there are many indoor venues) and the outdoor surface is either natural grass, artificial turf or cotula (in New Zealand).\nHistory.\nBowls is a variant of the \"boules\" games (Italian \"Boccia\"), which, in their general form, are of ancient or prehistoric origin. Ancient Greek variants are recorded that involved throwing light objects (such as flat stones, coins, or later also stone balls) as far as possible. The aspect of tossing the balls to approach a target as closely as possible is recorded in ancient Rome. This game was spread to Roman Gaul by soldiers or sailors. A Roman sepulchre in Florence shows people playing this game, stooping down to measure the points.\nBowls in England has been traced certainly to the 13th century, and conjecturally to the 12th century. William Fitzstephen (d. about 1190), in his biography of Thomas Becket, gives a graphic sketch of the London of his day and, writing of the summer amusements of young men, says that on holidays they were \"exercised in Leaping, Shooting, Wrestling, Casting of Stones [\"in jactu lapidum\"], and Throwing of Javelins fitted with Loops for the Purpose, which they strive to fling before the Mark; they also use Bucklers, like fighting Men.\" It is commonly supposed that by \"jactus lapidum\", Fitzstephen refers to an early variety of bowls, possibly played using round stone; there is a record of iron bowls being used, though at a much later date, on festive occasions at Nairn.. On the other hand, the \"jactus lapidum\" of which he speaks may have been more akin to shot put. \nIt is clear, at any rate, that a rudimentary form of the game was played in England in the 13th century. A manuscript of that period in the royal library, Windsor (No. 20, E iv.), contains a drawing representing two players aiming at a small cone instead of an earthenware ball or jack. The world's oldest surviving bowling green is the Southampton Old Bowling Green, which was first used in 1299.\nAnother manuscript of the same century has a crude but spirited picture which brings us into close touch with the existing game. Three figures are introduced and a jack. The first player's bowl has come to rest just in front of the jack; the second has delivered his bowl and is following after it with one of those eccentric contortions still not unusual on modern greens, the first player meanwhile making a repressive gesture with his hand, as if to urge the bowl to stop short of his own; the third player is depicted as in the act of delivering his bowl. A 14th-century manuscript, \"Book of Prayers\", in the Francis Douce collection in the Bodleian Library at Oxford, contains a drawing in which two persons are shown, but they bowl to no mark. Strutt (Sports and Pastimes) suggests that the first player's bowl may have been regarded by the second player as a species of jack; but in that case it is not clear what was the first player's target. In these three earliest illustrations of the pastime it is worth noting that each player has one bowl only, and that the attitude in delivering it was as various five or six hundred years ago as it is today. In the third, he stands almost upright; in the first, he kneels; in the second, he stoops, halfway between the upright and the kneeling position.\nThe game eventually came under the ban of king and parliament, both fearing it might jeopardise the practice of archery, then so important in battle. Statutes forbidding it and other sports were enacted in the reigns of Edward III, Richard II and other monarchs. Even when, on the invention of gunpowder and firearms, the bow had fallen into disuse as a weapon of war, the prohibition was continued. The discredit attaching to bowling alleys, first established in London in 1455, probably encouraged subsequent repressive legislation, for many of the alleys were connected with taverns frequented by the dissolute and gamesters. \nErasmus referred to the game as . The name of \"bowls\" is implied in the gerund \"bowlyn\", recorded in the mid-15th century. The term \"bowl\" for \"wooden ball\" is recorded in the early 1400s. The name is explicitly mentioned, as \"bowles\", in a list of unlawful games in a 1495 act by Henry VII (\"Tenys, Closshe, Dise, Cardes, Bowles\"). It occurs again in a similar statute by Henry VIII (1511). By a further act of 1541\u2014which was not repealed until 1845\u2014artificers, labourers, apprentices, servants and the like were forbidden to play bowls at any time except Christmas, and then only in their master's house and presence. It was further enjoined that any one playing bowls outside his own garden or orchard was liable to a penalty of 6s. 8d.(6 shillings and 8 pence), while those possessed of lands of the yearly value of \u00a3100 might obtain licences to play on their own private greens.\nIn 1864, William Wallace Mitchell (1803\u20131884), a Glasgow Cotton Merchant, published his \"Manual of Bowls Playing\" following his work as the secretary formed in 1849 by Scottish bowling clubs which became the basis of the rules of the modern game. Young Mitchell was only 11 years old when he played on Kilmarnock bowling green, the oldest club in Scotland, instituted in 1740.\nThe patenting of the first lawn mower in 1830, in Britain, is strongly believed to have been the catalyst for the worldwide preparation of modern-style greens, sporting ovals, playing fields, pitches, grass courts, etc. This, is turn, led to the codification of modern rules for many sports, including lawn bowls, most football codes, lawn tennis and others.\nNational Bowling Associations were established in the late 1800s. In the then-Victorian Colony (now the state of Victoria, Australia), the (Royal) Victorian Bowling Association was formed in 1880. The Scottish Bowling Association was established in 1892, although there had been a failed attempt in 1848 by 200 Scottish clubs.\nToday, bowls is played in over 40 countries with more than 50 member national authorities. The home of the modern game is still Scotland with the World Bowls Centre in Edinburgh at Caledonia House, 1 Redheughs Rigg, South Gyle, Edinburgh, EH12 9DQ.\nGame.\nLawn bowls is usually played on a large, rectangular, precisely levelled and manicured grass or synthetic surface known as a bowling green which is divided into parallel playing strips called rinks. In the simplest competition, singles, one of the two opponents flips a coin to see who wins the \"mat\" and begins a segment of the competition (in bowling parlance, an \"end\"), by placing the mat and rolling the jack to the other end of the green to serve as a target. Once it has come to rest, the jack is aligned to the centre of the rink and the players take turns to roll their bowls from the mat towards the jack and thereby build up the \"head\".\nA bowl may curve outside the rink boundary on its path, but must come to rest within the rink boundary to remain in play. Bowls falling into the ditch are dead and removed from play, except in the event when one has \"touched\" the jack on its way. \"Touchers\" are marked with chalk and remain alive in play even if they get into the ditch. Similarly if the jack is knocked into the ditch it is still alive unless it is out of bounds to the side resulting in a \"dead\" end which is replayed, though according to international rules the jack is \"respotted\" to the centre of the rink and the end is continued. After each competitor has delivered all of their bowls (four each in singles and pairs, three each in triples, and two bowls each in fours), the distance of the closest bowls to the jack is determined (the jack may have been displaced) and points, called \"shots\", are awarded for each bowl which a competitor has closer than the opponent's nearest to the jack. For instance, if a competitor has bowled two bowls closer to the jack than their opponent's nearest, they are awarded two shots. The exercise is then repeated for the next end, a game of bowls typically being of twenty-one ends.\nLawn bowls is played on grass and variations from green to green are common. Greens come in all shapes and sizes: the most common are fast, slow, big crown, small crown.\nBowls is generally played in a very good spirit, even at the highest professional level, acknowledgment of opponents' successes and near misses being quite normal.\nScoring.\nScoring systems vary from competition to competition. Games can be decided when:\nGames to a specified number of ends may also be drawn. The draw may stand, or the opponents may be required to play an extra end to decide the winner. These provisions are always published beforehand in the event's Conditions of Play.\nIn the Laws of the Sport of Bowls the winner in a singles game is the first player to score 21 shots. In all other disciplines (pairs, triples, fours) the winner is the team who has scored the most shots after 21/25 ends of play. Often local tournaments will play shorter games (often 10 or 12 ends). Some competitions use a \"set\" scoring system, with the first to seven points awarded a set in a best-or-three or best-of-five set match. As well as singles competition, there can be two (pairs), three (triples) and four-player (fours) teams. In these, teams bowl alternately, with each player within a team bowling all their bowls, then handing over to the next player. The team captain or \"skip\" always plays last and is instrumental in directing his team's shots and tactics. The current method of scoring in the professional tour (World Bowls Tour) is sets. Each set consists of nine ends and the player with the most shots at the end of a set wins the set. If the score is tied the set is halved. If a player wins two sets, or gets a win and a tie, that player wins the game. If each player wins a set, or both sets end tied, there is a 3-end tiebreaker to determine a winner.\nBias of bowls.\nBowls are designed to travel a curved path because of a weight bias which was originally produced by inserting weights in one side of the bowl. The word \"bias\" itself is recorded as a technical term of the game in the 1560s.\nThe insertion of weights is no longer permitted by the rules and bias is now produced entirely by the shape of the bowl. A bowler determines the bias direction of the bowl in his hand by a dimple or symbol on one side. Regulations determine the minimum bias allowed, and the range of diameters (11.6 to 13.1\u00a0cm), but within these rules bowlers can and do choose bowls to suit their own preference. They were originally made from lignum vitae, a dense wood giving rise to the term \"woods\" for bowls, but are now more typically made of a hard plastic composite material.\nBowls were once only available coloured black or brown, but they are now available in a variety of colours. They have unique symbol markings engraved on them for identification. Since many bowls look the same, coloured, adhesive stickers or labels are also used to mark the bowls of each team in bowls matches. Some local associations agree on specific colours for stickers for each of the clubs in their area. Provincial or national colours are often assigned in national and international competitions. These stickers are used by officials to distinguish teams.\nBowls have symbols unique to the set of four for identification. The side of the bowl with a larger symbol within a circle indicates the side away from the bias. That side with a smaller symbol within a smaller circle is the bias side toward which the bowl will turn. It is not uncommon for players to deliver a \"wrong bias\" shot from time to time and see their carefully aimed bowl crossing neighbouring rinks rather than heading towards their jack.\nWhen bowling there are several types of delivery. \"Draw\" shots are those where the bowl is rolled to a specific location without causing too much disturbance of bowls already in the head. For a right-handed bowler, \"forehand draw\" or \"finger peg\" is initially aimed to the right of the jack, and curves in to the left. The same bowler can deliver a \"backhand draw\" or \"thumb peg\" by turning the bowl over in his hand and curving it the opposite way, from left to right. In both cases, the bowl is rolled as close to the jack as possible, unless tactics demand otherwise. A \"drive\" or \"fire\" or \"strike\" involves bowling with force with the aim of knocking either the jack or a specific bowl out of play - and with the drive's speed, there is virtually no noticeable (or, at least, much less) curve on the shot. An \"upshot\" or \"yard on\" shot involves delivering the bowl with an extra degree of weight (often referred to as \"controlled\" weight or \"rambler\"), enough to displace the jack or disturb other bowls in the head without killing the end. A \"block\" shot is one that is intentionally placed short to defend from a drive or to stop an oppositions draw shot. The challenge in all these shots is to be able to adjust line and length accordingly, the faster the delivery, the narrower the line or \"green\".\nVariations of play.\nParticularly in team competition there can be a large number of bowls on the green towards the conclusion of the end, and this gives rise to complex tactics. Teams \"holding shot\" with the closest bowl will often make their subsequent shots not with the goal of placing the bowl near the jack, but in positions to make it difficult for opponents to get their bowls into the head, or to places where the jack might be deflected to if the opponent attempts to disturb the head.\nThere are many different ways to set up the game. Crown Green Bowling utilises the entire green. A player can send the jack anywhere on the green in this game and the green itself is more akin to a golf green, with much undulation. It is played with only two woods each. The jack also has a bias and is only slightly smaller than the woods. At the amateur level it is usual for several ends to be played simultaneously on one green. If two moving woods meet, both are taken back and the shots replayed. If a moving wood strikes a stationary wood or jack from another end, it is again taken back and replayed, but the bowl struck is replaced where contact took place. The game is played usually to 21-up in Singles and Doubles format with some competitions playing to 31-up. The Panel (Professional Crown Green Bowls) is played at the Red Lion, Westhoughton daily and is played to 41-up with greenside betting throughout play.\nSingles, triples and fours and Australian pairs are some ways the game can be played. In singles, two people play against each other and the first to reach 21, 25 or 31 shots (as decided by the controlling body) is the winner. In one variation of singles play, each player uses two bowls only and the game is played over 21 ends. A player concedes the game before the 21st end if the score difference is such that it is impossible to draw equal or win within the 21 ends. If the score is equal after 21 ends, an extra end is played to decide the winner. An additional scoring method is set play. This comprises two sets over nine ends. Should a player win a set each, they then play a further 3 ends that will decide the winner.\nPairs allows both people on a team to play Skip and Lead. The lead throws two bowls, the skip delivers two, then the lead delivers his remaining two, the skip then delivers his remaining two bowls. Each end, the leads and skips switch positions. This is played over 21 ends or sets play. Triples is with three players while Fours is with four players in each team and is played over 21 ends.\nAnother pairs variation is 242 pairs (also known as Australian Pairs). In the first end of the game the A players lead off with 2 bowls each, then the B players play 4 bowls each, before the A players complete the end with their final 2 bowls. The A players act as lead and skip in the same end. In the second end the roles are reversed with the A players being in the middle. This alternating pattern continues through the game which is typically over 15 ends.\nShort Mat Bowls is an all-year sport unaffected by weather conditions and it does not require a permanent location as the rink mats can be rolled up and stowed away. This makes it particularly appropriate for small communities as it can be played in village halls, schools, sports and social clubs.\nBowls are played by the blind and paraplegic. Blind bowlers are extremely skilful. A string is run out down the centre of the lane &amp; wherever the jack lands it is moved across to the string and the length is called out by a sighted marker, when the woods are sent the distance from the jack is called out, in yards, feet and inches-the position in relation to the jack is given using the clock, 12.00 is behind the jack.\nTra bowls.\nIn the province of West Flanders (and surrounding regions), tra bowls is the most popular variation of bowls. As opposed to playing it on a flat or uneven terrain, the terrain is made smooth but hollow (tra just means \"hollow road\" in Flemish). The hollow road causes the path to be curving even more.\nThe balls are biased in the same way as the lawn bowls balls but with a diameter of about 20\u00a0cm, a thickness of 12\u00a0cm and a weight of about 2\u00a0kg, they are a bit bigger than usual bowls. The target is an unmovable feather or metal plate on the ground, instead of a small ball. The length of the tra is about 18 m.\nThe scoring is also different, as a point is awarded for every shot that brings the ball closer to the target than any opponent's ball. This causes pure blocking strategies to be less effective.\nIn 1972, the West-Flemish tra bowls federation was founded to uniform the local differing rules and to organise a match calendar. Meanwhile, they also organise championships and tournaments.\nCompetitions.\nThere are various bowls competitions held around the world (see - World Bowls Events).\nBowls is one of the \"core sports\" that must be included at each edition of the Commonwealth Games. With the exception of the 1966 Games, the sport has been included in all Games since their inception in 1930."}
{"id": "4249", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4249", "title": "Barcelonnette", "text": "Barcelonnette (; , also ; obsolete ) is a commune of France and a subprefecture in the department of Alpes-de-Haute-Provence, in the Provence-Alpes-C\u00f4te d'Azur region. It is located in the southern French Alps, at the crossroads between Provence, Piedmont and the Dauphin\u00e9, and is the largest town in the Ubaye Valley. The town's inhabitants are known as \"Barcelonnettes\".\nToponymy.\nBarcelonnette was founded and named in 1231, by Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Provence. While the town's name is generally seen as a diminutive form of Barcelona in Catalonia, Albert Dauzat and Charles Rostaing point out an earlier attestation of the name \"Barcilona\" in Barcelonnette in around 1200, and suggest that it is derived instead from two earlier stems signifying a mountain, *\"bar\" and *\"cin\" (the latter of which is also seen in the name of Mont Cenis).\nIn the Vivaro-Alpine dialect of Occitan, the town is known as \"Barcilona de Proven\u00e7a\" or more rarely \"Barciloneta\" according to the classical norm; under the Mistralian norm it is called \"Barcilouna de Prouven\u00e7a\" or \"Barcilouneto\". In \"Val\u00e9ian\" (the dialect of Occitan spoken in the Ubaye Valley), it is called \"Barcilouna de Prouven\u00e7a\" or \"Barciloun\u00e9ta\". \"Barcino Nova\" is the town's Latin name meaning \"new Barcelona\"; \"Barcino\" was the Roman name for Barcelona in Catalonia from its foundation by Emperor Augustus in 10\u00a0BC, and it was only changed to \"Barcelona\" in the Middle Ages.\nThe inhabitants of the town are called \"Barcelonnettes\", or \"Vilandroises\" in Val\u00e9ian.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe Barcelonnette region was populated by Ligures from the 1st millennium BC onwards, and the arrival of the Celts several centuries later led to the formation of a mixed Celto-Ligurian people, the Vesubians. Polybius described the Vesubians as belligerent but nonetheless civilised and mercantile, and Julius Caesar praised their bravery. The work \"History of the Gauls\" also places the Vesubians in the Ubaye Valley.\nFollowing the Roman conquest of Provence, Barcelonnette was included in a small province with modern Embrun as its capital and governed by Albanus Bassalus. This was integrated soon afterwards into Gallia Narbonensis. In 36 AD, Emperor Nero transferred Barcelonnette to the province of the Cottian Alps. The town was known as \"Rigomagensium\" under the Roman Empire and was the capital of a civitas (a provincial subdivision), though no Roman money has yet been found in the canton of Barcelonnette.\nMedieval town.\nThe town of Barcelonnette was founded in 1231 by Ramon Berenguer IV, Count of Provence. According to Charles Rostaing, this act of formal \"foundation\", according certain privileges to the town, was a means of regenerating the destroyed town of \"Barcilona\". The town was afforded a \"consulat\" (giving it the power to administer and defend itself) in 1240.\nControl of the area in the Middle Ages swung between the Counts of Savoy and of Provence. In 1388, after Count Louis II of Provence had left to conquer Naples, the Count of Savoy Amadeus VIII took control of Barcelonnette; however, it returned to Proven\u00e7al control in 1390, with the d'Audiffret family as its lords. On the death of Louis II in 1417 it reverted to Savoy, and, although Count Ren\u00e9 again retook the area for Provence in 1471, it had returned to Savoyard dominance by the start of the 16th century, by which point the County of Provence had become united with the Kingdom of France due to the death of Count Charles V in 1481.\nAncien R\u00e9gime.\nDuring Charles V's invasion of Provence in 1536, Francis I of France sent the Count of F\u00fcrstenberg's 6000 \"Landsknechte\" to ravage the area in a scorched earth policy. Barcelonnette and the Ubaye Valley remained under French sovereignty until the second Treaty of Cateau-Cambr\u00e9sis on 3 April 1559.\nIn 1588 the troops of Fran\u00e7ois, Duke of Lesdigui\u00e8res entered the town and set fire to the church and convent during their campaign against the Duke of Savoy. In 1600, after the Treaty of Vervins, conflict returned between Henry IV of France and Savoy, and Lesdigui\u00e8res retook Barcelonnette until the conclusion of the Treaty of Lyon on 17 January the following year. In 1628, during the War of the Mantuan Succession, Barcelonnette and the other towns of the Ubaye Valley were pillaged and burned by Jacques du Bl\u00e9 d'Uxelles and his troops, as they passed through towards Italy to the Duke of Mantua's aid. The town was retaken by the Duke of Savoy in 1630; and in 1691 it was captured by the troops of the Marquis de Vins during the War of the League of Augsburg.\nBetween 1614 and 1713, Barcelonnette was the seat of one of the four prefectures under the jurisdiction of the Senate of Nice. At this time, the community of Barcelonnette successfully purchased the \"seigneurie\" of the town as it was put to auction by the Duke of Savoy; it thereby gained its own justicial powers. In 1646, a college was founded in Barcelonnette.\nA \"significant\" part of the town's inhabitants had, by the 16th century, converted to Protestantism, and were repressed during the French Wars of Religion.\nThe \"viguerie\" of Barcelonnette (also comprising Saint-Martin and Entraunes) was reattached to France in 1713 as part of a territorial exchange with the Duchy of Savoy during the Treaties of Utrecht. The town remained the site of a \"viguerie\" until the French Revolution. A decree of the council of state on 25 December 1714 reunited Barcelonnete with the general government of Provence.\nRevolution.\nBarcelonnette was one of few settlements in Haute-Provence to acquire a Masonic Lodge before the Revolution, in fact having two:\nIn March 1789, riots took place as a result of a crisis in wheat production. In July, the Great Fear of aristocratic reprisal against the ongoing French Revolution struck France, arriving in the Barcelonnette area on 31 July 1789 (when the news of the storming of the Bastille first reached the town) before spreading towards Digne.\nThis agitation continued in the Ubaye Valley; a new revolt broke out on 14 June, and famine was declared in April 1792. The patriotic society of the commune was one of the first 21 created in Alpes-de-Haute-Provence, in spring 1792, by the envoys of the departmental administration. Around a third of the male population attended at the club. Another episode of political violence occurred in August 1792.\nBarcelonnette was the seat of the District of Barcelonnette from 1790 to 1800.\nModern history.\nIn December 1851, the town was home to a movement of republican resistance towards Napoleon III's coup. Though only a minority of the population, the movement rebelled on Sunday 7 December, the day after the news of the coup arrived. Town officials and gendarmes were disarmed and placed in the maison d'arr\u00eat. A committee of public health was created on 8 December; on 9 December the inhabitants of Jausiers and its surroundings formed a colony under the direction of general councillor Br\u00e8s, and Mayor Signoret of Saint-Paul-sur-Ubaye. This was stopped, however, on 10 December before it could reach Barcelonnette, as the priest of the subprefecture had intervened. On 11 December, several officials escaped and found refuge in L'Argenti\u00e8re in Piedmont. The arrival of troops on 16 December put a final end to the republican resistance without bloodshed, and 57 insurgents were tried; 38 were condemned to deportation (though several were pardoned in April).\nBetween 1850 and 1950, Barcelonnette was the source of a wave of emigration to Mexico. Among these emigrants was Jean Baptiste Ebrard, founder of the Liverpool department store chain in Mexico; Marcelo Ebrard, the head of government of Mexico City from 2006 to 2012, is also descended from them. On the edges of Barcelonnette and Jausiers there are several houses and villas of colonial style (known as \"maisons mexicaines\"), constructed by emigrants to Mexico who returned to France between 1870 and 1930. A plaque in the town commemorates the deaths of ten Mexican citizens who returned to Barcelonnette to fight in the First World War.\nDuring the Second World War, 26 Jews were arrested in Barcelonnette before being deported. The 89th \"compagnie de travailleurs \u00e9trangers\" (Company of Foreign Workers), consisting of foreigners judged as undesirable by the Third Republic and the Vichy regime and committed to forced labour, was established in Barcelonnette.\nThe 11th Battalion of \"Chasseurs alpins\" was garrisoned at Barcelonnette between 1948 and 1990.\nGeography.\nBarcelonnette is situated in the wide and fertile Ubaye Valley, of which it is the largest town. It lies at an elevation of 1132\u00a0m (3717\u00a0ft) on the right bank of the Ubaye River, and is surrounded by mountains which reach peaks of over 3000\u00a0m; the tallest of these is the Needle of Chambeyron at 3412\u00a0m. Barcelonnette is situated 210\u00a0km from Turin, 91\u00a0km from Nice and 68\u00a0km from Gap.\nBiodiversity.\nAs a result of its relief and geographic situation, the Ubaye Valley has an \"abundance of plant and animal species\". The fauna is largely constituted of golden eagles, marmots, ibex and vultures, and the flora includes a large proportion of larches, g\u00e9n\u00e9pis and white asphodels.\nClimate.\nThe Ubaye Valley has an alpine climate and winters are harsh as a result of the altitude, but there are only light winds as a result of the relief. There are on average almost 300 days of sun and 700\u00a0mm of rain per year.\nHazards.\nNone of the 200 communes of the department is entirely free of seismic risk; the canton of Barcelonnette is placed in zone 1b (low risk) by the determinist classification of 1991 based on seismic history, and zone 4 (average risk) according to the probabilistic EC8 classification of 2011. The commune is also vulnerable to avalanches, forest fires, floods, and landslides. Barcelonnette is also exposed to the possibility of a technological hazard in that road transport of dangerous materials is allowed to pass through on the RD900.\nThe town has been subject to several orders of natural disaster: floods and mudslides in 1994 and 2008, and landslides in 1996 and 1999. The strongest recorded earthquakes in the region occurred on 5\u00a0April\u00a01959, with its epicentre at Saint-Paul-sur-Ubaye and a recorded intensity of 6.5 at Barcelonnette, and on 17\u00a0February\u00a01947, with its epicentre at Prazzo over the Italian border.\nArchitecture.\nThe subprefecture has been situated since 1978 in a \"maison mexicaine\", the Villa l'Ubayette, constructed between 1901 and 1903.\nPopulation.\nIn 1471, the community of Barcelonnette (including several surrounding parishes) comprised 421 fires (households). In 1765, it had 6,674 inhabitants, but emigration, particularly to Mexico, slowed the town's growth in the period before the Second World War. According to the census of 2017, Barcelonnette has a population of 2,598 (municipal population) across a total area of 16.42\u00a0km2. The town is characterised by low population density. Between 1990 and 1999 the town's annual mean population growth was -0.6%, though between 1999 and 2007 this increased to an average of -0.2%.\nEconomy.\nThe city is mainly a tourist and resort centre, serving many ski lodges. The Pra-Loup resort is 7\u00a0km from Barcelonnette; Le Sauze is 5\u00a0km away. It and the Ubaye Valley are served by the Barcelonnette \u2013 Saint-Pons Airfield. Notably, Barcelonnette is the only subprefecture of France not served by rail transport; the Ubaye line which would have linked Chorges to Barcelonnette was never completed as a result of the First World War and the construction of the Serre-Pon\u00e7on Dam between 1955 and 1961.\nEducation.\nAn \"\u00e9cole normale\" (an institute for training primary school teachers) was founded in Barcelonnette in 1833, and remained there until 1888 when it was transferred to Digne. The \"lyc\u00e9e Andr\u00e9-Honnorat de Barcelonnette\", originally the \"coll\u00e8ge Saint-Maurice\" and renamed after the politician Andr\u00e9 Honnorat in 1919, is located in the town; Pierre-Gilles de Gennes and Carole Merle both studied there. Currently, three schools exist in Barcelonnette: a public nursery school, a public elementary school, and a private school (under a contract by which the teachers are paid by the national education system).\nIn 2010 the \"lyc\u00e9e Andr\u00e9-Honnorat\" opened a boarding school aimed at gifted students of poorer social backgrounds, in order to give them better conditions in which to study. It is located in the \"Quartier Craplet\", formerly the garrison of the 11th Battalion of \"Chasseurs Alpins\" and then the French Army's \"Centre d'instruction et d'entra\u00eenement au combat en montagne\" (CIECM).\nInternational links.\nBarcelonnette is twinned with:\nIt is also the site of a Mexican honorary consulate."}
{"id": "4251", "revid": "41044949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4251", "title": "Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith", "text": "The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith (; \"\") is a relatively new religion teaching the essential worth of all religions and the unity of all people. Established by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h in the 19th century, it initially developed in Persia and parts of the Middle East, where it has faced ongoing persecution since its inception. The religion is estimated to have over five million adherents, known as Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds, spread throughout most of the world's countries and territories.\nThe religion has three central figures: the B\u00e1b (1819\u20131850), considered a herald who taught that God would soon send a prophet in the same way of Jesus or Muhammad and who was executed by Iranian authorities in 1850; Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h (1817\u20131892), who claimed to be that prophet in 1863 and faced exile and imprisonment for most of his life; and his son, \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 (1844\u20131921), who was released from confinement in 1908 and made teaching trips to Europe and the United States. After \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1's death in 1921, leadership of the religion fell to his grandson Shoghi Effendi (1897\u20131957). Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds annually elect local, regional, and national Spiritual Assemblies that govern the religion's affairs. Every five years the members of all National Spiritual Assemblies elect the Universal House of Justice, the nine-member supreme governing institution of the worldwide Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community that is located in Haifa, Israel, near the Shrine of the B\u00e1b.\nAccording to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings, God is single and all-powerful. Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h taught that religion is revealed in an orderly and progressive way by Manifestations of God, who are the founders of major world religions throughout history; Buddha, Jesus, and Muhammad are noted as the most recent of these before the B\u00e1b and Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds regard the major religions as fundamentally unified in purpose, though varied in social practices and interpretations. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith stresses the unity of all people, explicitly rejecting racism and nationalism. At the heart of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings is the goal of a unified world order that ensures the prosperity of all nations, races, creeds, and classes.\nLetters written by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h to various people, including some heads of state, have been collected and assembled into a canon of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed scripture. This includes works by his son \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1, and the B\u00e1b, who is regarded as Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's forerunner. Prominent among Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed literature are the \"Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas\", the \"Kit\u00e1b-i-\u00cdq\u00e1n\", \"Some Answered Questions\", and \"The Dawn-Breakers\".\nEtymology.\nIn English, the word \"Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed \" is used either as an adjective to refer to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith or as a term for a follower of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h. It is derived from the Arabic (), meaning \"glory\" or \"splendor\".\nThe older term \"Baha\u02bcism\" (or \"Bahaism\") is still used, for example as a variant of \"Bahai Faith\" by the US Library of Congress, but it is now less common and the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community prefers \"Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith\".\nBeliefs.\nThe teachings of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h form the foundation of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed belief. Three principles are central to these teachings: the unity of God, the unity of religion, and the unity of humanity. Baha'is believe that God periodically reveals his will through divine messengers, whose purpose is to transform the character of humankind and to develop, within those who respond, moral and spiritual qualities. Religion is thus seen as orderly, unified, and progressive from age to age.\nGod.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings describe a single, personal, inaccessible, omniscient, omnipresent, imperishable, and almighty God who is the creator of all things in the universe. The existence of God and the universe is thought to be eternal, without a beginning or end. Though inaccessible directly, God is nevertheless seen as conscious of creation, with a will and purpose expressed through messengers called Manifestations of God.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings state that God is too great for humans to fully comprehend, or to create a complete and accurate image of by themselves. Therefore, human understanding of God is achieved through his revelations via his Manifestations. In the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, God is often referred to by titles and attributes (for example, the All-Powerful, or the All-Loving), and there is a substantial emphasis on monotheism. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings state that the attributes applied to God are used to translate Godliness into human terms and to help people concentrate on their own attributes in worshipping God to develop their potentialities on their spiritual path. According to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings the human purpose is to learn to know and love God through such methods as prayer, reflection, and being of service to others.\nReligion.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed notions of progressive religious revelation result in their accepting the validity of the well known religions of the world, whose founders and central figures are seen as Manifestations of God. Religious history is interpreted as a series of dispensations, where each \"manifestation\" brings a somewhat broader and more advanced revelation that is rendered as a text of scripture and passed on through history with greater or lesser reliability but at least true in substance, suited for the time and place in which it was expressed. Specific religious social teachings (for example, the direction of prayer, or dietary restrictions) may be revoked by a subsequent manifestation so that a more appropriate requirement for the time and place may be established. Conversely, certain general principles (for example, neighbourliness, or charity) are seen to be universal and consistent. In Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed belief, this process of progressive revelation will not end; it is, however, believed to be cyclical. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds do not expect a new manifestation of God to appear within 1000 years of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's revelation.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed beliefs are sometimes described as syncretic combinations of earlier religious beliefs. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds, however, assert that their religion is a distinct tradition with its own scriptures, teachings, laws, and history. The religion was initially seen as a sect of Islam because of its belief in the prophethood of Muhammad and in the authenticity and veracity of the Qur\u2019an. Most religious specialists now see it as an independent religion, with its religious background in Shi\u02bba Islam being seen as analogous to the Jewish context in which Christianity was established. Muslim institutions and clergy, both Sunni and Shi'a, consider Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds to be deserters or apostates from Islam, which has led to Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds being persecuted. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds describe their faith as an independent world religion, differing from the other traditions in its relative age and in the appropriateness of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's teachings to the modern context. Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h is believed to have fulfilled the messianic expectations of these precursor faiths.\nHuman beings.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings state that human beings have a \"rational soul\", and that this provides the species with a unique capacity to recognize God's status and humanity's relationship with its creator. Every human is seen to have a duty to recognize God through his Messengers, and to conform to their teachings. Through recognition and obedience, service to humanity and regular prayer and spiritual practice, the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings state that the soul becomes closer to God, the spiritual ideal in Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed belief. According to Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed belief when a human dies the soul is permanently separated from the body and carries on in the next world where it is judged based on the person's actions in the physical world. Heaven and Hell are taught to be spiritual states of nearness or distance from God that describe relationships in this world and the next, and not physical places of reward and punishment achieved after death.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings emphasize the essential equality of human beings, and the abolition of prejudice. Humanity is seen as essentially one, though highly varied; its diversity of race and culture are seen as worthy of appreciation and acceptance. Doctrines of racism, nationalism, caste, social class, and gender-based hierarchy are seen as artificial impediments to unity. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings state that the unification of humanity is the paramount issue in the religious and political conditions of the present world.\nSocial principles.\nThe following principles are frequently listed as a quick summary of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings. They are derived from transcripts of speeches given by \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 during his tour of Europe and North America in 1912. The list is not authoritative and a variety of such lists circulate.\nWith specific regard to the pursuit of world peace, Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h prescribed a world-embracing collective security arrangement for the establishment of a temporary era of peace referred to in the Baha'i teachings as the Lesser Peace. For the establishment of a lasting peace (The Most Great Peace) and the purging of the \"overwhelming Corruptions\" it is necessary that all the people of the world universally unite under a universal Faith.\nCovenant.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings speak of a \"Greater Covenant\", being universal and endless, and a \"Lesser Covenant\", being unique to each religious dispensation. The Greater Covenant is viewed as a more enduring agreement between God and humanity, where a Manifestation of God is expected to come to humanity about every thousand years, at times of turmoil and uncertainty.\nThe Lesser Covenant is viewed as an agreement between a Messenger of God and his followers, and includes social practices and the continuation of authority in the religion. Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h and \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 established rules and institutions for an authoritative line of succession of leadership, in order to maintain unity and prevent schism. The Universal House of Justice is the final authority to resolve any disagreements among Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds, and within this framework no individual follower may propose 'inspired' or 'authoritative' interpretations of scripture. The dozen or so attempts at schism have all either become extinct or remained extremely small, numbering a few hundred collectively. The followers of such divisions are regarded as Covenant-breakers and shunned.\nShoghi Effendi's summary.\nShoghi Effendi, the head of the religion from 1921 to 1957, wrote the following summary of what he considered to be the distinguishing principles of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's teachings, which, he said, together with the laws and ordinances of the \"Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas\" constitute the bedrock of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith:\nCanonical texts.\nThe \"canonical texts\" of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith are the writings of the B\u00e1b, Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1, Shoghi Effendi and the Universal House of Justice, and the authenticated talks of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1. The writings of the B\u00e1b and Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h are considered as divine revelation, the writings and talks of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 and the writings of Shoghi Effendi as authoritative interpretation, and those of the Universal House of Justice as authoritative legislation and elucidation. Some measure of divine guidance is assumed for all of these texts.\nSome of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's most important writings include the \"Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas\" (\"Most Holy Book\"), which defines many laws and practices for individuals and society, the \"Kit\u00e1b-i-\u00cdq\u00e1n\" (\"Book of Certitude\"), which became the foundation of much of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed belief, and \"Gems of Divine Mysteries\", which includes further doctrinal foundations. Although the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings have a strong emphasis on social and ethical issues, a number of foundational texts have been described as mystical. These include the \"Seven Valleys\" and the \"Four Valleys\". \"The Seven Valleys\" was written to a follower of Sufism, in the style of \u02bbAttar, the Persian Muslim poet, and sets forth the stages of the soul's journey towards God. It was first translated into English in 1906, becoming one of the earliest available books of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h to the West. \"The Hidden Words\" is another book written by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h during the same period, containing 153 short passages in which Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h claims to have taken the basic essence of certain spiritual truths and written them in brief form.\nHistory.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith traces its beginnings to the religion of the B\u00e1b and the Shaykhi movement that immediately preceded it. The B\u00e1b was a merchant who began preaching in 1844 that he was the bearer of a new revelation from God, but was rejected by the generality of Islamic clergy in Iran, ending in his public execution for the crime of heresy. The B\u00e1b taught that God would soon send a new messenger, and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds consider Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h to be that person. Although they are distinct movements, the B\u00e1b is so interwoven into Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed theology and history that Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds celebrate his birth, death, and declaration as holy days, consider him one of their three central figures (along with Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h and \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1), and a historical account of the B\u00e1b\u00ed movement (\"The Dawn-Breakers\") is considered one of three books that every Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed should \"master\" and read \"over and over again\".\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community was mostly confined to the Iranian and Ottoman empires until after the death of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h in 1892, at which time he had followers in 13 countries of Asia and Africa. Under the leadership of his son, \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1, the religion gained a footing in Europe and America, and was consolidated in Iran, where it still suffers intense persecution. \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1's death in 1921 marks the end of what Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds call the \"heroic age\" of the religion.\nThe B\u00e1b.\nOn the evening of 22 May 1844, Siyyid \u02bbAl\u00ed-Muhammad of Shiraz gained his first convert and took on the title of \"the B\u00e1b\" ( \"the Gate\"), referring to his later claim to the status of Mahdi of Shi\u02bba Islam. His followers were therefore known as B\u00e1b\u00eds. As the B\u00e1b's teachings spread, which the Islamic clergy saw as blasphemous, his followers came under increased persecution and torture. The conflicts escalated in several places to military sieges by the Shah's army. The B\u00e1b himself was imprisoned and eventually executed in 1850.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds see the B\u00e1b as the forerunner of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, because the B\u00e1b's writings introduced the concept of \"He whom God shall make manifest\", a Messianic figure whose coming, according to Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds, was announced in the scriptures of all of the world's great religions, and whom Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, the founder of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, claimed to be. The B\u00e1b's tomb, located in Haifa, Israel, is an important place of pilgrimage for Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. The remains of the B\u00e1b were brought secretly from Iran to the Holy Land and eventually interred in the tomb built for them in a spot specifically designated by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h. The main written works translated into English of the B\u00e1b's are collected in Selections from the Writings of the B\u00e1b out of the estimated 135 works.\nBah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h.\nM\u00edrz\u00e1 Husayn \u02bbAl\u00ed N\u00far\u00ed was one of the early followers of the B\u00e1b, and later took the title of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h. B\u00e1b\u00eds faced a period of persecution that peaked in 1852\u201353 after a few individual B\u00e1bis made a failed attempt to assassinate the Shah. Although they acted alone, the government responded with collective punishment, killing many B\u00e1b\u00eds. Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h was put in prison.\nShortly thereafter he was expelled from Iran and traveled to Baghdad, in the Ottoman Empire. In Baghdad, his leadership revived the persecuted followers of the B\u00e1b in Iran, so Iranian authorities requested his removal, which instigated a summons to Constantinople (now Istanbul) from the Ottoman Sultan. In 1863, at the time of his removal from Baghdad, Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h first announced his claim of prophethood to his family and followers, which he said came to him years earlier while in a dungeon of Tehran. From the time of the initial exile from Iran, tensions grew between him and Subh-i-Azal, the appointed leader of the B\u00e1b\u00eds, who did not recognize Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's claim. Throughout the rest of his life Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h gained the allegiance of most of the B\u00e1b\u00eds, who came to be known as Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. \nHe spent less than four months in Constantinople. After receiving chastising letters from Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h, Ottoman authorities turned against him and put him under house arrest in Adrianople (now Edirne), where he remained for four years, until a royal decree of 1868 banished all B\u00e1b\u00eds to either Cyprus or \u02bbAkk\u00e1. \nIt was in or near the Ottoman penal colony of \u02bbAkk\u00e1, in present-day Israel, that Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h spent the remainder of his life. After initially strict and harsh confinement, he was allowed to live in a home near \u02bbAkk\u00e1, while still officially a prisoner of that city. He died there in 1892. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds regard his resting place at Bahj\u00ed as the Qiblih to which they turn in prayer each day.\nHe produced over 18,000 works in his lifetime, in both Arabic and Persian, of which only 8% have been translated into English. During the period in Adrianople, he began declaring his mission as a Messenger of God in letters to the world's religious and secular rulers, including Pope Pius IX, Napoleon III, and Queen Victoria.\n\u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1.\n\u02bbAbb\u00e1s Effendi was Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's eldest son, known by the title of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 (Servant of Bah\u00e1). His father left a will that appointed \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 as the leader of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community, and designated him as the \"Centre of the Covenant\", \"Head of the Faith\", and the sole authoritative interpreter of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's writings. \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 had shared his father's long exile and imprisonment, which continued until \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1's own release as a result of the Young Turk Revolution in 1908. Following his release he led a life of travelling, speaking, teaching, and maintaining correspondence with communities of believers and individuals, expounding the principles of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nThere are over 27,000 extant documents by \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1, mostly letters, of which only a fraction have been translated into English. Among the more well known are \"The Secret of Divine Civilization\", the \"Tablet to Auguste-Henri Forel\", and \"Some Answered Questions\". Additionally notes taken of a number of his talks were published in various volumes like \"Paris Talks\" during his journeys to the West.\nShoghi Effendi.\nBah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's \"Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas\" and \"The Will and Testament of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1\" are foundational documents of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed administrative order. Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h established the elected Universal House of Justice, and \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 established the appointed hereditary Guardianship and clarified the relationship between the two institutions. In his Will, \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 appointed Shoghi Effendi, his eldest grandson, as the first Guardian of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. Shoghi Effendi served for 36 years as the head of the religion until his death.\nShoghi Effendi throughout his lifetime translated Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed texts; developed global plans for the expansion of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community; developed the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed World Centre; carried on a voluminous correspondence with communities and individuals around the world; and built the administrative structure of the religion, preparing the community for the election of the Universal House of Justice. He unexpectedly died after a brief illness on 4 November 1957, in London, England, under conditions that did not allow for a successor to be appointed.\nIn 1937, Shoghi Effendi launched a seven-year plan for the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds of North America, followed by another in 1946. In 1953, he launched the first international plan, the Ten Year World Crusade. This plan included extremely ambitious goals for the expansion of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed communities and institutions, the translation of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed texts into several new languages, and the sending of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed pioneers into previously unreached nations. He announced in letters during the Ten Year Crusade that it would be followed by other plans under the direction of the Universal House of Justice, which was elected in 1963 at the culmination of the Crusade. The House of Justice then launched a nine-year plan in 1964, and a series of subsequent multi-year plans of varying length and goals followed, guiding the direction of the international Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community.\nUniversal House of Justice.\nSince 1963, the Universal House of Justice has been the elected head of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. The general functions of this body are defined through the writings of Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h and clarified in the writings of Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1 and Shoghi Effendi. These functions include teaching and education, implementing Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed laws, addressing social issues, and caring for the weak and the poor.\nThe House of Justice directs the work of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community through a series of multi-year international plans that began with a nine-year plan in 1964. In the current plan, the House of Justice encourages the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds around the world to focus on capacity building through children's classes, junior youth groups, devotional gatherings, and study circles. Additional lines of action include social action and participation in the prevalent discourses of society. The years from 2001 until 2021 represent four successive five-year plans, culminating in the centennial anniversary of the passing of \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1. Annually, on 21 April, the Universal House of Justice sends a 'Ridv\u00e1n' message to the worldwide Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community, that updates Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds on current developments and provides further guidance for the year to come.\nAt local, regional, and national levels, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds elect members to nine-person Spiritual Assemblies, which run the affairs of the religion. There are also appointed individuals working at various levels, including locally and internationally, which perform the function of propagating the teachings and protecting the community. The latter do not serve as clergy, which the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith does not have. The Universal House of Justice remains the supreme governing body of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, and its 9 members are elected every five years by the members of all National Spiritual Assemblies. Any male Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed, 21 years or older, is eligible to be elected to the Universal House of Justice; all other positions are open to male and female Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds.\nDemographics.\nA Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed-published document reported 4.74\u00a0million Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds in 1986 growing at an annual rate of 4.4%. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed sources since 1991 usually estimate the worldwide Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed population to be above 5\u00a0million. The \"World Christian Encyclopedia\" estimated 7.1\u00a0million Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds in the world in 2000, representing 218 countries, and 7.3\u00a0million in 2010 with the same source. They further state: \"The Baha'i Faith is the only religion to have grown faster in every United Nations region over the past 100 years than the general population; Baha\u02bci was thus the fastest-growing religion between 1910 and 2010, growing at least twice as fast as the population of almost every UN region.\"\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith is currently the largest religious minority in Iran, Panama and Belize, the second largest international religion in Bolivia, Zambia, and Papua New Guinea; and the third largest international religion in Chad and Kenya.\nAccording to \"The World Almanac and Book of Facts 2004\":\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith is a medium-sized religion and was listed in \"The Britannica Book of the Year\" (1992\u2013present) as the second most widespread of the world's independent religions in terms of the number of countries represented. According to \"Britannica\", the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith (as of 2010) is established in 221 countries and territories and has an estimated seven million adherents worldwide. Additionally, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds have self-organized in most of the nations of the world.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith was ranked by \"Foreign Policy\" magazine as the world's second fastest growing religion by percentage (1.7%) in 2007.\nSocial practices.\nExhortations.\nThe following are a few examples from Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's teachings on personal conduct that are required or encouraged of his followers:\nProhibitions.\nThe following are a few examples from Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's teachings on personal conduct that are prohibited or discouraged.\nThe observance of personal laws, such as prayer or fasting, is the sole responsibility of the individual. There are, however, occasions when a Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed might be administratively expelled from the community for a public disregard of the laws, or gross immorality. Such expulsions are administered by the National Spiritual Assembly and do not involve shunning.\nWhile some of the laws from the Kit\u00e1b-i-Aqdas are applicable at the present time, others are dependent upon the existence of a predominantly Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed society, such as the punishments for arson or murder. The laws, when not in direct conflict with the civil laws of the country of residence, are binding on every Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed. \nMarriage.\nThe purpose of marriage in the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed faith is mainly to foster spiritual harmony, fellowship and unity between a man and a woman and to provide a stable and loving environment for the rearing of children. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings on marriage call it a \"fortress for well-being and salvation\" and place marriage and the family as the foundation of the structure of human society. Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h highly praised marriage, discouraged divorce, and required chastity outside of marriage; Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h taught that a husband and wife should strive to improve the spiritual life of each other. Interracial marriage is also highly praised throughout Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed scripture.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds intending to marry are asked to obtain a thorough understanding of the other's character before deciding to marry. Although parents should not choose partners for their children, once two individuals decide to marry, they must receive the consent of all living biological parents, whether they are Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed or not. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed marriage ceremony is simple; the only compulsory part of the wedding is the reading of the wedding vows prescribed by Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h which both the groom and the bride read, in the presence of two witnesses. The vows are \"We will all, verily, abide by the Will of God.\"\nWork.\nBah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h prohibited a mendicant and ascetic lifestyle. Monasticism is forbidden, and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds are taught to practice spirituality while engaging in useful work. The importance of self-exertion and service to humanity in one's spiritual life is emphasised further in Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's writings, where he states that work done in the spirit of service to humanity enjoys a rank equal to that of prayer and worship in the sight of God.\nPlaces of worship.\nMost Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed meetings occur in individuals' homes, local Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed centers, or rented facilities. Worldwide, as of 2018, ten Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Houses of Worship, including eight Mother Temples and two local Houses of Worship have been built and a further five are planned for construction. Two of these houses of worship are national while the other three are going to be local temples. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings refer to an institution called a \"Mas\u035fhriqu'l-Ad\u035fhk\u00e1r\" (Dawning-place of the Mention of God), which is to form the center of a complex of institutions including a hospital, university, and so on. The first ever Mas\u035fhriqu'l-Ad\u035fhk\u00e1r in \u02bbIshq\u00e1b\u00e1d, Turkmenistan, has been the most complete House of Worship.\nCalendar.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed calendar is based upon the calendar established by the B\u00e1b. The year consists of 19 months, each having 19 days, with four or five intercalary days, to make a full solar year. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed New Year corresponds to the traditional Iranian New Year, called Naw R\u00faz, and occurs on the vernal equinox, near 21 March, at the end of the month of fasting. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed communities gather at the beginning of each month at a meeting called a Feast for worship, consultation and socializing.\nEach of the 19 months is given a name which is an attribute of God; some examples include Bah\u00e1\u02bc (Splendour), \u02bbIlm (Knowledge), and Jam\u00e1l (Beauty). The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed week is familiar in that it consists of seven days, with each day of the week also named after an attribute of God. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds observe 11 Holy Days throughout the year, with work suspended on 9 of these. These days commemorate important anniversaries in the history of the religion.\nSymbols.\nThe symbols of the religion are derived from the Arabic word Bah\u00e1\u02bc ( \"splendor\" or \"glory\"), with a numerical value of 9, which is why the most common symbol is the nine-pointed star. The ringstone symbol and calligraphy of the Greatest Name are also often encountered. The former consists of two five-pointed stars interspersed with a stylized Bah\u00e1\u02bc whose shape is meant to recall the three onenesses, while the latter is a calligraphic rendering of the phrase Y\u00e1 Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'l-Abh\u00e1 ( \"O Glory of the Most Glorious!\").The five-pointed star is the official symbol of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, known as the \"Haykal\" (\"temple\"). It was initiated and established by the B\u00e1b and various works were written in calligraphy shaped into a five-pointed star.\nSocio-economic development.\nSince its inception the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith has had involvement in socio-economic development beginning by giving greater freedom to women, promulgating the promotion of female education as a priority concern, and that involvement was given practical expression by creating schools, agricultural co-ops, and clinics.\nThe religion entered a new phase of activity when a message of the Universal House of Justice dated 20 October 1983 was released. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds were urged to seek out ways, compatible with the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings, in which they could become involved in the social and economic development of the communities in which they lived. Worldwide in 1979 there were 129 officially recognized Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed socio-economic development projects. By 1987, the number of officially recognized development projects had increased to 1482.\nCurrent initiatives of social action include activities in areas like health, sanitation, education, gender equality, arts and media, agriculture, and the environment. Educational projects include schools, which range from village tutorial schools to large secondary schools, and some universities. By 2017 there were an estimated 40,000 small scale projects, 1,400 sustained projects, and 135 Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed inspired organizations.\nUnited Nations.\nBah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h wrote of the need for world government in this age of humanity's collective life. Because of this emphasis the international Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community has chosen to support efforts of improving international relations through organizations such as the League of Nations and the United Nations, with some reservations about the present structure and constitution of the UN. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed International Community is an agency under the direction of the Universal House of Justice in Haifa, and has consultative status with the following organizations:\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed International Community has offices at the United Nations in New York and Geneva and representations to United Nations regional commissions and other offices in Addis Ababa, Bangkok, Nairobi, Rome, Santiago, and Vienna. In recent years, an Office of the Environment and an Office for the Advancement of Women were established as part of its United Nations Office. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith has also undertaken joint development programs with various other United Nations agencies. In the 2000 Millennium Forum of the United Nations a Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed was invited as the only non-governmental speaker during the summit.\nPersecution.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds continue to be persecuted in some majority-Islamic countries, whose leaders do not recognize the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith as an independent religion, but rather as apostasy from Islam. The most severe persecutions have occurred in Iran, where more than 200 Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds were executed between 1978 and 1998. The rights of Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds have been restricted to greater or lesser extents in numerous other countries, including Egypt, Afghanistan, Indonesia, Iraq, Morocco, Yemen, and several countries in sub-Saharan Africa.\nIran.\nThe marginalization of the Iranian Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds by current governments is rooted in historical efforts by Muslim clergy to persecute the religious minority. When the B\u00e1b started attracting a large following, the clergy hoped to stop the movement from spreading by stating that its followers were enemies of God. These clerical directives led to mob attacks and public executions. Starting in the twentieth century, in addition to repression aimed at individual Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds, centrally directed campaigns that targeted the entire Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community and its institutions were initiated. In one case in Yazd in 1903 more than 100 Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds were killed. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed schools, such as the Tarbiyat boys' and girls' schools in Tehran, were closed in the 1930s and 1940s, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed marriages were not recognized and Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed texts were censored.\nDuring the reign of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, to divert attention from economic difficulties in Iran and from a growing nationalist movement, a campaign of persecution against the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds was instituted. An approved and coordinated anti-Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed campaign (to incite public passion against the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds) started in 1955 and it included the spreading of anti-Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed propaganda on national radio stations and in official newspapers. During that campaign, initiated by Mulla Muhammad Taghi Falsafi, the Baha'i center in Tehran was demolished at the orders of Tehran military governor, General Timor Bakhtiar. In the late 1970s the Shah's regime consistently lost legitimacy due to criticism that it was pro-Western. As the anti-Shah movement gained ground and support, revolutionary propaganda was spread which alleged that some of the Shah's advisors were Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds were portrayed as economic threats, and as supporters of Israel and the West, and societal hostility against the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds increased.\nSince the Islamic Revolution of 1979 Iranian Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds have regularly had their homes ransacked or have been banned from attending university or from holding government jobs, and several hundred have received prison sentences for their religious beliefs, most recently for participating in study circles. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed cemeteries have been desecrated and property has been seized and occasionally demolished, including the House of M\u00edrz\u00e1 Buzurg, Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h's father. The House of the B\u00e1b in Shiraz, one of three sites to which Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds perform pilgrimage, has been destroyed twice.\nIn May 2018, the Iranian authorities expelled a young woman student from university of Isfahan because she was Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed. In March 2018, two more Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed students were expelled from universities in the cities of Zanjan and Gilan because of their religion.\nAccording to a US panel, attacks on Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds in Iran increased under Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's presidency. The United Nations Commission on Human Rights revealed an October 2005 confidential letter from Command Headquarters of the Armed Forces of Iran ordering its members to identify Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds and to monitor their activities. Due to these actions, the Special Rapporteur of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights stated on 20 March 2006, that she \"also expresses concern that the information gained as a result of such monitoring will be used as a basis for the increased persecution of, and discrimination against, members of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed faith, in violation of international standards. The Special Rapporteur is concerned that this latest development indicates that the situation with regard to religious minorities in Iran is, in fact, deteriorating.\"\nOn 14 May 2008, members of an informal body known as the \"Friends\" that oversaw the needs of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community in Iran were arrested and taken to Evin prison. The Friends court case has been postponed several times, but was finally underway on 12 January 2010. Other observers were not allowed in the court. Even the defence lawyers, who for two years have had minimal access to the defendants, had difficulty entering the courtroom. The chairman of the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom said that it seems that the government has already predetermined the outcome of the case and is violating international human rights law. Further sessions were held on 7 February 2010, 12 April 2010 and 12 June 2010. On 11 August 2010 it became known that the court sentence was 20 years imprisonment for each of the seven prisoners which was later reduced to ten years. After the sentence, they were transferred to Gohardasht prison. In March 2011 the sentences were reinstated to the original 20 years. On 3 January 2010, Iranian authorities detained ten more members of the Baha'i minority, reportedly including Leva Khanjani, granddaughter of Jamaloddin Khanjani, one of seven Baha'i leaders jailed since 2008 and in February, they arrested his son, Niki Khanjani.\nThe Iranian government claims that the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith is not a religion, but is instead a political organization, and hence refuses to recognize it as a minority religion. However, the government has never produced convincing evidence supporting its characterization of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community. The Iranian government also accuses the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith of being associated with Zionism. These accusations against the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds have no basis in historical fact, and the accusations are used by the Iranian government to use the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds as \"scapegoats\". In fact it was the Iranian leader Naser al-Din Shah Qajar who banished Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h from Iran to the Ottoman Empire and Bah\u00e1\u02bcu'll\u00e1h was later exiled by the Ottoman Sultan, at the behest of the Iranian Shah, to territories further away from Iran and finally to Acre in Syria, which only a century later was incorporated into the state of Israel.\nIn 2019, the Iranian government made it impossible for the Baha\u2019is to legally register with the Iranian state. National identity card applications in Iran no longer include the \u201cother religions\u201d option effectively making the Baha'i Faith unrecognized by the state.\nEgypt.\nDuring the 1920s Egypt's religious Tribunal recognized the Baha'i Faith as a new, independent religion, totally separate from Islam, due to the nature of the 'laws, principles and beliefs' of the Baha'is. At the same time the Tribunal condemned \"in most unequivocal and emphatic language the followers of Baha'u'llah as the believers in heresy, offensive and injurious to Islam, and wholly incompatible with the accepted doctrines and practice of its orthodox adherents.\"\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed institutions and community activities have been illegal under Egyptian law since 1960. All Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community properties, including Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed centers, libraries, and cemeteries, have been confiscated by the government and fatwas have been issued charging Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds with apostasy.\nThe Egyptian identification card controversy began in the 1990s when the government modernized the electronic processing of identity documents, which introduced a de facto requirement that documents must list the person's religion as Muslim, Christian, or Jewish (the only three religions officially recognized by the government). Consequently, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds were unable to obtain government identification documents (such as national identification cards, birth certificates, death certificates, marriage or divorce certificates, or passports) necessary to exercise their rights in their country unless they lied about their religion, which conflicts with Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed religious principle. Without documents, they could not be employed, educated, treated in hospitals, travel outside of the country, or vote, among other hardships. Following a protracted legal process culminating in a court ruling favorable to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds, the interior minister of Egypt released a decree on 14 April 2009, amending the law to allow Egyptians who are not Muslim, Christian, or Jewish to obtain identification documents that list a dash in place of one of the three recognized religions. The first identification cards were issued to two Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds under the new decree on 8 August 2009."}
{"id": "4252", "revid": "1416331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4252", "title": "Bahais", "text": ""}
{"id": "4253", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4253", "title": "Baader-Meinhof-Gang", "text": ""}
{"id": "4256", "revid": "38758555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4256", "title": "Baiuvarii", "text": "The Baiuvarii or Bavarians () were a Germanic people. The Baiuvarii had settled modern-day Bavaria (which is named after them), Austria, and South Tyrol by the 6th century AD, and are considered the ancestors of modern-day Bavarians and Austrians. The Baiuvarii spoke the early Bavarian language.\nName.\nThe name of the Baiuvarii is also spelled \"Baiuvari\". It probably means \"men from Bohemia\". The placename Bohemia is believed to be connected to that of the Boii, a Celtic people who left the region before the Roman era and were replaced by Germanic peoples. The Baiuvarii gave their name to the region of Bavaria.\nThe name is first attested in Latin sources in the 6th century AD. In the \"Getica\" (551), Jordanes writes that a group of Suebes near the Danube were neighbored on the east by the \"Baibari\". In a poem about a pilgrimage to Augsburg in 565, Venantius Fortunatus writes that the Baiovarius lived in area around the river Lech called Baiuaria.\nLanguage.\nThe Baiuvarii are classified as a Germanic people. It is uncertain whether they originally spoke an East Germanic or West Germanic language. Early evidence on the language of the Baiuvarii are limited to personal names and a few Runic inscriptions. By the 8th century AD, the Baiuvarii were speakers of an early form of the Austro-Bavarian language within the West Germanic family.\nHistory.\nEvidence from etymology traces the history of the Baiuvarii back to Bohemia in the 1st century AD. This was after the Celtic Boii left the area and were replaced by Maroboduus, king of the Germanic Marcomanni, who moved his Suebian people into the area. Whether the Baiuvarii settled Bavaria in a specific later migration, after Maroboduus, either from the north (Bohemia) or from Pannonia, is now uncertain.\nAccording to , Bavarian migration to present-day Bavaria is a legend. The early Baiuvarii are often associated with the archaeological group, but this is controversial. During the time of Attila in the 5th century, the entire Middle Danube region saw the entry of many new peoples from north and east of the Carpathians, and the formation and destruction of many new political entities.\nIt is thus more probable that the Baiuvarii emerged in the provinces of Noricum ripense and Raetia secunda following Odoacer's withdrawal of population to Italy in 488, and the subsequent expansion of Italian Ostrogothic, and Merovingian Frankish influence into the area. They are believed to have incorporated elements from several Germanic peoples, including the Scirii, Heruli, Suebi, Alemanni, Naristi, Thuringi and Lombards. They might also have included non-Germanic Romance people.\nOne of the earliest references to the Baiuvarii is the Frankish Table of Nations from about 520. By the late 5th century, the region was under the influence of the Ostrogothic Kingdom of Theodoric the Great. During this period, the Frankish king Theudebert I (died 548) claimed control from the North Sea to Pannonia. After his death, his uncle Chlothar I appointed Garibald I as \"dux\" of Bavaria. He established the Agilolfings dynasty with his power base at Augsburg or Regensburg. By the 8th century, many Baiuvarii had converted to Christianity.\nThrough their ruling Agilolfings dynasty, they were closely connected with the Franks.\nCulture.\nA collection of Bavarian tribal laws was compiled in the 8th century. This document is known as \"Lex Baiuvariorum\". Elements of it possibly date back to the 6th century. It is very similar to \"Lex Thuringorum\", which was the legal code of the Thuringi, with whom the Baiuvarii had close relations.\nThe funerary traditions of the Baiuvarii is similar to those of the Alemanni, but quite different from those of the Thuringi. The Baiuvarii are distinguished by the presence of individuals with artificially deformed craniums in their cemeteries. Although, these individuals were predominantly female, only found in small numbers, and they did not leave a genetic impact upon the Bavarian people. Likewise, they were determined to have mostly come from southeastern Europe, perhaps as a form of exogamy.\nGenetics.\nA genetic study published in the \"Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America\" in 2018 examined the remains of 41 individuals buried at a Bavarian cemetery ca. 500 AD. Of these, 11 whole genomes were generated. The males were found to be genetically homogeneous and of north-central European origin. The females were less homogeneous, particularly those with artificially deformed craniums. The vast majority of the surveyed individuals, particularly the males, were predicted to have had blond hair and blue eyes. No admixture with earlier Roman populations of the area was detected. Among modern populations, the surveyed individuals were found to be most closely related to modern-day Germans. This study suggests that Germanic tribes were indigenous to the area of southern Germany. "}
{"id": "4257", "revid": "2544398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4257", "title": "Burgundians", "text": "The Burgundians (; ; ; ) were an early Germanic tribe or group of tribes. They appeared in the Rhine region, near the Roman empire, and were later moved into the empire, in the western Alps and southeastern Gaul. They were perhaps mentioned much earlier in the time of the Roman Empire as living in part of the region of Germania that is now part of Poland.\nThe Burgundians are first mentioned together with the Alamanni as early as the 11th panegyric to emperor Maximian given in Trier in 291, and referring to events that must have happened between 248 and 291, and they apparently remained neighbours for centuries. By 411 a Burgundian group had established themselves on the Rhine, between Franks and Alamanni, holding the cities of Worms, Speyer, and Strasbourg. In 436, A\u00ebtius defeated the Burgundians on the Rhine with the help of Hunnish forces, and then in 443, he re-settled the Burgundians within the empire, in Savoy in Gaul.\nThis Gaulish domain became the Kingdom of the Burgundians, in the western Alps region where modern Switzerland, France and Italy meet. This later became a component of the Frankish empire. The name of this kingdom survives in the regional appellation, Burgundy, which is a region in modern France, representing only a part of that kingdom.\nAnother part of the Burgundians stayed in their previous homeland in the Oder\u2013Vistula basin and formed a contingent in Attila's Hunnic army by 451.\nBefore clear documentary evidence begins, the Burgundians may have originally emigrated from mainland Scandinavia to the Baltic island of Bornholm, and from there to the Vistula basin, in the middle of what is now Poland.\nName.\nThe ethnonym Burgundians is commonly used in English to refer to the \"Burgundi\" (\"Burgundionei\", \"Burgundiones\" or \"Burgunds\") who settled in Sapaudia (Savoy), in the western Alps, during the 5th century. The original Kingdom of the Burgundians barely intersected the modern \"Bourgogne\" and more closely matched the boundaries of the Arpitan or Romand (Franco-Proven\u00e7al) language area, centred on the \"R\u00f4no-Arpes\" (Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes) region of France, Romandy in west Switzerland and \"Val d'Outa\" (Val d'Aosta), in north west Italy.\nIn modern usage, however, \"Burgundians\" can sometimes refer to later inhabitants of the geographical \"Bourgogne\" or \"Borgogne\" (Burgundy), named after the old kingdom, but not corresponding to the original boundaries of it. Between the 6th and 20th centuries, the boundaries and political connections of \"Burgundy\" have changed frequently. In modern times the only area still referred to as Burgundy is in France, which derives its name from the Duchy of Burgundy. But in the context of the Middle Ages the term Burgundian (or similar spellings) can refer even to the powerful political entity the Dukes controlled which included not only Burgundy itself but had actually expanded to have a strong association with areas now in modern Belgium and Southern Netherlands. The parts of the old Kingdom not within the French controlled Duchy tended to come under different names, except for the County of Burgundy.\nHistory.\nUncertain early history.\nThe origins of the Burgundians before they reached the area near the Roman-controlled Rhine is a subject of various old proposals, but these are doubted by some modern scholars such as Ian Wood and Walter Goffart. As remarked by Susan Reynolds:\nThey have long been associated with Scandinavian origin based on place-name evidence and archaeological evidence (Stjerna) and many consider their tradition to be correct (e.g. Musset, p.\u00a062). According to such proposals, the Burgundians are believed to have then emigrated to the Baltic island of Bornholm (\"the island of the Burgundians\" in Old Norse). However, by about 250 AD, the population of Bornholm had largely disappeared from the island. Most cemeteries ceased to be used, and those that were still used had few burials (Stjerna, in German 1925:176). In \"\u00deorsteins saga V\u00edkingssonar\" (\"The Saga of Thorstein, Viking's Son\"), a man (or group) named Veseti settled on a holm (island) called \"borgundarh\u00f3lmr\" in Old Norse, i.e. Bornholm. Alfred the Great's translation of \"Orosius\" uses the name \"Burgenda land\" to refer to a territory next to the land of Sweons (\"Swedes\"). The poet and early mythologist Viktor Rydberg (1828\u20131895), (\"Our Fathers' Godsaga\") asserted from an early medieval source, \"Vita Sigismundi\", that they themselves retained oral traditions about their Scandinavian origin.\nEarly Roman sources, such as Tacitus and Pliny the Elder, knew little concerning the Germanic peoples east of the Elbe river, or on the Baltic Sea. Pliny (IV.28) however mentions a group with a similar names among the Vandalic or Eastern Germanic Germani peoples, including also the Goths. Claudius Ptolemy lists these also, as living between the Suevus (probably the Oder) and Vistula rivers, north of the Lugii, and south of the coast dwelling tribes. Around the mid 2nd century AD, there was a significant migration by Germanic tribes of Scandinavian origin (Rugii, Goths, Gepidae, Vandals, Burgundians, and others) towards the south-east, creating turmoil along the entire Roman frontier. These migrations culminated in the Marcomannic Wars, which resulted in widespread destruction and the first invasion of Italy in the Roman Empire period. Jordanes reports that during the 3rd century, the Burgundians living in the Vistula basin were almost annihilated by Fastida, king of the Gepids, whose kingdom was at the mouth of the Vistula.\nIn the late 3rd century, the Burgundians appeared on the east bank of the Rhine, apparently confronting Roman Gaul. Zosimus (1.68) reports them being defeated by the emperor Probus in 278 near a river, together with Silingi and Vandals. A few years later, Claudius Mamertinus mentions them along with the Alamanni, a Suebic people. These two peoples had moved into the Agri Decumates on the eastern side of the Rhine, an area today referred to still as Swabia, at times attacking Roman Gaul together and sometimes fighting each other. He also mentions that the Goths had previously defeated the Burgundians.\nAmmianus Marcellinus, on the other hand, claimed that the Burgundians descended from the Romans. The Roman sources do not speak of any specific migration from Poland by the Burgundians (although other Vandalic peoples are more clearly mentioned as having moved west in this period), and so there have historically been some doubts about the link between the eastern and western Burgundians.\nIn 369/370, the Emperor Valentinian I enlisted the aid of the Burgundians in his war against the Alemanni. \nApproximately four decades later, the Burgundians appear again. Following Stilicho's withdrawal of troops to fight Alaric I the Visigoth in AD 406\u2013408, a large group of peoples from central Europe north of the Danube, came west and crossed the Rhine, entering the Empire, near the lands of the Burgundians who had moved much earlier. The dominant groups were Alans, Vandals (Hasdingi and Silingi), and Danubian Suevi. The majority of these Danubian peoples moved through Gaul and eventually established themselves in kingdoms in Roman Hispania. One group of Alans was settled in northern Gaul by the Romans.\nSome Burgundians also migrated westwards and settled as \"foederati\" in the Roman province of Germania Prima along with the Middle Rhine. Other Burgundians however remained outside the empire and apparently formed a contingent in Attila's Hunnic army by 451.\nKingdom.\nRhineland.\nIn 411, the Burgundian king Gundahar (or \"Gundicar\") set up a puppet emperor, Jovinus, in cooperation with Goar, king of the Alans. With the authority of the Gallic emperor that he controlled, Gundahar settled on the left (Roman) bank of the Rhine, between the river Lauter and the Nahe, seizing Worms, Speyer, and Strassburg. Apparently as part of a truce, the Emperor Honorius later officially \"granted\" them the land, with its capital at the old Celtic Roman settlement of Borbetomagus (present Worms).\nDespite their new status as \"foederati\", Burgundian raids into Roman Upper Gallia Belgica became intolerable and were ruthlessly brought to an end in 436, when the Roman general A\u00ebtius called in Hun mercenaries, who overwhelmed the Rhineland kingdom in 437. Gundahar was killed in the fighting, reportedly along with the majority of the Burgundian tribe.\nThe destruction of Worms and the Burgundian kingdom by the Huns became the subject of heroic legends that were afterwards incorporated in the \"Nibelungenlied\"\u2014on which Wagner based his Ring Cycle\u2014where King Gunther (Gundahar) and Queen Br\u00fcnhild hold their court at Worms, and Siegfried comes to woo Kriemhild. (In Old Norse sources the names are \"Gunnar\", \"Brynhild\", and \"Gudr\u00fan\" as normally rendered in English.) In fact, the \"Etzel\" of the \"Nibelungenlied\" is based on Attila the Hun.\nSettlement in Savoy.\nFor reasons not cited in the sources, the Burgundians were granted \"foederati\" status a second time, and in 443 were resettled by A\u00ebtius in the region of \"Sapaudia\". Though the precise geography is uncertain, \"Sapaudia\" corresponds to the modern-day Savoy, and the Burgundians probably lived near \"Lugdunum\", known today as Lyon. A new king, Gundioc or \"Gunderic\", presumed to be Gundahar's son, appears to have reigned following his father's death. The historian Pline tells us that Gunderic ruled the areas of Sa\u00f4ne, Dauphiny, Savoie and a part of Provence. He set up Vienne as the capital of the kingdom of Burgundy. In all, eight Burgundian kings of the house of Gundahar ruled until the kingdom was overrun by the Franks in 534.\nAs allies of Rome in its last decades, the Burgundians fought alongside A\u00ebtius and a confederation of Visigoths and others against Attila at the Battle of Ch\u00e2lons (also called \"The Battle of the Catalaunian Fields\") in 451. The alliance between Burgundians and Visigoths seems to have been strong, as Gundioc and his brother Chilperic I accompanied Theodoric II to Spain to fight the Sueves in 455.\nAspirations to the empire.\nAlso in 455, an ambiguous reference \"infidoque tibi Burdundio ductu\" implicates an unnamed treacherous Burgundian leader in the murder of the emperor Petronius Maximus in the chaos preceding the sack of Rome by the Vandals. The Patrician Ricimer is also blamed; this event marks the first indication of the link between the Burgundians and Ricimer, who was probably Gundioc's brother-in-law and Gundobad's uncle.\nIn 456, the Burgundians, apparently confident in their growing power, negotiated a territorial expansion and power sharing arrangement with the local Roman senators.\nIn 457, Ricimer overthrew another emperor, Avitus, raising Majorian to the throne. This new emperor proved unhelpful to Ricimer and the Burgundians. The year after his ascension, Majorian stripped the Burgundians of the lands they had acquired two years earlier. After showing further signs of independence, he was murdered by Ricimer in 461.\nTen years later, in 472, Ricimer\u2013who was by now the son-in-law of the Western Emperor Anthemius\u2013was plotting with Gundobad to kill his father-in-law; Gundobad beheaded the emperor (apparently personally). Ricimer then appointed Olybrius; both died, surprisingly of natural causes, within a few months. Gundobad seems then to have succeeded his uncle as Patrician and king-maker, and raised Glycerius to the throne.\nIn 474, Burgundian influence over the empire seems to have ended. Glycerius was deposed in favor of Julius Nepos, and Gundobad returned to Burgundy, presumably at the death of his father Gundioc. At this time or shortly afterwards, the Burgundian kingdom was divided among Gundobad and his brothers, Godigisel, Chilperic II, and Gundomar I.\nConsolidation of the kingdom.\nAccording to Gregory of Tours, the years following Gundobad's return to Burgundy saw a bloody consolidation of power. Gregory states that Gundobad murdered his brother Chilperic, drowning his wife and exiling their daughters (one of whom was to become the wife of Clovis the Frank, and was reputedly responsible for his conversion). This is contested by, e.g., Bury, who points out problems in much of Gregory's chronology for the events.\nIn c. 500, when Gundobad and Clovis were at war, Gundobad appears to have been betrayed by his brother Godegisel, who joined the Franks; together Godegisel's and Clovis' forces \"crushed the army of Gundobad\". Gundobad was temporarily holed up in Avignon, but was able to re-muster his army and sacked Vienne, where Godegisel and many of his followers were put to death. From this point, Gundobad appears to have been the sole king of Burgundy. This would imply that his brother Gundomar was already dead, though there are no specific mentions of the event in the sources.\nEither Gundobad and Clovis reconciled their differences, or Gundobad was forced into some sort of vassalage by Clovis' earlier victory, as the Burgundian king appears to have assisted the Franks in 507 in their victory over Alaric II the Visigoth.\nDuring the upheaval, sometime between 483\u2013501, Gundobad began to set forth the \"Lex Gundobada\" (see below), issuing roughly the first half, which drew upon the \"Lex Visigothorum\". Following his consolidation of power, between 501 and his death in 516, Gundobad issued the second half of his law, which was more originally Burgundian.\nFall.\nThe Burgundians were extending their power over southeastern Gaul\u2014that is, northern Italy, western Switzerland, and southeastern France. In 493, Clovis, king of the Franks, married the Burgundian princess Clotilda (daughter of Chilperic), who converted him to the Catholic faith.\nAt first allied with Clovis' Franks against the Visigoths in the early 6th century, the Burgundians were eventually conquered at Autun by the Franks in 532 after a first attempt in the Battle of V\u00e9zeronce. The Burgundian kingdom was made part of the Merovingian kingdoms, and the Burgundians themselves were by and large absorbed as well.\nPhysical appearance.\nThe 5th century Gallo-Roman poet and landowner Sidonius, who at one point lived with the Burgundians, described them as a long-haired people of immense physical size:\nLanguage.\nThe Burgundians and their language were described as Germanic by the poet Sidonius Apollinaris. Herwig Wolfram has interpreted this as being because they had entered Gaul from \"Germania\".\nMore specifically their language is thought to have belonged to the East Germanic language group, based upon their presumed equivalence to the Burgundians named much earlier by Pliny in the east, and some names and placenames. However this is now considered uncertain. Little is known of the language. Some proper names of Burgundians are recorded, and some words used in the area in modern times are thought to be derived from the ancient Burgundian language, but it is often difficult to distinguish these from Germanic words of other origin, and in any case the modern form of the words is rarely suitable to infer much about the form in the old language.\nThe language appears to have become extinct during the late sixth century.\nReligion.\nSomewhere in the east the Burgundians had converted to the Arian Christianity from earlier Germanic paganism. Their Arianism proved a source of suspicion and distrust between the Burgundians and the Catholic Western Roman Empire.\nDivisions were evidently healed or healing circa 500, however, as Gundobad, one of the last Burgundian kings, maintained a close personal friendship with Avitus, the bishop of Vienne. Moreover, Gundobad's son and successor, Sigismund, was himself a Catholic, and there is evidence that many of the Burgundian people had converted by this time as well, including several female members of the ruling family.\nLaw.\nThe Burgundians left three legal codes, among the earliest from any of the Germanic tribes.\nThe Liber Constitutionum sive Lex Gundobada (\"The Book of Constitutions or Law of Gundobad\"), also known as the \"Lex Burgundionum\", or more simply the \"Lex Gundobada\" or the \"Liber\", was issued in several parts between 483 and 516, principally by Gundobad, but also by his son, Sigismund. It was a record of Burgundian customary law and is typical of the many Germanic law codes from this period. In particular, the \"Liber\" borrowed from the \"Lex Visigothorum\" and influenced the later \"Lex Ripuaria\". The \"Liber\" is one of the primary sources for contemporary Burgundian life, as well as the history of its kings.\nLike many of the Germanic tribes, the Burgundians' legal traditions allowed the application of separate laws for separate ethnicities. Thus, in addition to the \"Lex Gundobada\", Gundobad also issued (or codified) a set of laws for Roman subjects of the Burgundian kingdom, the \"Lex Romana Burgundionum\" (\"The Roman Law of the Burgundians\").\nIn addition to the above codes, Gundobad's son Sigismund later published the \"Prima Constitutio\"."}
{"id": "4260", "revid": "2051880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4260", "title": "Dots and Boxes", "text": "Dots and Boxes is a pencil-and-paper game for two players (sometimes more). It was first published in the 19th century by French mathematician \u00c9douard Lucas, who called it . It has gone by many other names, including the game of dots, dot to dot grid, boxes, and pigs in a pen.\nThe game starts with an empty grid of dots. Usually two players take turns adding a single horizontal or vertical line between two \"unjoined\" adjacent dots. A player who completes the fourth side of a 1\u00d71 box earns one point and takes another turn. (A point is typically recorded by placing a mark that identifies the player in the box, such as an initial.) The game ends when no more lines can be placed. The winner is the player with the most points. The board may be of any size grid. When short on time, or to learn the game, a 2\u00d72 board (3\u00d73 dots) is suitable. A 5\u00d75 board, on the other hand, is good for experts.\nThe diagram on the right shows a game being played on a 2\u00d72 board (3\u00d73 dots). The second player (\"B\") plays a rotated mirror image of the first player's moves, hoping to divide the board into two pieces and tie the game. But the first player (\"A\") makes a \"sacrifice\" at move 7 and B accepts the sacrifice, getting one box. However, B \"must\" now add another line, and so B connects the center dot to the center-right dot, causing the remaining unscored boxes to be joined together in a \"chain\" (shown at the end of move 8). With A's next move, A gets all three of them and ends the game, winning 3\u20131.\nStrategy.\nFor most novice players, the game begins with a phase of more-or-less randomly connecting dots, where the only strategy is to avoid adding the third side to any box. This continues until all the remaining (potential) boxes are joined together into \"chains\" \u2013 groups of one or more adjacent boxes in which any move gives all the boxes in the chain to the opponent. At this point, players typically take all available boxes, then \"open\" the smallest available chain to their opponent. For example, a novice player faced with a situation like position 1 in the diagram on the right, in which some boxes can be captured, may take all the boxes in the chain, resulting in position 2. But, with their last move, they have to open the next, larger chain, and the novice loses the game.\nA more \"experienced\" player faced with position 1 will instead play the \"double-cross strategy\", taking all but 2 of the boxes in the chain and leaving position 3. The opponent will take these two boxes and then be forced to open the next chain. By achieving position 3, player A wins. The same double-cross strategy applies no matter how many long chains there are: a player using this strategy will take all but two boxes in each chain and take all the boxes in the last chain. If the chains are long enough, then this player will win.\nThe next level of strategic complexity, between \"experts\" who would both use the double-cross strategy (if they were allowed to), is a battle for \"control\": An expert player tries to force their opponent \"to open the first long chain\", because the player who first opens a long chain usually loses. Against a player who does not understand the concept of a sacrifice, the expert simply has to make the correct number of sacrifices to encourage the opponent to hand him the first chain long enough to ensure a win. \"If\" the other player also sacrifices, the expert has to additionally manipulate the number of available sacrifices through earlier play.\nIn combinatorial game theory, dots and boxes is an impartial game and many positions can be analyzed using Sprague\u2013Grundy theory. However, Dots and Boxes lacks the normal play convention of most impartial games (where the last player to move wins), which complicates the analysis considerably.\nUnusual grids and variants.\nDots and Boxes need not be played on a rectangular grid \u2013 it can be played on a triangular grid or a hexagonal grid.\nDots and Boxes has a dual graph form called \"Strings-and-Coins\". This game is played on a network of coins (vertices) joined by strings (edges). Players take turns cutting a string. When a cut leaves a coin with no strings, the player \"pockets\" the coin and takes another turn. The winner is the player who pockets the most coins. Strings-and-Coins can be played on an arbitrary graph.\nA variant Kropki played in Poland allows a player to claim a region of several squares as soon as its boundary is completed.\nIn analyses of Dots and Boxes, a game board that starts with outer lines already drawn is called a \"Swedish board\" while the standard version that starts fully blank is called an \"American board\". An intermediate version with only the left and bottom sides starting with drawn lines is called an \"Icelandic board\"."}
{"id": "4261", "revid": "35498106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4261", "title": "Big Brother (Nineteen Eighty-Four)", "text": "Big Brother is a fictional character and symbol in George Orwell's dystopian 1949 novel \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". He is ostensibly the leader of Oceania, a totalitarian state wherein the ruling party Ingsoc wields total power \"for its own sake\" over the inhabitants. In the society that Orwell describes, every citizen is under constant surveillance by the authorities, mainly by telescreens (with the exception of the Proles). The people are constantly reminded of this by the slogan \"Big Brother is watching you\": a maxim that is ubiquitously on display.\nIn modern culture, the term \"Big Brother\" has entered the lexicon as a synonym for abuse of government power, particularly in respect to civil liberties, often specifically related to mass surveillance.\nCharacter origins.\nIn the essay section of his novel \"1985\", Anthony Burgess states that Orwell got the idea for the name of Big Brother from advertising billboards for educational correspondence courses from a company called Bennett's during World War II. The original posters showed J. M. Bennett himself, a kindly-looking old man offering guidance and support to would-be students with the phrase \"Let me be your father.\" According to Burgess, after Bennett's death, his son took over the company and the posters were replaced with pictures of the son (who looked imposing and stern in contrast to his father's kindly demeanor) with the text \"Let me be your big brother\".\nAdditional speculation from Douglas Kellner of the University of California, Los Angeles argued that Big Brother represents Joseph Stalin, representing Communism, including Stalinism, and Adolf Hitler, representing Nazism. Another theory is that the inspiration for Big Brother was Brendan Bracken, the Minister of Information, a government department in wartime United Kingdom, until 1945. Orwell worked under Bracken on the BBC's Indian, Hong Kong (\"present-day Hong Kong, China\") and Malayan (\"modern Malaysian\") Service. Bracken was customarily referred to by his employees by his initials, B.B., the same initials as the character Big Brother. Orwell also resented the wartime censorship and need to manipulate information which he felt came from the highest levels of the Minister of Information and from Bracken's office in particular.\nPortrayal in the novel.\nExistence.\nIn the novel, it is never explicitly indicated if Big Brother is or had been a real person, or is a fictional personification of the Party, similar to Britannia and Uncle Sam. Big Brother is described as appearing on posters and telescreens as a man in his mid-forties. In Party propaganda, Big Brother is presented as one of the founders of the Party.\nAt one point, Winston Smith, the protagonist of Orwell's novel, tries \"to remember in what year he had first heard mention of Big Brother. He thought it must have been at some time in the sixties, but it was impossible to be certain. In the Party histories, Big Brother figured as the leader and guardian of the Revolution since its very earliest days. His exploits had been gradually pushed backwards in time until already they extended into the fabulous world of the forties and the thirties, when the capitalists in their strange cylindrical hats still rode through the streets of London\".\nIn the book \"The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism\", read by Winston Smith and purportedly written by Goldstein, Big Brother is referred to as infallible and all-powerful. No one has ever seen him and there is a reasonable certainty that he will never die. He is simply \"the guise in which the Party chooses to exhibit itself to the world\" since the emotions of love, fear and reverence are more easily focused on an individual (if only a face on the hoardings and a voice on the telescreens) than an organisation. When Winston Smith is later arrested, O'Brien repeats that Big Brother will never die. When Smith asks if Big Brother exists, O'Brien describes him as \"the embodiment of the Party\" and says that he will exist as long as the Party exists. When Winston asks \"Does Big Brother exist the same way I do?\" (meaning is Big Brother an actual human being), O'Brien replies \"You do not exist\" (meaning that Smith is now an unperson; an example of doublethink).\nCult of personality.\nBig Brother is the subject of a cult of personality. A spontaneous ritual of devotion to \"BB\" is illustrated at the end of the compulsory Two Minutes Hate:\nThough Oceania's Ministry of Truth, Ministry of Plenty and Ministry of Peace each have names with meanings deliberately opposite to their real purpose, the Ministry of Love is perhaps the most straightforward as \"rehabilitated thought criminals\" leave the Ministry as loyal subjects who have been brainwashed into adoring (loving) Big Brother, hence its name.\nThe term \"ministry\" implies that each of these ministries is headed by a minister. If so, however, these ministers seem to be shadowy figures, whose names, words and acts are not publicised\u2014public attention being focused solely on Big Brother.\nFilm adaptations.\nThe character, as represented solely by a single still photograph, was played in the 1954 BBC adaptation by production designer Roy Oxley. In the 1956 film adaptation, Big Brother was represented by an illustration of a stern-looking disembodied head.\nIn the film starring John Hurt released in 1984, the Big Brother photograph was of actor Bob Flag. Both Oxley and Flag sported small moustaches.\nCriticism and use as metaphor.\nSince the publication of \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", the phrase \"Big Brother\" has come into common use to describe any prying or overly-controlling authority figure and attempts by government to increase surveillance. Big Brother and other Orwellian imagery are often referenced in the joke known as the Russian reversal.\nIain Moncreiffe and Don Pottinger jokingly mentioned in their 1956 book \"Blood Royal\" the sentence: \"Without Little Father need for Big Brother\", referring to the Russian Revolution and the Soviet Union.\nThe worldwide reality television show \"Big Brother\" is based on the novel's concept of people being under constant surveillance. In 2000, after the United States version of the CBS program \"Big Brother\" premiered, the Estate of George Orwell sued CBS and its production company Orwell Productions, Inc. in federal court in Chicago for copyright and trademark infringement. The case was \"Estate of Orwell v. CBS\", 00-c-5034 (ND Ill). On the eve of trial, the case settled worldwide to the parties' \"mutual satisfaction\", but the amount that CBS paid to the Orwell Estate was not disclosed. CBS had not asked the Estate for permission. Under current laws, the novel will remain under copyright protection until 2020 in the European Union and until 2044 in the United States.\nThe December 2002 issue of \"Gear\" magazine featured a story about technologies and trends that could violate personal privacy moving society closer to a \"Big Brother\" state and utilised a recreation of the movie poster from the film version of \"1984\". The magazine \"Book\" ranked Big Brother no. 59 on its \"100 best characters in fiction since 1900\" list. \"Wizard\" magazine rated him the 75th-greatest villain of all time.\nThe iconic image of Big Brother (played by David Graham) played a key role in Apple's \"1984\" television commercial introducing the Macintosh. The Orwell Estate viewed the Apple commercial as a copyright infringement and sent a cease-and-desist letter to Apple and its advertising agency. The commercial was never televised again, though the date mentioned in the ad (24 January) was but two days later, making it unlikely that it would have been re-aired. Subsequent (now posthumous) ads featuring Steve Jobs (for a variety of products including audio books) have mimicked the format and appearance of that original ad campaign, with the appearance of Jobs nearly identical to that of Big Brother. In 2008, \"The Simpsons\" spoofed Apple's Big Brother commercial in an episode entitled \"Mypods and Boomsticks\".\nComputer company Microsoft patented in 2011 a product distribution system with a camera or capture device that monitors the viewers that consume the product, allowing the provider to take \"remedial action\" if the actual viewers do not match the distribution license. The system has been compared with \"1984\" telescreen surveillance system.\nA series of laws intended to implement the European Union Data Retention Directive in Romania were nicknamed \"the Big Brother laws\" by Romanian media and critics as they would have led to blanket storage of citizens' telecommunications data for six months. All of these laws were struck down as unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court of Romania and the Directive itself was ultimately invalidated by the Court of Justice of the European Union.\nIn the 2010 video game \"BioShock 2\", there is an enemy named the Big Sister. The phrase \"Big Sister is watching\" is a reference to the 1984 phrase \"Big Brother is watching\".\nIn 2018, the video game Rainbow six: Siege, refer to Big Brother in his character \"Lion\", who can use a flying drone that can detect any movements for a short amount of time. In the introduction cinematic of the operation Chimera, he even says \"Big Brother is watching on us\".\nChina's Social Credit System has been described as akin to \"Big Brother\" by detractors, where citizens and businesses are given or deducted good behavior points depending on their choices."}
{"id": "4265", "revid": "5787719", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4265", "title": "Bodes law", "text": ""}
{"id": "4266", "revid": "33077729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4266", "title": "Binary search algorithm", "text": "In computer science, binary search, also known as half-interval search, logarithmic search, or binary chop, is a search algorithm that finds the position of a target value within a sorted array. Binary search compares the target value to the middle element of the array. If they are not equal, the half in which the target cannot lie is eliminated and the search continues on the remaining half, again taking the middle element to compare to the target value, and repeating this until the target value is found. If the search ends with the remaining half being empty, the target is not in the array.\nBinary search runs in logarithmic time in the worst case, making formula_1 comparisons, where formula_2 is the number of elements in the array. Binary search is faster than linear search except for small arrays. However, the array must be sorted first to be able to apply binary search. There are specialized data structures designed for fast searching, such as hash tables, that can be searched more efficiently than binary search. However, binary search can be used to solve a wider range of problems, such as finding the next-smallest or next-largest element in the array relative to the target even if it is absent from the array.\nThere are numerous variations of binary search. In particular, fractional cascading speeds up binary searches for the same value in multiple arrays. Fractional cascading efficiently solves a number of search problems in computational geometry and in numerous other fields. Exponential search extends binary search to unbounded lists. The binary search tree and B-tree data structures are based on binary search.\nAlgorithm.\nBinary search works on sorted arrays. Binary search begins by comparing an element in the middle of the array with the target value. If the target value matches the element, its position in the array is returned. If the target value is less than the element, the search continues in the lower half of the array. If the target value is greater than the element, the search continues in the upper half of the array. By doing this, the algorithm eliminates the half in which the target value cannot lie in each iteration.\nProcedure.\nGiven an array formula_3 of formula_2 elements with values or records formula_5sorted such that formula_6, and target value formula_7, the following subroutine uses binary search to find the index of formula_7 in formula_3.\nThis iterative procedure keeps track of the search boundaries with the two variables formula_10 and formula_12. The procedure may be expressed in pseudocode as follows, where the variable names and types remain the same as above, codice_1 is the floor function, and codice_2 refers to a specific value that conveys the failure of the search.\n function binary_search(A, n, T) is\n L := 0\n R := n \u2212 1\n while L \u2264 R do\n m := floor((L + R) / 2)\n if A[m] &lt; T then\n L := m + 1\n else if A[m] &gt; T then\n R := m \u2212 1\n else:\n return m\n return unsuccessful\nAlternatively, the algorithm may take the ceiling of formula_16. This may change the result if the target value appears more than once in the array.\nAlternative procedure.\nIn the above procedure, the algorithm checks whether the middle element (formula_15) is equal to the target (formula_7) in every iteration. Some implementations leave out this check during each iteration. The algorithm would perform this check only when one element is left (when formula_31). This results in a faster comparison loop, as one comparison is eliminated per iteration. However, it requires one more iteration on average.\nHermann Bottenbruch published the first implementation to leave out this check in 1962.\nWhere codice_3 is the ceiling function, the pseudocode for this version is:\n function binary_search_alternative(A, n, T) is\n L := 0\n R := n \u2212 1\n while L != R do\n m := ceil((L + R) / 2)\n if A[m] &gt; T then\n R := m \u2212 1\n else:\n L := m\n if A[L] = T then\n return L\n return unsuccessful\nDuplicate elements.\nThe procedure may return any index whose element is equal to the target value, even if there are duplicate elements in the array. For example, if the array to be searched was formula_49 and the target was formula_50, then it would be correct for the algorithm to either return the 4th (index 3) or 5th (index 4) element. The regular procedure would return the 4th element (index 3) in this case. It does not always return the first duplicate (consider formula_51 which still returns the 4th element). However, it is sometimes necessary to find the leftmost element or the rightmost element for a target value that is duplicated in the array. In the above example, the 4th element is the leftmost element of the value 4, while the 5th element is the rightmost element of the value 4. The alternative procedure above will always return the index of the rightmost element if such an element exists.\nProcedure for finding the leftmost element.\nTo find the leftmost element, the following procedure can be used:\nIf formula_67 and formula_68, then formula_69 is the leftmost element that equals formula_7. Even if formula_7 is not in the array, formula_10 is the rank of formula_7 in the array, or the number of elements in the array that are less than formula_7.\nWhere codice_1 is the floor function, the pseudocode for this version is:\n function binary_search_leftmost(A, n, T):\n L := 0\n R := n\n while L &lt; R:\n m := floor((L + R) / 2)\n if A[m] &lt; T:\n L := m + 1\n else:\n R := m\n return L\nProcedure for finding the rightmost element.\nTo find the rightmost element, the following procedure can be used:\nIf formula_90 and formula_91, then formula_92 is the rightmost element that equals formula_7. Even if \"formula_7\" is not in the array, formula_95 is the number of elements in the array that are greater than \"formula_7\".\nWhere codice_1 is the floor function, the pseudocode for this version is:\n function binary_search_rightmost(A, n, T):\n L := 0\n R := n\n while L &lt; R:\n m := floor((L + R) / 2)\n if A[m] &gt; T:\n R := m\n else:\n L := m + 1\n return R - 1\nApproximate matches.\nThe above procedure only performs \"exact\" matches, finding the position of a target value. However, it is trivial to extend binary search to perform approximate matches because binary search operates on sorted arrays. For example, binary search can be used to compute, for a given value, its rank (the number of smaller elements), predecessor (next-smallest element), successor (next-largest element), and nearest neighbor. Range queries seeking the number of elements between two values can be performed with two rank queries.\nPerformance.\nIn terms of the number of comparisons, the performance of binary search can be analyzed by viewing the run of the procedure on a binary tree. The root node of the tree is the middle element of the array. The middle element of the lower half is the left child node of the root, and the middle element of the upper half is the right child node of the root. The rest of the tree is built in a similar fashion. Starting from the root node, the left or right subtrees are traversed depending on whether the target value is less or more than the node under consideration.\nIn the worst case, binary search makes formula_101 iterations of the comparison loop, where the formula_102 notation denotes the floor function that yields the greatest integer less than or equal to the argument, and formula_103 is the binary logarithm. This is because the worst case is reached when the search reaches the deepest level of the tree, and there are always formula_101 levels in the tree for any binary search.\nThe worst case may also be reached when the target element is not in the array. If formula_105 is one less than a power of two, then this is always the case. Otherwise, the search may perform formula_101iterations if the search reaches the deepest level of the tree. However, it may make formula_107 iterations, which is one less than the worst case, if the search ends at the second-deepest level of the tree.\nOn average, assuming that each element is equally likely to be searched, binary search makes formula_108 iterations when the target element is in the array. This is approximately equal to formula_109 iterations. When the target element is not in the array, binary search makes formula_110 iterations on average, assuming that the range between and outside elements is equally likely to be searched.\nIn the best case, where the target value is the middle element of the array, its position is returned after one iteration.\nIn terms of iterations, no search algorithm that works only by comparing elements can exhibit better average and worst-case performance than binary search. The comparison tree representing binary search has the fewest levels possible as every level above the lowest level of the tree is filled completely. Otherwise, the search algorithm can eliminate few elements in an iteration, increasing the number of iterations required in the average and worst case. This is the case for other search algorithms based on comparisons, as while they may work faster on some target values, the average performance over \"all\" elements is worse than binary search. By dividing the array in half, binary search ensures that the size of both subarrays are as similar as possible.\nSpace complexity.\nBinary search requires three pointers to elements, which may be array indices or pointers to memory locations, regardless of the size of the array. Therefore, the space complexity of binary search is formula_111 in the word RAM model of computation.\nDerivation of average case.\nThe average number of iterations performed by binary search depends on the probability of each element being searched. The average case is different for successful searches and unsuccessful searches. It will be assumed that each element is equally likely to be searched for successful searches. For unsuccessful searches, it will be assumed that the intervals between and outside elements are equally likely to be searched. The average case for successful searches is the number of iterations required to search every element exactly once, divided by formula_2, the number of elements. The average case for unsuccessful searches is the number of iterations required to search an element within every interval exactly once, divided by the formula_113 intervals.\nSuccessful searches.\nIn the binary tree representation, a successful search can be represented by a path from the root to the target node, called an \"internal path\". The length of a path is the number of edges (connections between nodes) that the path passes through. The number of iterations performed by a search, given that the corresponding path has length formula_114, is formula_115 counting the initial iteration. The \"internal path length\" is the sum of the lengths of all unique internal paths. Since there is only one path from the root to any single node, each internal path represents a search for a specific element. If there are formula_2 elements, which is a positive integer, and the internal path length is formula_117, then the average number of iterations for a successful search formula_118, with the one iteration added to count the initial iteration.\nSince binary search is the optimal algorithm for searching with comparisons, this problem is reduced to calculating the minimum internal path length of all binary trees with formula_2 nodes, which is equal to:\nformula_120\nFor example, in a 7-element array, the root requires one iteration, the two elements below the root require two iterations, and the four elements below require three iterations. In this case, the internal path length is:\nformula_121\nThe average number of iterations would be formula_122 based on the equation for the average case. The sum for formula_117 can be simplified to:\nformula_124\nSubstituting the equation for formula_117 into the equation for formula_126:\nformula_127\nFor integer formula_2, this is equivalent to the equation for the average case on a successful search specified above.\nUnsuccessful searches.\nUnsuccessful searches can be represented by augmenting the tree with \"external nodes\", which forms an \"extended binary tree\". If an internal node, or a node present in the tree, has fewer than two child nodes, then additional child nodes, called external nodes, are added so that each internal node has two children. By doing so, an unsuccessful search can be represented as a path to an external node, whose parent is the single element that remains during the last iteration. An \"external path\" is a path from the root to an external node. The \"external path length\" is the sum of the lengths of all unique external paths. If there are formula_2 elements, which is a positive integer, and the external path length is formula_130, then the average number of iterations for an unsuccessful search formula_131, with the one iteration added to count the initial iteration. The external path length is divided by formula_132 instead of formula_2 because there are formula_132 external paths, representing the intervals between and outside the elements of the array.\nThis problem can similarly be reduced to determining the minimum external path length of all binary trees with formula_2 nodes. For all binary trees, the external path length is equal to the internal path length plus formula_136. Substituting the equation for formula_117:\nformula_138\nSubstituting the equation for formula_130 into the equation for formula_140, the average case for unsuccessful searches can be determined:\nformula_141\nPerformance of alternative procedure.\nEach iteration of the binary search procedure defined above makes one or two comparisons, checking if the middle element is equal to the target in each iteration. Assuming that each element is equally likely to be searched, each iteration makes 1.5 comparisons on average. A variation of the algorithm checks whether the middle element is equal to the target at the end of the search. On average, this eliminates half a comparison from each iteration. This slightly cuts the time taken per iteration on most computers. However, it guarantees that the search takes the maximum number of iterations, on average adding one iteration to the search. Because the comparison loop is performed only formula_101 times in the worst case, the slight increase in efficiency per iteration does not compensate for the extra iteration for all but very large formula_105.\nRunning time and cache use.\nIn analyzing the performance of binary search, another consideration is the time required to compare two elements. For integers and strings, the time required increases linearly as the encoding length (usually the number of bits) of the elements increase. For example, comparing a pair of 64-bit unsigned integers would require comparing up to double the bits as comparing a pair of 32-bit unsigned integers. The worst case is achieved when the integers are equal. This can be significant when the encoding lengths of the elements are large, such as with large integer types or long strings, which makes comparing elements expensive. Furthermore, comparing floating-point values (the most common digital representation of real numbers) is often more expensive than comparing integers or short strings.\nOn most computer architectures, the processor has a hardware cache separate from RAM. Since they are located within the processor itself, caches are much faster to access but usually store much less data than RAM. Therefore, most processors store memory locations that have been accessed recently, along with memory locations close to it. For example, when an array element is accessed, the element itself may be stored along with the elements that are stored close to it in RAM, making it faster to sequentially access array elements that are close in index to each other (locality of reference). On a sorted array, binary search can jump to distant memory locations if the array is large, unlike algorithms (such as linear search and linear probing in hash tables) which access elements in sequence. This adds slightly to the running time of binary search for large arrays on most systems.\nBinary search versus other schemes.\nSorted arrays with binary search are a very inefficient solution when insertion and deletion operations are interleaved with retrieval, taking formula_144 time for each such operation. In addition, sorted arrays can complicate memory use especially when elements are often inserted into the array. There are other data structures that support much more efficient insertion and deletion. Binary search can be used to perform exact matching and set membership (determining whether a target value is in a collection of values). There are data structures that support faster exact matching and set membership. However, unlike many other searching schemes, binary search can be used for efficient approximate matching, usually performing such matches in formula_145 time regardless of the type or structure of the values themselves. In addition, there are some operations, like finding the smallest and largest element, that can be performed efficiently on a sorted array.\nLinear search.\nLinear search is a simple search algorithm that checks every record until it finds the target value. Linear search can be done on a linked list, which allows for faster insertion and deletion than an array. Binary search is faster than linear search for sorted arrays except if the array is short, although the array needs to be sorted beforehand. All sorting algorithms based on comparing elements, such as quicksort and merge sort, require at least formula_146 comparisons in the worst case. Unlike linear search, binary search can be used for efficient approximate matching. There are operations such as finding the smallest and largest element that can be done efficiently on a sorted array but not on an unsorted array.\nTrees.\nA binary search tree is a binary tree data structure that works based on the principle of binary search. The records of the tree are arranged in sorted order, and each record in the tree can be searched using an algorithm similar to binary search, taking on average logarithmic time. Insertion and deletion also require on average logarithmic time in binary search trees. This can be faster than the linear time insertion and deletion of sorted arrays, and binary trees retain the ability to perform all the operations possible on a sorted array, including range and approximate queries.\nHowever, binary search is usually more efficient for searching as binary search trees will most likely be imperfectly balanced, resulting in slightly worse performance than binary search. This even applies to balanced binary search trees, binary search trees that balance their own nodes, because they rarely produce the tree with the fewest possible levels. Except for balanced binary search trees, the tree may be severely imbalanced with few internal nodes with two children, resulting in the average and worst-case search time approaching formula_105 comparisons. Binary search trees take more space than sorted arrays.\nBinary search trees lend themselves to fast searching in external memory stored in hard disks, as binary search trees can be efficiently structured in filesystems. The B-tree generalizes this method of tree organization. B-trees are frequently used to organize long-term storage such as databases and filesystems.\nHashing.\nFor implementing associative arrays, hash tables, a data structure that maps keys to records using a hash function, are generally faster than binary search on a sorted array of records. Most hash table implementations require only amortized constant time on average. However, hashing is not useful for approximate matches, such as computing the next-smallest, next-largest, and nearest key, as the only information given on a failed search is that the target is not present in any record. Binary search is ideal for such matches, performing them in logarithmic time. Binary search also supports approximate matches. Some operations, like finding the smallest and largest element, can be done efficiently on sorted arrays but not on hash tables.\nSet membership algorithms.\nA related problem to search is set membership. Any algorithm that does lookup, like binary search, can also be used for set membership. There are other algorithms that are more specifically suited for set membership. A bit array is the simplest, useful when the range of keys is limited. It compactly stores a collection of bits, with each bit representing a single key within the range of keys. Bit arrays are very fast, requiring only formula_148 time. The Judy1 type of Judy array handles 64-bit keys efficiently.\nFor approximate results, Bloom filters, another probabilistic data structure based on hashing, store a set of keys by encoding the keys using a bit array and multiple hash functions. Bloom filters are much more space-efficient than bit arrays in most cases and not much slower: with formula_149 hash functions, membership queries require only formula_150 time. However, Bloom filters suffer from false positives.\nOther data structures.\nThere exist data structures that may improve on binary search in some cases for both searching and other operations available for sorted arrays. For example, searches, approximate matches, and the operations available to sorted arrays can be performed more efficiently than binary search on specialized data structures such as van Emde Boas trees, fusion trees, tries, and bit arrays. These specialized data structures are usually only faster because they take advantage of the properties of keys with a certain attribute (usually keys that are small integers), and thus will be time or space consuming for keys that lack that attribute. As long as the keys can be ordered, these operations can always be done at least efficiently on a sorted array regardless of the keys. Some structures, such as Judy arrays, use a combination of approaches to mitigate this while retaining efficiency and the ability to perform approximate matching.\nVariations.\nUniform binary search.\nUniform binary search stores, instead of the lower and upper bounds, the difference in the index of the middle element from the current iteration to the next iteration. A lookup table containing the differences is computed beforehand. For example, if the array to be searched is , the middle element (formula_15) would be . In this case, the middle element of the left subarray () is and the middle element of the right subarray () is . Uniform binary search would store the value of as both indices differ from by this same amount. To reduce the search space, the algorithm either adds or subtracts this change from the index of the middle element. Uniform binary search may be faster on systems where it is inefficient to calculate the midpoint, such as on decimal computers.\nExponential search.\nExponential search extends binary search to unbounded lists. It starts by finding the first element with an index that is both a power of two and greater than the target value. Afterwards, it sets that index as the upper bound, and switches to binary search. A search takes formula_152 iterations before binary search is started and at most formula_153 iterations of the binary search, where formula_154 is the position of the target value. Exponential search works on bounded lists, but becomes an improvement over binary search only if the target value lies near the beginning of the array.\nInterpolation search.\nInstead of calculating the midpoint, interpolation search estimates the position of the target value, taking into account the lowest and highest elements in the array as well as length of the array. It works on the basis that the midpoint is not the best guess in many cases. For example, if the target value is close to the highest element in the array, it is likely to be located near the end of the array.\nA common interpolation function is linear interpolation. If formula_3 is the array, formula_156 are the lower and upper bounds respectively, and formula_7 is the target, then the target is estimated to be about formula_158 of the way between formula_10 and formula_12. When linear interpolation is used, and the distribution of the array elements is uniform or near uniform, interpolation search makes formula_161 comparisons.\nIn practice, interpolation search is slower than binary search for small arrays, as interpolation search requires extra computation. Its time complexity grows more slowly than binary search, but this only compensates for the extra computation for large arrays.\nFractional cascading.\nFractional cascading is a technique that speeds up binary searches for the same element in multiple sorted arrays. Searching each array separately requires formula_162 time, where formula_149 is the number of arrays. Fractional cascading reduces this to formula_164 by storing specific information in each array about each element and its position in the other arrays.\nFractional cascading was originally developed to efficiently solve various computational geometry problems. Fractional cascading has been applied elsewhere, such as in data mining and Internet Protocol routing.\nGeneralization to graphs.\nBinary search has been generalized to work on certain types of graphs, where the target value is stored in a vertex instead of an array element. Binary search trees are one such generalization\u2014when a vertex (node) in the tree is queried, the algorithm either learns that the vertex is the target, or otherwise which subtree the target would be located in. However, this can be further generalized as follows: given an undirected, positively weighted graph and a target vertex, the algorithm learns upon querying a vertex that it is equal to the target, or it is given an incident edge that is on the shortest path from the queried vertex to the target. The standard binary search algorithm is simply the case where the graph is a path. Similarly, binary search trees are the case where the edges to the left or right subtrees are given when the queried vertex is unequal to the target. For all undirected, positively weighted graphs, there is an algorithm that finds the target vertex in formula_1 queries in the worst case.\nNoisy binary search.\nNoisy binary search algorithms solve the case where the algorithm cannot reliably compare elements of the array. For each pair of elements, there is a certain probability that the algorithm makes the wrong comparison. Noisy binary search can find the correct position of the target with a given probability that controls the reliability of the yielded position. Every noisy binary search procedure must make at least formula_166 comparisons on average, where formula_167 is the binary entropy function and formula_168 is the probability that the procedure yields the wrong position. The noisy binary search problem can be considered as a case of the R\u00e9nyi-Ulam game, a variant of Twenty Questions where the answers may be wrong.\nQuantum binary search.\nClassical computers are bounded to the worst case of exactly formula_169 iterations when performing binary search. Quantum algorithms for binary search are still bounded to a proportion of formula_170 queries (representing iterations of the classical procedure), but the constant factor is less than one, providing for a lower time complexity on quantum computers. Any \"exact\" quantum binary search procedure\u2014that is, a procedure that always yields the correct result\u2014requires at least formula_171 queries in the worst case, where formula_172 is the natural logarithm. There is an exact quantum binary search procedure that runs in formula_173 queries in the worst case. In comparison, Grover's algorithm is the optimal quantum algorithm for searching an unordered list of elements, and it requires formula_174 queries.\nHistory.\nThe idea of sorting a list of items to allow for faster searching dates back to antiquity. The earliest known example was the Inakibit-Anu tablet from Babylon dating back to . The tablet contained about 500 sexagesimal numbers and their reciprocals sorted in lexicographical order, which made searching for a specific entry easier. In addition, several lists of names that were sorted by their first letter were discovered on the Aegean Islands. \"Catholicon\", a Latin dictionary finished in 1286 CE, was the first work to describe rules for sorting words into alphabetical order, as opposed to just the first few letters.\nIn 1946, John Mauchly made the first mention of binary search as part of the Moore School Lectures, a seminal and foundational college course in computing. In 1957, William Wesley Peterson published the first method for interpolation search. Every published binary search algorithm worked only for arrays whose length is one less than a power of two until 1960, when Derrick Henry Lehmer published a binary search algorithm that worked on all arrays. In 1962, Hermann Bottenbruch presented an ALGOL 60 implementation of binary search that placed the comparison for equality at the end, increasing the average number of iterations by one, but reducing to one the number of comparisons per iteration. The uniform binary search was developed by A. K. Chandra of Stanford University in 1971. In 1986, Bernard Chazelle and Leonidas J. Guibas introduced fractional cascading as a method to solve numerous search problems in computational geometry.\nImplementation issues.\nWhen Jon Bentley assigned binary search as a problem in a course for professional programmers, he found that ninety percent failed to provide a correct solution after several hours of working on it, mainly because the incorrect implementations failed to run or returned a wrong answer in rare edge cases. A study published in 1988 shows that accurate code for it is only found in five out of twenty textbooks. Furthermore, Bentley's own implementation of binary search, published in his 1986 book \"Programming Pearls\", contained an overflow error that remained undetected for over twenty years. The Java programming language library implementation of binary search had the same overflow bug for more than nine years.\nIn a practical implementation, the variables used to represent the indices will often be of fixed size (integers), and this can result in an arithmetic overflow for very large arrays. If the midpoint of the span is calculated as formula_16, then the value of formula_176 may exceed the range of integers of the data type used to store the midpoint, even if formula_10 and formula_12 are within the range. If \"formula_10\" and \"formula_12\" are nonnegative, this can be avoided by calculating the midpoint as formula_181.\nAn infinite loop may occur if the exit conditions for the loop are not defined correctly. Once \"formula_10\" exceeds \"formula_12\", the search has failed and must convey the failure of the search. In addition, the loop must be exited when the target element is found, or in the case of an implementation where this check is moved to the end, checks for whether the search was successful or failed at the end must be in place. Bentley found that most of the programmers who incorrectly implemented binary search made an error in defining the exit conditions.\nLibrary support.\nMany languages' standard libraries include binary search routines:"}
{"id": "4267", "revid": "15865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4267", "title": "Belle and Sebastian", "text": "Belle and Sebastian are a Scottish indie pop band formed in Glasgow in 1994. Led by Stuart Murdoch, the band has released ten albums. Much of their work had been released on Jeepster Records, but they are now signed to Matador Records worldwide.\nHistory.\nFormation and early years (1994\u20131998).\nBelle and Sebastian were formed in Glasgow, Scotland in 1994 by Stuart Murdoch and Stuart David, both of whom had enrolled at Stow College's Beatbox programme for unemployed musicians. Together, with music professor Alan Rankine (formerly of The Associates), they recorded some demos, which were picked up by the college's Music Business course that produces and releases one single each year on the college's label, Electric Honey. As the band had a number of songs already and the label was extremely impressed with the demos, Belle and Sebastian were allowed to record a full-length album, which was recorded mostly live over three days, entitled \"Tigermilk\". Murdoch once described the band as a \"product of botched capitalism\". The band took their name from a short story Murdoch had written inspired by the television adaptation of the French novel \"Belle et S\u00e9bastien\" about a six-year-old boy and his dog.\n\"Tigermilk\" was recorded in three days and originally only one thousand copies were pressed in vinyl. As of 2007, these original copies were valued up to \u00a3400. The warm reception the album received inspired Murdoch and David to turn the band into a full-time project, recruiting Stevie Jackson (guitar and vocals), Isobel Campbell (cello/vocals), Chris Geddes (keys) and Richard Colburn (drums) to fill out the group.\nAfter the success of the debut album, Belle and Sebastian were signed to Jeepster Records in August 1996 and \"If You're Feeling Sinister\", their second album, was released on 18 November. The album was named by \"Spin\" as one of the 100 greatest albums between 1985 and 2005, and it is widely considered the band's masterpiece. Just before the recording of \"Sinister\", Sarah Martin (violin/vocals) joined the band. Following this a series of EPs were released in 1997. The first of these was \"Dog on Wheels\", which contained four demo tracks recorded before the real formation of the band. In fact, the only long-term band members to play on the songs were Murdoch, David, and Mick Cooke, who played trumpet on the EP but would not officially join the band until a few years later. It charted at No.\u00a059 in the UK singles chart.\nThe \"Lazy Line Painter Jane\" EP followed in July. The track was recorded in the church where Murdoch lived and features vocals from Monica Queen. The EP narrowly missed out on the UK top 40, peaking at No.\u00a041. The last of the 1997 EPs was October's \"3.. 6.. 9 Seconds of Light\". The EP was made Single of the Week in both the \"NME\" and \"Melody Maker\" and reached No.\u00a032 in the charts, thus becoming the band's first top 40 single.\nCritical acclaim and line-up changes (1998\u20132003).\nThe band released their third LP, \"The Boy with the Arab Strap\" in 1998, and it reached No.\u00a012 in the UK charts. \"Arab Strap\" garnered an NPR interview and positive reviews from \"Rolling Stone\" and the \"Village Voice,\" among others; however, the album has its detractors, including \"Pitchfork\", who gave the album a particularly poor review, calling it a \"parody\" of their earlier work (Pitchfork has since removed the review from their website and re-reviewed the album positively in 2018). During the recording of the album, long-time studio trumpet-player Mick Cooke was asked to join the band as a full member. The \"This Is Just a Modern Rock Song\" EP followed later that year.\nIn 1999, the band was awarded with Best Newcomer (for their third album) at the BRIT Awards, upsetting better-known acts such as Steps and 5ive. That same year, the band hosted their own festival, the Bowlie Weekender. \"Tigermilk\" was also given a full release by Jeepster before the band started work on their next LP. The result was \"Fold Your Hands Child, You Walk Like a Peasant\", which became the band's first top 10 album in the UK. A stand-alone single, \"Legal Man\", reached No.\u00a015 and gave them their first appearance on Top of the Pops.\nAs the band's popularity and recognition was growing worldwide, their music began appearing in films and on television. The 2000 film \"High Fidelity\" mentions the band (negatively, with Jack Black's character referring to them as \"Old Sad Bastard\" and disdaining their soft style) and features a clip from the song \"Seymour Stein\" from \"The Boy with the Arab Strap\". Also, the title track from \"Arab Strap\" was played over the end credits of the UK television series \"Teachers,\" and the lyric \"Colour my life with the chaos of trouble\" from the song was quoted by one of the characters in the 2009 film \"(500) Days of Summer\".\nStuart David soon left the band to concentrate on his side project, Looper, and his book writing, which included his \"The Idle Thoughts of a Daydreamer\". He was replaced by Bobby Kildea of V-Twin. The \"Jonathan David\" single, sung by Stevie Jackson, was released in June 2001 and was followed by \"I'm Waking Up to Us\" in November. \"I'm Waking Up to Us\" saw the band use an outside producer (Mike Hurst) for the first time. Most of 2002 was spent touring and recording a soundtrack album, \"Storytelling\" (for \"Storytelling\" by Todd Solondz). Campbell left the band in the spring of 2002, in the middle of the band's North American tour to pursue a solo career, first as The Gentle Waves, and later under her own name. She later collaborated with singer Mark Lanegan on three albums.\nLabel change and return to success (2003\u20132010).\nThe band left Jeepster in 2002, signing a four-album deal with Rough Trade Records. Their first album for Rough Trade, \"Dear Catastrophe Waitress\", was released in 2003 and was produced by Trevor Horn. The album showed a markedly more \"produced\" sound compared to their first four LPs, as the band was making a concerted effort to produce more \"radio-friendly\" music. The album was warmly received and is credited with restoring the band's \"indie cred\". The album also marked the return of Murdoch as the group's primary songwriter, following the poorly received \"Fold Your Hands Child, You Walk Like a Peasant\" and \"Storytelling\", both of which were more collaborative than the band's early work. A documentary DVD, \"Fans Only\", was released by Jeepster in October 2003, featuring promotional videos, live clips and unreleased footage. A single from the album, \"Step into My Office, Baby\" followed in November 2003; it would be their first single to be taken from an album, and included a track recorded with Divine Comedy producer Darren Allison entitled \"Love on the March\".\nThe Thin Lizzy-inspired \"I'm a Cuckoo\" was the second single from the album. It achieved their highest chart position yet, reaching No.\u00a014 in the UK. The \"Books\" EP followed, a double A-side single led by \"Wrapped Up in Books\" from \"Dear Catastrophe Waitress\" and the new \"Your Cover's Blown\". This EP became the band's third top 20 UK release, and the band was nominated for both the Mercury Music Prize and an Ivor Novello Award. In January 2005, B&amp;S was voted Scotland's greatest band in a poll by The List, beating Simple Minds, Idlewild, Travis, Franz Ferdinand, and The Proclaimers, among others.\nIn April 2005, members of the band visited Israel and the Palestinian territories with the UK charity War on Want; the group subsequently recorded a song inspired by the trip titled \"The Eighth Station of the Cross Kebab House\", which would first appear on the digital-download version of the charity album and would later have a physical release as a B-side on 2006's \"Funny Little Frog\" single. \"Push Barman to Open Old Wounds\", a compilation of the Jeepster singles and EPs, was released in May 2005 while the band were recording their seventh album in California. The result of the sessions was \"The Life Pursuit\", produced by Tony Hoffer. The album, originally intended to be a double album, became the band's highest-charting album upon its release in February 2006, peaking at No.\u00a08 in the UK and No.\u00a065 on the US \"Billboard\" 200. \"Funny Little Frog\", which preceded it, also proved to be their highest-charting single, debuting at No.\u00a013.\nOn 6 July 2006, the band played a historic show with the Los Angeles Philharmonic at the Hollywood Bowl. The opening act at the 18,000 seat sell-out concert was The Shins. The members of the band see this as a landmark event, with Stevie Jackson saying, \"This is the biggest thrill of my entire life\". In October 2006, members of the band helped put together a CD collection of new songs for children titled \"Colours Are Brighter\", with the involvement of major bands such as Franz Ferdinand and The Flaming Lips.\nOn 18 November 2008 the band released \"The BBC Sessions\", which features songs from the period of 1996\u20132001 (including the last recordings featuring Isobel Campbell before she left the band), along with a second disc featuring a recording of a live performance in Belfast from Christmas 2001.\nRecent years (2010\u2013present).\nOn 17 July 2010, the band performed their first UK gig in almost four years to a crowd of around 30,000 at Latitude Festival in Henham Park, Southwold. They performed two new songs, \"I Didn't See It Coming\" and \"I'm Not Living in the Real World\".\nTheir eighth studio album, released in the UK and internationally on 25 September 2010, was titled \"Belle and Sebastian Write About Love\". The first single from the album, as well as the record's title track \"Write About Love\", was released in the US on 7 September 2010. \"Write About Love\" entered the UK albums chart in its first week of release, peaking at No.\u00a08 as of 19 October 2010. Norah Jones is featured on the track \"Little Lou, Ugly Jack, Prophet John\".\nIn December 2010 Belle and Sebastian curated the sequel to the \"Bowlie Weekender\" in the form of \"Bowlie 2\" presented by All Tomorrow's Parties.\nIn 2013, Pitchfork TV released an hour-long documentary in February, directed by RJ Bentler which focused on the band's 1996 album If You're Feeling Sinister, as well as the formation and early releases of the band. The documentary featured interviews with every member that was present on the album, as well as several archival photos and videos from the band's early days. The band compiled a second compilation album \"The Third Eye Centre\" which included the b-sides and rarities released after \"Push Barman to Open Old Wounds\", from the albums \"Dear Catastrophe Waitress\", \"The Life Pursuit\", and \"Write About Love\". In an interview at the end of 2013, Mick Cooke confirmed he had left the band on good terms.\nThe band received an 'Outstanding Contribution To Music Award' at the NME Awards 2014.\nIn 2014, the band returned to the studio, recording in Atlanta, Georgia for their ninth studio album, along with announcing tour dates for various festivals and concerts across the world during 2014. Their ninth album \"Girls in Peacetime Want to Dance\" was released on 19 January 2015. It was their first album with Dave McGowan, who had been their touring bassist since 2011.\nThe Belle and Sebastian song \"There's Too Much Love\" forms much of the soundtrack for the Brazilian film \"The Way He Looks\", about a blind, gay teenage boy and his friends, released in 2014.\nBelle and Sebastian performed at the world-famous Glastonbury Festival on Sunday 28 June 2015, on 'The Other Stage' and at O2 Academy, Glasgow in March 2017 which was televised in the U.K. as part of the 'BBC 6 MUSIC Presents Festival'.\nIn mid-2017, the band put out a new single, \"We Were Beautiful\". During the same year, the band appeared in the news for a comical story that occurred during their US tour, in which they accidentally forgot Colburn in a North Dakota Walmart. In December 2017 and January and February 2018, the band released a trio of EPs under the name \"How to Solve Our Human Problems\".\nOn 3 November 2018, the band announced that Dave McGowan had officially become a member.\nIn August 2019, to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the first Bowlie Weekender festival, Belle &amp; Sebastian held a third festival, dubbed the \"Boaty Weekender\". Unlike the previous two festivals, the Boaty Weekender was held on a cruise ship in the Mediterranean Sea instead of U.K. holiday parks.\nBand members.\nCurrent members\nFormer members\nTimeline"}
{"id": "4268", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4268", "title": "Boston Globe", "text": ""}
{"id": "4272", "revid": "31928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4272", "title": "Baltic Sea/Elblag", "text": ""}
{"id": "4273", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4273", "title": "Baltic Sea/Truso", "text": ""}
{"id": "4275", "revid": "38020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4275", "title": "Baltic Sea/Gdanzk", "text": ""}
{"id": "4276", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4276", "title": "Baltic Sea/Odra", "text": ""}
{"id": "4279", "revid": "734812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4279", "title": "Broadcast domain", "text": "A broadcast domain is a logical division of a computer network, in which all nodes can reach each other by broadcast at the data link layer. A broadcast domain can be within the same LAN segment or it can be bridged to other LAN segments.\nIn terms of current popular technologies, any computer connected to the same Ethernet repeater or switch is a member of the same broadcast domain. Further, any computer connected to the same set of inter-connected switches/repeaters is a member of the same broadcast domain. Routers and other higher-layer devices form boundaries between broadcast domains.\nThe notion of broadcast domain should be contrasted with that of collision domain, which would be all nodes on the same set of inter-connected repeaters, divided by switches and learning bridges. Collision domains are generally smaller than, and contained within, broadcast domains.\nWhile some layer two network devices are able to divide the collision domains, broadcast domains are only divided by layer 3 network devices such as routers or layer 3 switches. Separating VLANs divides broadcast domains as well.\nFurther explanation.\nThe distinction between broadcast and collision domains comes about because simple Ethernet and similar systems use a shared transmission system. In simple Ethernet (without switches or bridges), data frames are transmitted to all other nodes on a network. Each receiving node checks the destination address of each frame, and simply ignores any frame not addressed to its own MAC address or the broadcast address.\nSwitches act as buffers, receiving and analyzing the frames from each connected network segment. Frames destined for nodes connected to the originating segment are not forwarded by the switch. Frames destined for a specific node on a different segment are sent only to that segment. Only broadcast frames are forwarded to all other segments. This reduces unnecessary traffic and collisions.\nIn such a switched network, transmitted frames may not be received by all other reachable nodes. Nominally, only broadcast frames will be received by all other nodes. Collisions are localized to the physical-layer network segment they occur on. Thus, the broadcast domain is the entire inter-connected layer two network, and the segments connected to each switch/bridge port are each a collision domain. To clarify; repeaters do not divide collision domains but switches do. This means that since switches have become commonplace, collision domains are isolated to the specific half-duplex segment between the switch port and the connected node. Full-duplex segments, or links, don't form a collision domain as there is a dedicated channel between each transmitter and receiver, making collisions a thing-of-the-past in modern wired networks.\nIn a switched network, enabling promiscuous mode for packet capturing results in no extra data being collected, as a NIC with promiscuous mode enabled simply neglects to drop Ethernet frames with a destination field populated with a MAC from another device. Such frames would not be forwarded by the switch to any ports on which that MAC is not communicating and with which it is associated in the MAC address table.\nNot all network systems or media feature broadcast/collision domains. For example, PPP links.\nBroadcast domain control.\nWith a sufficiently sophisticated switch, it is possible to create a network in which the normal notion of a broadcast domain is strictly controlled. One implementation of this concept is termed a \"private VLAN\". Another implementation is possible with Linux and iptables. One helpful analogy is that by creating multiple VLANs, the number of broadcast domains increases, but the size of each broadcast domain decreases. This is because a virtual LAN (or VLAN) is technically a broadcast domain.\nThis is achieved by designating one or more \"server\" or \"provider\" nodes, either by MAC address or switch port. Broadcast frames are allowed to originate from these sources, and are sent to all other nodes. Broadcast frames from all other sources are directed only to the server/provider nodes. Traffic from other sources not destined to the server/provider nodes (\"peer-to-peer\" traffic) is blocked.\nThe result is a network based on a nominally shared transmission system; like Ethernet, but in which \"client\" nodes cannot communicate with each other, only with the server/provider. A common application is Internet providers. Allowing direct data link layer communication between customer nodes exposes the network to various security attacks, such as ARP spoofing. Controlling the broadcast domain in this fashion provides many of the advantages of a point-to-point network, using commodity broadcast-based hardware."}
{"id": "4282", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4282", "title": "Beechcraft", "text": "Beechcraft is a brand of Textron Aviation since 2014. Originally, it was a brand of Beech Aircraft Corporation, an American manufacturer of general aviation, commercial, and military aircraft, ranging from light single-engined aircraft to twin-engined turboprop transports, business jets, and military trainers. Beech later became a division of Raytheon and then Hawker Beechcraft before a bankruptcy sale turned its assets over to Textron (parent company of Beech's historical cross-town Wichita rival, Cessna Aircraft Company).\nHistory.\nBeech Aircraft Company was founded in Wichita, Kansas, in 1932 by Walter Beech as president, his wife Olive Ann Beech as secretary, Ted A. Wells as vice president of engineering, K. K. Shaul as treasurer, and investor C. G. Yankey as vice president. The company began operations in an idle Cessna factory. With designer Ted Wells, they developed the first aircraft under the Beechcraft name, the classic Beechcraft Model 17 Staggerwing, which first flew in November 1932. Over 750 Staggerwings were built, with 270 manufactured for the United States Army Air Forces during World War II.\nBeechcraft was not Beech's first company, as he had previously formed Travel Air in 1924 and the design numbers used at Beechcraft followed the sequence started at Travel Air, and were then continued at Curtiss-Wright, after Travel Air had been absorbed into the much larger company in 1929. Beech became president of the Curtiss-Wright's airplane division and VP of sales, but became dissatisfied with being so far removed from aircraft production and quit to form Beechcraft, using the original Travel Air facilities and employing many of the same people. Model numbers prior to 11/11000 were built under the \"Travel Air\" name, while Curtiss-Wright built the CW-12, 14, 15, and 16 as well as previous successful Travel Air models (mostly the model 4).\nIn 1942 Beech won its first Army-Navy \"E\" Award production award and became one of the elite five percent of war contracting firms in the country to win five straight awards for production efficiency, mostly for the production of the Beechcraft Model 18 which remains in widespread use worldwide. Beechcraft ranked 69th among United States corporations in the value of World War II military production contracts.\nAfter the war, the Staggerwing was replaced by the revolutionary Beechcraft Bonanza with a distinctive V-tail. Perhaps the best known Beech aircraft, the single-engined Bonanza has been manufactured in various models since 1947. The Bonanza has had the longest production run of any airplane, past or present, in the world. Other important Beech aircraft are the King Air and Super King Air line of twin-engined turboprops, in production since 1964, the Baron, a twin-engined variant of the Bonanza, and the Beechcraft Model 18, originally a business transport and commuter airliner from the late 1930s through the 1960s, which remains in active service as a cargo transport.\nIn 1950, Olive Ann Beech was installed as president and CEO of the company, after the sudden death of her husband from a heart attack on November 29 of that year. She continued as CEO until Beech was purchased by Raytheon Company on February 8, 1980. Ted Wells had been replaced as chief engineer by Herbert Rawdon, who remained at the post until his retirement in the early 1960s.\nThroughout much of the mid-to-late 20th century, Beechcraft was considered one of the \"Big Three\" in the field of general aviation manufacturing, along with Cessna and Piper Aircraft.\nIn 1994, Raytheon merged Beechcraft with the Hawker product line it had acquired in 1993 from British Aerospace, forming Raytheon Aircraft Company. In 2002, the Beechcraft brand was revived to again designate the Wichita-produced aircraft. In 2006, Raytheon sold Raytheon Aircraft to Goldman Sachs creating Hawker Beechcraft. Since its inception Beechcraft has resided in Wichita, Kansas, also the home of chief competitor Cessna, the birthplace of Learjet and of Stearman, whose trainers were used in large numbers during WW II.\nThe entry into bankruptcy of Hawker Beechcraft on May 3, 2012 ended with its emergence on February 16, 2013 as a new entity, Beechcraft Corporation, with the Hawker Beechcraft name being retired. The new and much smaller company produce the King Air line of aircraft as well as the T-6 and AT-6 military trainer/attack aircraft, as well as the piston-powered single-engined Bonanza and twin-engined Baron aircraft. The jet line was discontinued, but the new company continues to support the aircraft already produced with parts, plus engineering and airworthiness documentation.\nBy October 2013, the company, now financially turned around, was up for sale.\nOn December 26, 2013, Textron agreed to purchase Beechcraft, including the discontinued Hawker jet line, for $1.4 billion. The sale was concluded in the first half of 2014, with government approval. Textron CEO Scott Donnelly indicated that Beechcraft and Cessna would be combined to form a new light aircraft manufacturing concern, Textron Aviation, that would result in US$65M-$85M in annual savings over keeping the companies separate. Textron has kept both the Beechcraft and Cessna names as separate brands.\nProducts.\nAs of January 2019, Textron Aviation was producing the following models under the Beechcraft brand name:\nFacilities.\nBeech Factory Airport - Houses Beechcraft's head office, manufacturing facility, and runway for test flights"}
{"id": "4283", "revid": "84591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4283", "title": "Battle of Peleliu", "text": "The Battle of Peleliu, codenamed Operation Stalemate II by the United States military, was fought between the U.S. and Japan during the Mariana and Palau Campaign of World War II, from September 15 to November 27, 1944, on the island of Peleliu.\nU.S. Marines of the 1st Marine Division, and later soldiers of the U.S. Army's 81st Infantry Division, fought to capture an airstrip on the small coral island of Peleliu. This battle was part of a larger offensive campaign known as Operation Forager, which ran from June to November 1944, in the Pacific Theater.\nMajor General William Rupertus, commander of the 1st Marine Division, predicted the island would be secured within four days. However, after repeated Imperial Army defeats in previous island campaigns, Japan had developed new island-defense tactics and well-crafted fortifications that allowed stiff resistance, extending the battle through more than two months. The heavily outnumbered Japanese defenders put up such stiff resistance, often fighting to the death in the Emperor's name, that the island became known in Japanese as the \"Emperor's Island.\"\nIn the U.S., this was a controversial battle because of the island's negligible strategic value and the high casualty rate, which exceeded that of all other amphibious operations during the Pacific War. The National Museum of the Marine Corps called it \"the bitterest battle of the war for the Marines\".\nBackground.\nBy 1944, American victories in the Southwest and Central Pacific had brought the war closer to Japan, with American bombers able to strike at the Japanese main islands from air bases secured during the Mariana Islands campaign (June\u2013August 1944). There was disagreement among the U.S. Joint Chiefs over two proposed strategies to defeat the Japanese Empire. The strategy proposed by General Douglas MacArthur called for the recapture of the Philippines, followed by the capture of Okinawa, then an attack on the Japanese mainland. Admiral Chester Nimitz favored a more direct strategy of bypassing the Philippines, but seizing Okinawa and Taiwan as staging areas to an attack on the Japanese mainland, followed by the future invasion of Japan's southernmost islands. Both strategies included the invasion of Peleliu, but for different reasons.\nThe 1st Marine Division had already been chosen to make the assault. President Franklin D. Roosevelt traveled to Pearl Harbor to personally meet both commanders and hear their arguments. MacArthur's strategy was chosen. However, before MacArthur could retake the Philippines, the Palau Islands, specifically Peleliu and Angaur, were to be neutralized and an airfield built to protect MacArthur's left flank.\nPreparations.\nJapanese.\nBy 1944, Peleliu Island was occupied by about 11,000 Japanese of the 14th Infantry Division with Korean and Okinawan labourers. Colonel Kunio Nakagawa, commander of the division's 2nd Regiment, led the preparations for the island's defense.\nAfter their losses in the Solomons, Gilberts, Marshalls, and Marianas, the Imperial Army assembled a research team to develop new island-defense tactics. They chose to abandon the old strategy of trying to stop the enemy on the beaches, where they would be exposed to naval gunfire. The new tactics would only disrupt the landings at the water's edge and depend on an in-depth defense further inland. Colonel Nakagawa used the rough terrain to his advantage, by constructing a system of heavily fortified bunkers, caves, and underground positions, all interlocked in a \"honeycomb\" system. The traditional \"banzai charge\" attack was also discontinued as being both wasteful of men and ineffective. These changes would force the Americans into a war of attrition, requiring more resources.\nNakagawa's defenses were centered on Peleliu's highest point, Umurbrogol Mountain, a collection of hills and steep ridges located at the center of Peleliu overlooking a large portion of the island, including the crucial airfield. The Umurbrogol contained some 500 limestone caves, connected by tunnels. Many of these were former mine shafts that were turned into defensive positions. Engineers added sliding armored steel doors with multiple openings to serve both artillery and machine guns. Cave entrances were opened or altered to be slanted as a defense against grenade and flamethrower attacks. The caves and bunkers were connected to a vast tunnel and trench system throughout central Peleliu, which allowed the Japanese to evacuate or reoccupy positions as needed, and to take advantage of shrinking interior lines.\nThe Japanese were well armed with and mortars and anti-aircraft cannons, backed by a light tank unit and an anti-aircraft detachment.\nThe Japanese also used the beach terrain to their advantage. The northern end of the landing beaches faced a coral promontory that overlooked the beaches from a small peninsula, a spot later known to the Marines who assaulted it simply as \"The Point\". Holes were blasted into the ridge to accommodate a gun, and six 20\u00a0mm cannons. The positions were then sealed shut, leaving just a small slit to fire on the beaches. Similar positions were crafted along the stretch of landing beaches.\nThe beaches were also filled with thousands of obstacles for the landing craft, principally mines and a large number of heavy artillery shells buried with the fuses exposed to explode when they were run over. A battalion was placed along the beach to defend against the landing, but they were meant to merely delay the inevitable American advance inland.\nAmerican.\nUnlike the Japanese, who drastically altered their tactics for the upcoming battle, the American invasion plan was unchanged from that of previous amphibious landings, even after suffering 3,000 casualties and enduring two months of delaying tactics against the entrenched Japanese defenders at the Battle of Biak. On Peleliu, American planners chose to land on the southwest beaches because of their proximity to the airfield on south Peleliu. The 1st Marine Regiment, commanded by Colonel Lewis B. \"Chesty\" Puller, was to land on the northern end of the beaches. The 5th Marine Regiment, under Colonel Harold Harris, would land in the center, and the 7th Marine Regiment, under Colonel Herman Hanneken, would land at the southern end.\nThe division's artillery regiment, the 11th Marines under Colonel William Harrison, would land after the infantry regiments. The plan was for the 1st and 7th Marines to push inland, guarding the 5th Marines' flanks, and allowing them to capture the airfield located directly to the center of the landing beaches. The 5th Marines were to push to the eastern shore, cutting the island in half. The 1st Marines would push north into the Umurbrogol, while the 7th Marines would clear the southern end of the island. Only one battalion was left behind in reserve, with the U.S. Army's 81st Infantry Division available for support from Angaur, just south of Peleliu.\nOn September 4, the Marines shipped off from their station on Pavuvu, just north of Guadalcanal, a trip across the Pacific to Peleliu. A Navy Underwater Demolition Team went in first to clear the beaches of obstacles, while warships began their pre-invasion bombardment of Peleliu on September 12.\nThe battleships , , , and , heavy cruisers , , and , and light cruisers , and , led by the command ship , subjected the tiny island, only in size, to a massive three-day bombardment, pausing only to permit air strikes from the three aircraft carriers, five light aircraft carriers, and eleven escort carriers with the attack force. A total of 519 rounds of shells, 1,845 rounds of shells and 1,793 bombs pounded the islands during this period.\nThe Americans believed the bombardment to be successful, as Rear Admiral Jesse Oldendorf claimed that the Navy had run out of targets. In reality, the majority of Japanese positions were completely unharmed. Even the battalion left to defend the beaches was virtually unscathed. During the assault, the island's defenders exercised unusual firing discipline to avoid giving away their positions. The bombardment managed only to destroy Japan's aircraft on the island, as well as the buildings surrounding the airfield. The Japanese remained in their fortified positions, ready to attack the American landing troops.\nOpposing forces.\nAmerican order of battle.\nUnited States Pacific Fleet\nAdmiral Chester W. Nimitz\nUS Third Fleet\nAdmiral William F. Halsey Jr.\nJoint Expeditionary Force (Task Force 31)\nVice Admiral Theodore S. Wilkinson\nExpeditionary Troops (Task Force 36)\nIII Amphibious Corps\nMajor General Julian C. Smith, USMC\nWestern Landing Force (TG 36.1)\nMajor General Roy S. Geiger, USMC\n1st Marine Division\nBeach assignments\nJapanese order of battle.\nPalau District Group\nLieutenant General Inoue Sadao (HQ on Koror Island)\nVice Admiral Yoshioka Ito\nMaj. Gen. Kenjiro Murai\n14th Division (Lt. Gen. Sadao)\nPeleliu Sector Unit (Lt. Col. Kunio Nakagawa)\nBattle.\nLanding.\nU.S. Marines landed on Peleliu at 08:32, on September 15, the 1st Marines to the north on White Beach 1 and 2 and the 5th and 7th Marines to the center and south on Orange Beach 1, 2, and 3. As the other landing craft approached the beaches, the Marines were caught in a crossfire when the Japanese opened the steel doors guarding their positions and fired artillery. The positions on the coral promontories guarding each flank fired on the Marines with 47\u00a0mm guns and 20\u00a0mm cannons. By 09:30, the Japanese had destroyed 60 LVTs and DUKWs.\nThe 1st Marines were quickly bogged down by heavy fire from the extreme left flank and a 30-foot-high coral ridge, \"The Point\". Colonel Chesty Puller narrowly escaped death when a dud high velocity artillery round struck his LVT. His communications section was destroyed on its way to the beach by a hit from a 47\u00a0mm round. The 7th Marines faced a cluttered Orange Beach 3, with natural and man-made obstacles, forcing the Amtracs to approach in column.\nThe 5th Marines made the most progress on the first day, aided by cover provided by coconut groves. They pushed toward the airfield, but were met with Nakagawa's first counterattack. His armored tank company raced across the airfield to push the Marines back, but was soon engaged by tanks, howitzers, naval guns, and dive bombers. Nakagawa's tanks and escorting infantrymen were quickly destroyed.\nAt the end of the first day, the Americans held their stretch of landing beaches, but little else. Their biggest push in the south moved inland, but the 1st Marines to the north made very little progress because of the extremely thick resistance. The Marines had suffered 200 dead and 900 wounded. Rupertus, still unaware of his enemy's change of tactics, believed the Japanese would quickly crumble since their perimeter had been broken.\nAirfield/South Peleliu.\nOn the second day, the 5th Marines moved to capture the airfield and push toward the eastern shore. They ran across the airfield, enduring heavy artillery fire from the highlands to the north, suffering heavy casualties in the process. After capturing the airfield, they rapidly advanced to the eastern end of Peleliu, leaving the island's southern defenders to be destroyed by the 7th Marines.\nThis area was hotly contested by the Japanese, who still occupied numerous pillboxes. Heat indices were around , and the Marines soon suffered high casualties from heat exhaustion. Further complicating the situation, the Marines' water was distributed in empty oil drums, contaminating the water with the oil residue. Still, by the eighth day the 5th and 7th Marines had accomplished their objectives, holding the airfield and the southern portion of the island, although the airfield remained under threat of sustained Japanese fire from the heights of Umurbrogol Mountain until the end of the battle.\nAmerican forces put the airfield to use on the third day. L-2 Grasshoppers from VMO-3 began aerial spotting missions for Marine artillery and naval gunfire support. On September 26 (D+11), Marine F4U Corsairs from VMF-114 landed on the airstrip. The Corsairs began dive-bombing missions across Peleliu, firing rockets into open cave entrances for the infantrymen, and dropping napalm; it was only the second time the latter weapon had been used in the Pacific. Napalm proved useful, burning away the vegetation hiding spider holes and usually killing their occupants.\nThe time from liftoff to the target area for the Corsairs based on Peleliu Airfield was very short, sometimes only 10 to 15 seconds. Consequently, there was almost no time for pilots to raise their aircraft undercarriage; most pilots did not bother and left them down during the air strike. After the air strike was completed and the payload dropped, the Corsair simply turned back into the landing pattern again.\nThe Point.\nThe fortress at the end of the southern landing beaches (a.k.a. \u201cThe Point\u201d) continued to cause heavy Marine casualties due to enfilading fire from Japanese heavy machine guns and anti-tank artillery across the landing beaches. Puller ordered Captain George P. Hunt, commander of K Company, 3rd Battalion, 1st Marines, to capture the position. Hunt's company approached The Point short on supplies, having lost most of its machine guns while approaching the beaches. Hunt's second platoon was pinned down for nearly a day in an anti-tank trench between fortifications. The rest of his company was endangered when the Japanese cut a hole in their line, surrounding his company and leaving his right flank cut off.\nHowever, a rifle platoon began knocking out the Japanese gun positions one by one. Using smoke grenades for concealment, the platoon swept through each hole, destroying the positions with rifle grenades and close-quarters combat. After knocking out the six machine gun positions, the Marines faced the 47\u00a0mm gun cave. A lieutenant blinded the 47\u00a0mm gunner's visibility with a smoke grenade, allowing Corporal Henry W. Hahn to launch a grenade through the cave's aperture. The grenade detonated the 47\u00a0mm's shells, forcing the cave's occupants out with their bodies alight and their ammunition belts exploding around their waists. A Marine fire team was positioned on the flank of the cave where the emerging occupants were shot down.\nK Company had captured The Point, but Nakagawa counterattacked. The next 30 hours saw four major counterattacks against a sole company, critically low on supplies, out of water, and surrounded. The Marines soon had to resort to hand-to-hand combat to fend off the Japanese attackers. By the time reinforcements arrived, the company had successfully repulsed all of the Japanese attacks, but had been reduced to 18 men, suffering 157 casualties during the battle for The Point. Hunt and Hahn were both awarded the Navy Cross for their actions.\nNgesebus Island.\nThe 5th Marines\u2014after having secured the airfield\u2014were sent to capture Ngesebus Island, just north of Peleliu. Ngesebus was occupied by many Japanese artillery positions, and was the site of an airfield still under construction. The tiny island was connected to Peleliu by a small causeway, but 5th Marines commander Harris opted instead to make a shore-to-shore amphibious landing, predicting the causeway to be an obvious target for the island's defenders.\nHarris coordinated a pre-landing bombardment of the island on September 28, carried out by Army guns, naval guns, howitzers from the 11th Marines, strafing runs from VMF-114's Corsairs, and fire from the approaching LVTs. Unlike the Navy's bombardment of Peleliu, Harris' assault on Ngesebus successfully killed most of the Japanese defenders. The Marines still faced opposition in the ridges and caves, but the island fell quickly, with relatively light casualties for the 5th Marines. They had suffered 15 killed and 33 wounded, and inflicted 470 casualties on the Japanese.\nBloody Nose Ridge.\nAfter capturing The Point, the 1st Marines moved north into the Umurbrogol pocket, named \"Bloody Nose Ridge\" by the Marines. Puller led his men in numerous assaults, but each resulted in severe casualties from Japanese fire. The 1st Marines were trapped in the narrow paths between the ridges, with each ridge fortification supporting the other with deadly crossfire.\nThe Marines took increasingly high casualties as they slowly advanced through the ridges. The Japanese again showed unusual fire discipline, striking only when they could inflict maximum casualties. As casualties mounted, Japanese snipers began to take aim at stretcher bearers, knowing that if stretcher bearers were injured or killed, more would have to return to replace them, and the snipers could steadily pick off more and more Marines. The Japanese also infiltrated the American lines at night to attack the Marines in their fighting holes. The Marines built two-man fighting holes, so one Marine could sleep while the other kept watch for infiltrators.\nOne particularly bloody battle on Bloody Nose came when the 1st Battalion, 1st Marines\u2014under the command of Major Raymond Davis\u2014attacked Hill 100. Over six days of fighting, the battalion suffered 71% casualties. Captain Everett Pope and his company penetrated deep into the ridges, leading his remaining 90 men to seize what he thought was Hill 100. It took a day's fighting to reach what he thought was the crest of the hill, which was in fact another ridge occupied by more Japanese defenders. \nTrapped at the base of the ridge, Captain Pope set up a small defense perimeter, which was attacked relentlessly by the Japanese throughout the night. The Marines soon ran out of ammunition, and had to fight the attackers with knives and fists, even resorting to throwing coral rock and empty ammunition boxes at the Japanese. Pope and his men managed to hold out until dawn came, which brought on more deadly fire. When they evacuated the position, only nine men remained. Pope later received the Medal of Honor for the action. (Picture of the Peleliu Memorial dedicated on the 50th anniversary of the landing on Peleliu with Captain Pope's name)\nThe Japanese eventually inflicted 70% casualties on Puller's 1st Marines, or 1,749 men. After six days of fighting in the ridges of Umurbrogol, General Roy Geiger, commander of the III Amphibious Corps, sent elements of U.S. Army's 81st Infantry Division to Peleliu to relieve the regiment. The 321st Regiment Combat Team landed on the western beaches of Peleliu\u2014at the northern end of Umurbrogol mountain\u2014on September 23. The 321st and the 7th Marines encircled The Pocket by September 24, D+9.\nBy October 15, the 7th Marines had suffered 46% casualties and General Geiger relieved them with the 5th Marines. Col. Harris adopted siege tactics, using bulldozers and flame-thrower tanks, pushing from the north. On October 30, the 81st Infantry Division took over command of Peleliu, taking another six weeks, with the same tactics, to reduce The Pocket.\nOn November 24, Nakagawa proclaimed \"Our sword is broken and we have run out of spears\". He then burnt his regimental colors and performed ritual suicide. He was posthumously promoted to lieutenant general for his valor displayed on Peleliu. On November 27, the island was declared secure, ending the 73-day-long battle.\nA Japanese lieutenant with twenty-six 2nd Infantry soldiers and eight 45th Guard Force sailors held out in the caves in Peleliu until April 22, 1947, and surrendered after a Japanese admiral convinced them the war was over.\nAftermath.\nThe reduction of the Japanese pocket around Umurbrogol mountain has been called the most difficult fight that the U.S. military encountered in the entire war. The 1st Marine Division was mauled and remained out of action until the invasion of Okinawa began on April 1, 1945. In total, the 1st Marine Division suffered over 6,500 casualties during its month on Peleliu, over one third of the entire division. The 81st Infantry Division also suffered heavy losses with 3,300 casualties during its tenure on the island.\nPostwar statisticians calculated that it took U.S. forces over 1500 rounds of ammunition to kill each Japanese defender and that, during the course of the battle, the Americans expended 13.32 million rounds of .30-calibre, 1.52 million rounds of .45-calibre, 693,657 rounds of .50-calibre bullets, 118,262 hand grenades, and approximately 150,000 mortar rounds.\nThe battle was controversial in the United States due to the island's lack of strategic value and the high casualty rate. The defenders lacked the means to interfere with potential US operations in the Philippines and the airfield captured on Peleliu did not play a key role in subsequent operations. Instead, the Ulithi Atoll in the Caroline Islands was used as a staging base for the invasion of Okinawa. The high casualty rate exceeded all other amphibious operations during the Pacific War.\nIn addition, few news reports were published about the battle because Rupertus' prediction of a \"three days\" victory motivated only six reporters to report from shore. The battle was also overshadowed by MacArthur's return to the Philippines and the Allies' push towards Germany in Europe.\nThe battles for Angaur and Peleliu showed Americans the pattern of future Japanese island defense but they made few adjustments for the battles for Iwo Jima and Okinawa. Naval bombardment prior to amphibious assault at Iwo Jima was only slightly more effective than at Peleliu, but at Okinawa the preliminary shelling was much improved. Frogmen performing underwater demolition at Iwo Jima confused the enemy by sweeping both coasts, but later alerted Japanese defenders to the exact assault beaches at Okinawa. American ground forces at Peleliu gained experience in assaulting heavily fortified positions such as they would find again at Okinawa.\nOn the recommendation of Admiral William F. Halsey Jr., the planned occupation of Yap Island in the Caroline Islands was canceled. Halsey actually recommended that the landings on Peleliu and Angaur be canceled, too, and their Marines and soldiers be thrown into Leyte Island instead, but was overruled by Nimitz.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the March of Time's 1951 documentary TV series, Crusade in the Pacific, Episode 17 is \"The Fight for Bloody Nose Ridge.\"\nIn NBC-TV's 1952-53 documentary TV series Victory at Sea, Episode 18, \"Two if by Sea\" covers the assaults at Peleliu and Angaur.\nThe Battle of Peleliu is featured in many World War II themed video games, including \"\". The player takes the role of a US Marine tasked with taking Peleliu Airfield, repelling counter-attacks, destroying machine-gun and mortar positions and eventually securing Japanese artillery emplacements at the point. In flight-simulation game \"War Thunder\", two teams of players clash to hold the southern and northern airfields. In multi-player shooter \"Red Orchestra 2: Rising Storm\", a team of American troops attack the defensive Japanese team's control points.\nThe battle including footage and stills are featured in the fifth episode of \"Ken Burns' The War\".\nThe battle features in episodes 5, 6 and 7 of the TV mini-series \"The Pacific\".\nIn his book, \"With the Old Breed\", Eugene Bondurant Sledge described his experiences in the battle for Peleliu.\nIn 2015, the Japanese magazine \"Young Animal\" commenced serialization of \"\" by Masao Hiratsuka and artist Kazuyoshi Takeda, telling the story of the battle in manga form.\nOne of the final scenes in \"Parer's War\", a 2014 Australian television film, shows the Battle of Peleliu recorded by Damien Parer with his camera at the time of his death.\nThe Peleliu Campaign features as one of the campaigns in the 2019 solitaire tactical wargame \u201cFields of Fire\u201d Volume 2, designed by Ben Hull, published by GMT Games LLC.\nIndividual honors.\nJapan.\nPosthumous promotions.\nFor heroism:"}
{"id": "4284", "revid": "3266313", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4284", "title": "Battle of Stalingrad", "text": "In the Battle of Stalingrad (23 August 19422 February 1943), Germany and its allies fought the Soviet Union for control of the city of Stalingrad (now Volgograd) in Southern Russia. Marked by fierce close-quarters combat and direct assaults on civilians in air raids, it is one of the bloodiest battles in the history of warfare, with an estimated 2\u00a0million total casualties. After their defeat at Stalingrad, the German High Command had to withdraw considerable military forces from other theaters of war to replace their losses.\nThe German offensive to capture Stalingrad, a major industrial and transport hub on the Volga River that ensured Soviet access to the Caucasus oil wells, began in August 1942, using the 6th Army and elements of the 4th Panzer Army. The attack was supported by intense \"Luftwaffe\" bombing that reduced much of the city to rubble. The battle degenerated into house-to-house fighting, as both sides poured reinforcements into the city. By mid-November, the Germans had pushed the Soviet defenders back at great cost into narrow zones along the west bank of the river.\nOn 19 November, the Red Army launched Operation Uranus, a two-pronged attack targeting the weaker Romanian and Hungarian armies protecting the 6th Army's flanks. The Axis flanks were overrun and the 6th Army was cut off and surrounded in the Stalingrad area. Adolf Hitler was determined to hold the city at all costs and forbade the 6th Army from attempting a breakout; instead, attempts were made to supply it by air and to break the encirclement from the outside. Heavy fighting continued for another two months. At the beginning of February 1943, the Axis forces in Stalingrad, having exhausted their ammunition and food, surrendered after five months, one week and three days of fighting.\nBackground.\nBy the spring of 1942, despite the failure of Operation Barbarossa to decisively defeat the Soviet Union in a single campaign, the Wehrmacht had captured vast expanses of territory, including Ukraine, Belarus, and the Baltic republics. Elsewhere, the war had been progressing well: the U-boat offensive in the Atlantic had been very successful and Erwin Rommel had just captured Tobruk. In the east, the Germans had stabilised a front running from Leningrad south to Rostov, with a number of minor salients. Hitler was confident that he could break the Red Army despite the heavy German losses west of Moscow in winter 1941\u201342, because Army Group Centre (\"Heeresgruppe Mitte\") had been unable to engage 65% of its infantry, which had meanwhile been rested and re-equipped. Neither Army Group North nor Army Group South had been particularly hard-pressed over the winter. Stalin was expecting the main thrust of the German summer attacks to be directed against Moscow again.\nWith the initial operations being very successful, the Germans decided that their summer campaign in 1942 would be directed at the southern parts of the Soviet Union. The initial objectives in the region around Stalingrad were to destroy the industrial capacity of the city and to block the Volga River traffic connecting the Caucasus and Caspian Sea to central Russia. The Germans cut the pipeline from the oilfields when they captured Rostov on 23 July. The capture of Stalingrad would make the delivery of Lend Lease supplies via the Persian Corridor much more difficult.\nOn 23 July 1942, Hitler personally rewrote the operational objectives for the 1942 campaign, greatly expanding them to include the occupation of the city of Stalingrad. Both sides began to attach propaganda value to the city, which bore the name of the Soviet leader. Hitler proclaimed that after Stalingrad's capture, its male citizens were to be killed and all women and children were to be deported because its population was \"thoroughly communistic\" and \"especially dangerous\". It was assumed that the fall of the city would also firmly secure the northern and western flanks of the German armies as they advanced on Baku, with the aim of securing its strategic petroleum resources for Germany. The expansion of objectives was a significant factor in Germany's failure at Stalingrad, caused by German overconfidence and an underestimation of Soviet reserves.\nThe Soviets realised their critical situation, ordering everyone who could hold a rifle into the fight.\nPrelude.\nArmy Group South was selected for a sprint forward through the southern Russian steppes into the Caucasus to capture the vital Soviet oil fields there. The planned summer offensive, code-named \"Fall Blau\" (Case Blue), was to include the German 6th, 17th, 4th Panzer and 1st Panzer Armies. Army Group South had overrun the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1941. Poised in Eastern Ukraine, it was to spearhead the offensive.\nHitler intervened, however, ordering the Army Group to split in two. Army Group South (A), under the command of Wilhelm List, was to continue advancing south towards the Caucasus as planned with the 17th Army and First Panzer Army. Army Group South (B), including Friedrich Paulus's 6th Army and Hermann Hoth's 4th Panzer Army, was to move east towards the Volga and Stalingrad. Army Group B was commanded by General Maximilian von Weichs.\nThe start of \"Case Blue\" had been planned for late May 1942. However, a number of German and Romanian units that were to take part in \"Blau\" were besieging Sevastopol on the Crimean Peninsula. Delays in ending the siege pushed back the start date for \"Blau\" several times, and the city did not fall until early July.\nOperation Fridericus I by the Germans against the \"Isium bulge\", pinched off the Soviet salient in the Second Battle of Kharkov, and resulted in the envelopment of a large Soviet force between 17 May and 29 May. Similarly, Operation Wilhelm attacked Voltshansk on 13 June, and Operation Fridericus attacked Kupiansk on 22 June.\n\"Blau\" finally opened as Army Group South began its attack into southern Russia on 28 June 1942. The German offensive started well. Soviet forces offered little resistance in the vast empty steppes and started streaming eastward. Several attempts to re-establish a defensive line failed when German units outflanked them. Two major pockets were formed and destroyed: the first, northeast of Kharkov, on 2 July, and a second, around Millerovo, Rostov Oblast, a week later. Meanwhile, the Hungarian 2nd Army and the German 4th Panzer Army had launched an assault on Voronezh, capturing the city on 5 July.\nThe initial advance of the 6th Army was so successful that Hitler intervened and ordered the 4th Panzer Army to join Army Group South (A) to the south. A massive traffic jam resulted when the 4th Panzer and the 1st Panzer choked the roads, stopping both dead while they cleared the mess of thousands of vehicles. The delay is thought to have delayed the advance at least one week. With the advance now slowed, Hitler changed his mind and reassigned the 4th Panzer Army back to the attack on Stalingrad.\nBy the end of July, the Germans had pushed the Soviets across the Don River. At this point, the Don and Volga Rivers are only apart, and the Germans left their main supply depots west of the Don, which had important implications later in the course of the battle. The Germans began using the armies of their Italian, Hungarian and Romanian allies to guard their left (northern) flank. Occasionally Italian actions were mentioned in official German communiques. Italian forces were generally held in little regard by the Germans, and were accused of low morale: in reality, the Italian divisions fought comparatively well, with the 3rd Mountain Infantry Division Ravenna and 5th Infantry Division Cosseria showing spirit, according to a German liaison officer. The Italians were forced to retreat only after a massive armoured attack in which German reinforcements failed to arrive in time, according to German historian Rolf-Dieter M\u00fcller.\nOn 25 July the Germans faced stiff resistance with a Soviet bridgehead west of Kalach. \"We had had to pay a high cost in men and material\u00a0... left on the Kalach battlefield were numerous burnt-out or shot-up German tanks.\"\nThe Germans formed bridgeheads across the Don on 20 August, with the 295th and 76th Infantry Divisions enabling the XIVth Panzer Corps \"to thrust to the Volga north of Stalingrad.\" The German 6th Army was only a few dozen kilometres from Stalingrad. The 4th Panzer Army, ordered south on 13 July to block the Soviet retreat \"weakened by the 17th Army and the 1st Panzer Army\", had turned northwards to help take the city from the south.\nTo the south, Army Group A was pushing far into the Caucasus, but their advance slowed as supply lines grew overextended. The two German army groups were too far apart to support one another.\nAfter German intentions became clear in July 1942, Stalin appointed General Andrey Yeryomenko commander of the Southeastern Front on 1 August 1942. Yeryomenko and Commissar Nikita Khrushchev were tasked with planning the defence of Stalingrad. Beyond the Volga River on the eastern boundary of Stalingrad, additional Soviet units were formed into the 62nd Army under Lieutenant General Vasiliy Chuikov on 11 September 1942. Tasked with holding the city at all costs, Chuikov proclaimed, \"We will defend the city or die in the attempt.\" The battle earned him one of his two Hero of the Soviet Union awards.\nOrders of battle.\nRed Army.\nDuring the defence of Stalingrad, the Red Army deployed five armies in and around the city (28th, 51st, 57th, 62nd and 64th Armies); and an additional nine armies in the encirclement counteroffensive (24th, 65th, 66th Armies and 16th Air Army from the north as part of the Don Front offensive, and 1st Guards Army, 5th Tank, 21st Army, 2nd Air Army and 17th Air Army from the south as part of the Southwestern Front).\nAttack on Stalingrad.\nInitial attack.\nDavid Glantz indicated that four hard-fought battles \u2013 collectively known as the Kotluban Operations \u2013 north of Stalingrad, where the Soviets made their greatest stand, decided Germany's fate before the Nazis ever set foot in the city itself, and were a turning point in the war. Beginning in late August, continuing in September and into October, the Soviets committed between two and four armies in hastily coordinated and poorly controlled attacks against the Germans' northern flank. The actions resulted in more than 200,000 Soviet Army casualties but did slow the German assault.\nOn 23 August the 6th Army reached the outskirts of Stalingrad in pursuit of the 62nd and 64th Armies, which had fallen back into the city. Kleist later said after the war:\nThe Soviets had enough warning of the German advance to ship grain, cattle, and railway cars across the Volga out of harm's way, but Stalin refused to evacuate the 400,000 civilian residents trapped in Stalingrad. This \"harvest victory\" left the city short of food even before the German attack began. Before the \"Heer\" reached the city itself, the \"Luftwaffe\" had cut off shipping on the Volga, vital for bringing supplies into the city. Between 25 and 31 July, 32 Soviet ships were sunk, with another nine crippled.\nThe battle began with the heavy bombing of the city by \"Generaloberst\" Wolfram von Richthofen's \"Luftflotte 4\", which in the summer and autumn of 1942 was the single most powerful air formation in the world. Some 1,000 tons of bombs were dropped in 48 hours, more than in London at the height of the Blitz. The exact number of civilians killed is unknown but was most likely very high. Around 40,000 civilians were taken to Germany as slave workers, some fled during battle and a small number were evacuated by the Soviets, but by February 1943 only 10,000 to 60,000 civilians were still alive. Much of the city was smashed to rubble, although some factories continued production while workers joined in the fighting. The Stalingrad Tractor Factory continued to turn out T-34 tanks up until German troops burst into the plant. The 369th (Croatian) Reinforced Infantry Regiment was the only non-German unit selected by the \"Wehrmacht\" to enter Stalingrad city during assault operations. It fought as part of the 100th J\u00e4ger Division.\nStalin rushed all available troops to the east bank of the Volga, some from as far away as Siberia. Regular river ferries were quickly destroyed by the Luftwaffe, which then targeted troop barges being towed slowly across by tugs. It has been said that Stalin prevented civilians from leaving the city in the belief that their presence would encourage greater resistance from the city's defenders. Civilians, including women and children, were put to work building trenchworks and protective fortifications. A massive German air raid on 23 August caused a firestorm, killing hundreds and turning Stalingrad into a vast landscape of rubble and burnt ruins. Ninety percent of the living space in the Voroshilovskiy area was destroyed. Between 23 and 26 August, Soviet reports indicate 955 people were killed and another 1,181 wounded as a result of the bombing. Casualties of 40,000 were greatly exaggerated, and after 25 August the Soviets did not record any civilian and military casualties as a result of air raids.\nThe Soviet Air Force, the \"Voyenno-Vozdushnye Sily\" (VVS), was swept aside by the Luftwaffe. The VVS bases in the immediate area lost 201 aircraft between 23 and 31 August, and despite meagre reinforcements of some 100 aircraft in August, it was left with just 192 serviceable aircraft, 57 of which were fighters. The Soviets continued to pour aerial reinforcements into the Stalingrad area in late September, but continued to suffer appalling losses; the \"Luftwaffe\" had complete control of the skies.\nThe burden of the initial defence of the city fell on the 1077th Anti-Aircraft Regiment, a unit made up mainly of young female volunteers who had no training for engaging ground targets. Despite this, and with no support available from other units, the AA gunners stayed at their posts and took on the advancing panzers. The German 16th Panzer Division reportedly had to fight the 1077th's gunners \"shot for shot\" until all 37 anti-aircraft guns were destroyed or overrun. The 16th Panzer was shocked to find that, due to Soviet manpower shortages, it had been fighting female soldiers. In the early stages of the battle, the NKVD organised poorly armed \"Workers' militias\" similar to those that had defended the city twenty-four years earlier, composed of civilians not directly involved in war production for immediate use in the battle. The civilians were often sent into battle without rifles. Staff and students from the local technical university formed a \"tank destroyer\" unit. They assembled tanks from leftover parts at the tractor factory. These tanks, unpainted and lacking gun-sights, were driven directly from the factory floor to the front line. They could only be aimed at point-blank range through the bore of their gun barrels.\nBy the end of August, Army Group South (B) had finally reached the Volga, north of Stalingrad. Another advance to the river south of the city followed, while the Soviets abandoned their Rossoshka position for the inner defensive ring west of Stalingrad. The wings of the 6th Army and the 4th Panzer Army met near Jablotchni along the Zaritza on 2 Sept. By 1 September, the Soviets could only reinforce and supply their forces in Stalingrad by perilous crossings of the Volga under constant bombardment by artillery and aircraft.\nSeptember city battles.\nOn 5 September, the Soviet 24th and 66th Armies organized a massive attack against XIV Panzer Corps. The \"Luftwaffe\" helped repel the offensive by heavily attacking Soviet artillery positions and defensive lines. The Soviets were forced to withdraw at midday after only a few hours. Of the 120 tanks the Soviets had committed, 30 were lost to air attack.\nSoviet operations were constantly hampered by the \"Luftwaffe\". On 18 September, the Soviet 1st Guards and 24th Army launched an offensive against VIII Army Corps at Kotluban. \"VIII. Fliegerkorps\" dispatched wave after wave of Stuka dive-bombers to prevent a breakthrough. The offensive was repelled. The Stukas claimed 41 of the 106 Soviet tanks knocked out that morning, while escorting Bf 109s destroyed 77 Soviet aircraft. Amid the debris of the wrecked city, the Soviet 62nd and 64th Armies, which included the Soviet 13th Guards Rifle Division, anchored their defence lines with strong-points in houses and factories.\nFighting within the ruined city was fierce and desperate. Lieutenant General Alexander Rodimtsev was in charge of the 13th Guards Rifle Division, and received one of two Heroes of the Soviet Union awarded during the battle for his actions. Stalin's Order No. 227 of 27 July 1942 decreed that all commanders who ordered unauthorised retreats would be subject to a military tribunal. Deserters and presumed malingerers were captured or executed after fighting. During the battle the 62nd Army had the most arrests and executions: 203 in all, of which 49 were executed, while 139 were sent to penal companies and battalions. The Germans pushing forward into Stalingrad suffered heavy casualties.\nBy 12 September, at the time of their retreat into the city, the Soviet 62nd Army had been reduced to 90 tanks, 700 mortars and just 20,000 personnel. The remaining tanks were used as immobile strong-points within the city. The initial German attack on 14 September attempted to take the city in a rush. The 51st Army Corps' 295th Infantry Division went after the Mamayev Kurgan hill, the 71st attacked the central rail station and toward the central landing stage on the Volga, while 48th Panzer Corps attacked south of the Tsaritsa River. Rodimtsev's 13th Guards Rifle Division had been hurried up to cross the river and join the defenders inside the city. Assigned to counterattack at the Mamayev Kurgan and at Railway Station No. 1, it suffered particularly heavy losses.\nThough initially successful, the German attacks stalled in the face of Soviet reinforcements brought in from across the Volga. The Soviet 13th Guards Rifle Division, assigned to counterattack at the Mamayev Kurgan and at Railway Station No. 1, suffered particularly heavy losses. Over 30 percent of its soldiers were killed in the first 24 hours, and just 320 out of the original 10,000 survived the entire battle. Both objectives were retaken, but only temporarily. The railway station changed hands 14 times in six hours. By the following evening, the 13th Guards Rifle Division had ceased to exist.\nCombat raged for three days at the giant grain elevator in the south of the city. About fifty Red Army defenders, cut off from resupply, held the position for five days and fought off ten different assaults before running out of ammunition and water. Only forty dead Soviet fighters were found, though the Germans had thought there were many more due to the intensity of resistance. The Soviets burned large amounts of grain during their retreat in order to deny the enemy food. Paulus chose the grain elevator and silos as the symbol of Stalingrad for a patch he was having designed to commemorate the battle after a German victory.\nIn another part of the city, a Soviet platoon under the command of Sergeant Yakov Pavlov fortified a four-story building that oversaw a square 300 meters from the river bank, later called \"Pavlov's House\". The soldiers surrounded it with minefields, set up machine-gun positions at the windows and breached the walls in the basement for better communications. The soldiers found about ten Soviet civilians hiding in the basement. They were not relieved, and not significantly reinforced, for two months. The building was labelled \"Festung\" (\"Fortress\") on German maps. Sgt. Pavlov was awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union for his actions.\nThe Germans made slow but steady progress through the city. Positions were taken individually, but the Germans were never able to capture the key crossing points along the river bank. By 27 Sept. the Germans occupied the southern portion of the city, but the Soviets held the centre and northern part. Most importantly, the Soviets controlled the ferries to their supplies on the east bank of the Volga.\nStrategy and tactics.\nGerman military doctrine was based on the principle of combined-arms teams and close cooperation between tanks, infantry, engineers, artillery and ground-attack aircraft. Some Soviet commanders adopted the tactic of always keeping their front-line positions as close to the Germans as physically possible; Chuikov called this \"hugging\" the Germans. This slowed the German advance and reduced the effectiveness of the German advantage in supporting fire.\nThe Red Army gradually adopted a strategy to hold for as long as possible all the ground in the city. Thus, they converted multi-floored apartment blocks, factories, warehouses, street corner residences and office buildings into a series of well-defended strong-points with small 5\u201310-man units. Manpower in the city was constantly refreshed by bringing additional troops over the Volga. When a position was lost, an immediate attempt was usually made to re-take it with fresh forces.\nBitter fighting raged for every ruin, street, factory, house, basement, and staircase. Even the sewers were the sites of firefights. The Germans called this unseen urban warfare \"Rattenkrieg\" (\"Rat War\"), and bitterly joked about capturing the kitchen but still fighting for the living room and the bedroom. Buildings had to be cleared room by room through the bombed-out debris of residential areas, office blocks, basements and apartment high-rises. Some of the taller buildings, blasted into roofless shells by earlier German aerial bombardment, saw floor-by-floor, close-quarters combat, with the Germans and Soviets on alternate levels, firing at each other through holes in the floors. Fighting on and around Mamayev Kurgan, a prominent hill above the city, was particularly merciless; indeed, the position changed hands many times.\nThe Germans used aircraft, tanks and heavy artillery to clear the city with varying degrees of success. Toward the end of the battle, the gigantic railroad gun nicknamed \"Dora\" was brought into the area. The Soviets built up a large number of artillery batteries on the east bank of the Volga. This artillery was able to bombard the German positions or at least provide counter-battery fire.\nSnipers on both sides used the ruins to inflict casualties. The most famous Soviet sniper in Stalingrad was Vasily Zaytsev, with 225 confirmed kills during the battle. Targets were often soldiers bringing up food or water to forward positions. Artillery spotters were an especially prized target for snipers.\nA significant historical debate concerns the degree of terror in the Red Army. The British historian Antony Beevor noted the \"sinister\" message from the Stalingrad Front's Political Department on 8 October 1942 that: \"The defeatist mood is almost eliminated and the number of treasonous incidents is getting lower\" as an example of the sort of coercion Red Army soldiers experienced under the Special Detachments (later to be renamed SMERSH). On the other hand, Beevor noted the often extraordinary bravery of the Soviet soldiers in a battle that was only comparable to Verdun, and argued that terror alone cannot explain such self-sacrifice. Richard Overy addresses the question of just how important the Red Army's coercive methods were to the Soviet war effort compared with other motivational factors such as hatred for the enemy. He argues that, though it is \"easy to argue that from the summer of 1942 the Soviet army fought because it was forced to fight,\" to concentrate solely on coercion is nonetheless to \"distort our view of the Soviet war effort.\" After conducting hundreds of interviews with Soviet veterans on the subject of terror on the Eastern Front \u2013 and specifically about Order No. 227 (\"Not a step back!\") at Stalingrad \u2013 Catherine Merridale notes that, seemingly paradoxically, \"their response was frequently relief.\" Infantryman Lev Lvovich's explanation, for example, is typical for these interviews; as he recalls, \"[i]t was a necessary and important step. We all knew where we stood after we had heard it. And we all \u2013 it's true \u2013 felt better. Yes, we felt better.\"\nMany women fought on the Soviet side or were under fire. As General Chuikov acknowledged, \"Remembering the defence of Stalingrad, I can't overlook the very important question\u00a0... about the role of women in war, in the rear, but also at the front. Equally with men they bore all the burdens of combat life and together with us men, they went all the way to Berlin.\" At the beginning of the battle there were 75,000 women and girls from the Stalingrad area who had finished military or medical training, and all of whom were to serve in the battle. Women staffed a great many of the anti-aircraft batteries that fought not only the Luftwaffe but German tanks. Soviet nurses not only treated wounded personnel under fire but were involved in the highly dangerous work of bringing wounded soldiers back to the hospitals under enemy fire. Many of the Soviet wireless and telephone operators were women who often suffered heavy casualties when their command posts came under fire. Though women were not usually trained as infantry, many Soviet women fought as machine gunners, mortar operators, and scouts. Women were also snipers at Stalingrad. Three air regiments at Stalingrad were entirely female. At least three women won the title Hero of the Soviet Union while driving tanks at Stalingrad.\nFor both Stalin and Hitler, Stalingrad became a matter of prestige far beyond its strategic significance. The Soviet command moved units from the Red Army strategic reserve in the Moscow area to the lower Volga and transferred aircraft from the entire country to the Stalingrad region.\nThe strain on both military commanders was immense: Paulus developed an uncontrollable tic in his eye, which eventually afflicted the left side of his face, while Chuikov experienced an outbreak of eczema that required him to have his hands completely bandaged. Troops on both sides faced the constant strain of close-range combat.\nFighting in the industrial district.\nAfter 27 September, much of the fighting in the city shifted north to the industrial district. Having slowly advanced over 10 days against strong Soviet resistance, the 51st Army Corps was finally in front of the three giant factories of Stalingrad: the Red October Steel Factory, the Barrikady Arms Factory and Stalingrad Tractor Factory. It took a few more days for them to prepare for the most savage offensive of all, which was unleashed on 14 October with a concentration of gunfire never seen before. Exceptionally intense shelling and bombing paved the way for the first German assault groups. The main attack (led by the 14th Panzer and 305th Infantry Divisions) attacked towards the tractor factory, while another assault led by the 24th Panzer Division hit to the south of the giant plant.\nThe German onslaught crushed the 37th Guards Rifle Division of Major General Viktor Zholudev and in the afternoon the forward assault group reached the tractor factory before arriving at the Volga River, splitting the 62nd Army into two. In response to the German breakthrough to the Volga, the front headquarters committed three battalions from the 300th Rifle Division and the 45th Rifle Division of Colonel Vasily Sokolov, a substantial force of over 2,000 men, to the fighting at the Red October Factory.\nFighting raged inside the Barrikady Factory until the end of October. The Soviet-controlled area shrank down to a few strips of land along the western bank of the Volga, and in November the fighting concentrated around what Soviet newspapers referred to as \"Lyudnikov's Island\", a small patch of ground behind the Barrikady Factory where the remnants of Colonel Ivan Lyudnikov's 138th Rifle Division resisted all ferocious assaults thrown by the Germans and became a symbol of the stout Soviet defence of Stalingrad.\nAir attacks.\nFrom 5 to 12 September, \"Luftflotte 4\" conducted 7,507 sorties (938 per day). From 16 to 25 September, it carried out 9,746 missions (975 per day). Determined to crush Soviet resistance, \"Luftflotte\" 4's \"Stukawaffe\" flew 900 individual sorties against Soviet positions at the Stalingrad Tractor Factory on 5 October. Several Soviet regiments were wiped out; the entire staff of the Soviet 339th Infantry Regiment was killed the following morning during an air raid.\nThe \"Luftwaffe\" retained air superiority into November, and Soviet daytime aerial resistance was nonexistent. However, the combination of constant air support operations on the German side and the Soviet surrender of the daytime skies began to affect the strategic balance in the air. From 28 June to 20 September, \"Luftflotte\" 4's original strength of 1,600 aircraft, of which 1,155 were operational, fell to 950, of which only 550 were operational. The fleet's total strength decreased by 40 percent. Daily sorties decreased from 1,343 per day to 975 per day. Soviet offensives in the central and northern portions of the Eastern Front tied down Luftwaffe reserves and newly built aircraft, reducing \"Luftflotte\" 4's percentage of Eastern Front aircraft from 60 percent on 28 June to 38 percent by 20 September. The \"Kampfwaffe\" (bomber force) was the hardest hit, having only 232 out of an original force of 480 left. The \"VVS\" remained qualitatively inferior, but by the time of the Soviet counter-offensive, the \"VVS\" had reached numerical superiority.\nIn mid-October, after receiving reinforcements from the Caucasus theatre, the \"Luftwaffe\" intensified its efforts against the remaining Red Army positions holding the west bank. \"Luftflotte\" 4 flew 1,250 sorties on 14 October and its Stukas dropped 550 tonnes of bombs, while German infantry surrounded the three factories. \"Stukageschwader\" 1, 2, and 77 had largely silenced Soviet artillery on the eastern bank of the Volga before turning their attention to the shipping that was once again trying to reinforce the narrowing Soviet pockets of resistance. The 62nd Army had been cut in two and, due to intensive air attack on its supply ferries, was receiving much less material support. With the Soviets forced into a strip of land on the western bank of the Volga, over 1,208 \"Stuka\" missions were flown in an effort to eliminate them.\nThe Soviet bomber force, the \"Aviatsiya Dal'nego Deystviya\" (Long Range Aviation; ADD), having taken crippling losses over the past 18 months, was restricted to flying at night. The Soviets flew 11,317 night sorties over Stalingrad and the Don-bend sector between 17 July and 19 November. These raids caused little damage and were of nuisance value only.\nOn 8 November, substantial units from \"Luftflotte\" 4 were withdrawn to combat the Allied landings in North Africa. The German air arm found itself spread thinly across Europe, struggling to maintain its strength in the other southern sectors of the Soviet-German front.\nAs historian Chris Bellamy notes, the Germans paid a high strategic price for the aircraft sent into Stalingrad: the \"Luftwaffe\" was forced to divert much of its air strength away from the oil-rich Caucasus, which had been Hitler's original grand-strategic objective.\nThe Royal Romanian Air Force was also involved in the Axis air operations at Stalingrad. Starting 23 October 1942, Romanian pilots flew a total of 4,000 sorties, during which they destroyed 61 Soviet aircraft. The Romanian Air Force lost 79 aircraft, most of them captured on the ground along with their airfields.\nGermans reach the Volga.\nAfter three months of slow advance, the Germans finally reached the river banks, capturing 90% of the ruined city and splitting the remaining Soviet forces into two narrow pockets. Ice floes on the Volga now prevented boats and tugs from supplying the Soviet defenders. Nevertheless, the fighting continued, especially on the slopes of Mamayev Kurgan and inside the factory area in the northern part of the city. From 21 August to 20 November, the German 6th Army lost 60,548 men, including 12,782 killed, 45,545 wounded and 2,221 missing.\nSoviet counter-offensives.\nRecognising that German troops were ill-prepared for offensive operations during the winter of 1942 and that most of them were redeployed elsewhere on the southern sector of the Eastern Front, the Stavka decided to conduct a number of offensive operations between 19 November 1942 and 2 February 1943. These operations opened the Winter Campaign of 1942\u20131943 (19 November 1942 \u2013 3 March 1943), which involved some fifteen Armies operating on several fronts. According to Zhukov, \"German operational blunders were aggravated by poor intelligence: they failed to spot preparations for the major counter-offensive near Stalingrad where there were 10 field, 1 tank and 4 air armies.\"\nWeakness on the German flanks.\nDuring the siege, the German and allied Italian, Hungarian, and Romanian armies protecting Army Group B's north and south flanks had pressed their headquarters for support. The Hungarian 2nd Army was given the task of defending a section of the front north of Stalingrad between the Italian Army and Voronezh. This resulted in a very thin line, with some sectors where stretches were being defended by a single platoon (platoons typically have around 20 to 50 men). These forces were also lacking in effective anti-tank weapons. Zhukov states, \"Compared with the Germans, the troops of the satellites were not so well armed, less experienced and less efficient, even in defence.\"\nBecause of the total focus on the city, the Axis forces had neglected for months to consolidate their positions along the natural defensive line of the Don River. The Soviet forces were allowed to retain bridgeheads on the right bank from which offensive operations could be quickly launched. These bridgeheads in retrospect presented a serious threat to Army Group B.\nSimilarly, on the southern flank of the Stalingrad sector, the front southwest of Kotelnikovo was held only by the Romanian 4th Army. Beyond that army, a single German division, the 16th Motorised Infantry, covered 400\u00a0km. Paulus had requested permission to \"withdraw the 6th Army behind the Don,\" but was rejected. According to Paulus' comments to Adam, \"There is still the order whereby no commander of an army group or an army has the right to relinquish a village, even a trench, without Hitler's consent.\"\nOperation Uranus: the Soviet offensive.\nIn autumn, the Soviet generals Georgy Zhukov and Aleksandr Vasilevsky, responsible for strategic planning in the Stalingrad area, concentrated forces in the steppes to the north and south of the city. The northern flank was defended by Hungarian and Romanian units, often in open positions on the steppes. The natural line of defence, the Don River, had never been properly established by the German side. The armies in the area were also poorly equipped in terms of anti-tank weapons. The plan was to punch through the overstretched and weakly defended German flanks and surround the German forces in the Stalingrad region.\nDuring the preparations for the attack, Marshal Zhukov personally visited the front and noticing the poor organisation, insisted on a one-week delay in the start date of the planned attack. The operation was code-named \"Uranus\" and launched in conjunction with Operation Mars, which was directed at Army Group Center. The plan was similar to the one Zhukov had used to achieve victory at Khalkhin Gol three years before, where he had sprung a double envelopment and destroyed the 23rd Division of the Japanese army.\nOn 19 November 1942, the Red Army launched Operation Uranus. The attacking Soviet units under the command of Gen. Nikolay Vatutin consisted of three complete armies, the 1st Guards Army, 5th Tank Army and 21st Army, including a total of 18 infantry divisions, eight tank brigades, two motorised brigades, six cavalry divisions and one anti-tank brigade. The preparations for the attack could be heard by the Romanians, who continued to push for reinforcements, only to be refused again. Thinly spread, deployed in exposed positions, outnumbered and poorly equipped, the Romanian 3rd Army, which held the northern flank of the German 6th Army, was overrun.\nBehind the front lines, no preparations had been made to defend key points in the rear such as Kalach. The response by the \"Wehrmacht\" was both chaotic and indecisive. Poor weather prevented effective air action against the Soviet offensive. Army Group B was in disarray and faced strong Soviet pressure across all its fronts. Hence it was ineffective in relieving the 6th Army.\nOn 20 November, a second Soviet offensive (two armies) was launched to the south of Stalingrad against points held by the Romanian 4th Army Corps. The Romanian forces, made up primarily of infantry, were overrun by large numbers of tanks. The Soviet forces raced west and met on 23 November at the town of Kalach, sealing the ring around Stalingrad. The link-up of the Soviet forces, not filmed at the time, was later re-enacted for a propaganda film which was shown worldwide..\nSixth Army surrounded.\nThe surrounded Axis personnel comprised 265,000 Germans, Romanians, Italians, and the Croatians. In addition, the German 6th Army included between 40,000 and 65,000 \"Hilfswillige\" (\"Hiwi\"), or \"volunteer auxiliaries\", a term used for personnel recruited amongst Soviet POWs and civilians from areas under occupation. \"Hiwi\" often proved to be reliable Axis personnel in rear areas and were used for supporting roles, but also served in some front-line units as their numbers had increased. German personnel in the pocket numbered about 210,000, according to strength breakdowns of the 20 field divisions (average size 9,000) and 100 battalion-sized units of the Sixth Army on 19 November 1942. Inside the pocket (, literally \"cauldron\"), there were also around 10,000 Soviet civilians and several thousand Soviet soldiers the Germans had taken captive during the battle. Not all of the 6th Army was trapped: 50,000 soldiers were brushed aside outside the pocket. These belonged mostly to the other two divisions of the 6th Army between the Italian and Romanian armies: the 62nd and 298th Infantry Divisions. Of the 210,000 Germans, 10,000 remained to fight on, 105,000 surrendered, 35,000 left by air and the remaining 60,000 died.\nEven with the desperate situation of the 6th Army, Army Group A continued their invasion of the Caucasus further south from 19 November until 19 December. Only on December 28 was Army Group A ordered to withdraw from the Caucasus. Hence Army Group A was never used to help relieve the Sixth Army.\nArmy Group Don was formed under Field Marshal von Manstein. Under his command were the twenty German and two Romanian divisions encircled at Stalingrad, Adam's battle groups formed along the Chir River and on the Don bridgehead, plus the remains of the Romanian 3rd Army.\nThe Red Army units immediately formed two defensive fronts: a circumvallation facing inward and a contravallation facing outward. Field Marshal Erich von Manstein advised Hitler not to order the 6th Army to break out, stating that he could break through the Soviet lines and relieve the besieged 6th Army. The American historians Williamson Murray and Alan Millet wrote that it was Manstein's message to Hitler on 24 November advising him that the 6th Army should not break out, along with G\u00f6ring's statements that the Luftwaffe could supply Stalingrad that \"...\u00a0sealed the fate of the Sixth Army.\" After 1945, Manstein claimed that he told Hitler that the 6th Army must break out. The American historian Gerhard Weinberg wrote that Manstein distorted his record on the matter. Manstein was tasked to conduct a relief operation, named Operation Winter Storm (\"Unternehmen Wintergewitter\") against Stalingrad, which he thought was feasible if the 6th Army was temporarily supplied through the air.\nAdolf Hitler had declared in a public speech (in the Berlin Sportpalast) on 30 September 1942 that the German army would never leave the city. At a meeting shortly after the Soviet encirclement, German army chiefs pushed for an immediate breakout to a new line on the west of the Don, but Hitler was at his Bavarian retreat of Obersalzberg in Berchtesgaden with the head of the \"Luftwaffe\", Hermann G\u00f6ring. When asked by Hitler, G\u00f6ring replied, after being convinced by Hans Jeschonnek, that the \"Luftwaffe\" could supply the 6th Army with an \"air bridge.\" This would allow the Germans in the city to fight on temporarily while a relief force was assembled. A similar plan had been used a year earlier at the Demyansk Pocket, albeit on a much smaller scale: a corps at Demyansk rather than an entire army.\nThe director of \"Luftflotte\" 4, Wolfram von Richthofen, tried to get this decision overturned. The forces under the 6th Army were almost twice as large as a regular German army unit, plus there was also a corps of the 4th Panzer Army trapped in the pocket. Due to a limited number of available aircraft and having only one available airfield, at Pitomnik, the \"Luftwaffe\" could only deliver 105 tonnes of supplies per day, only a fraction of the minimum 750 tonnes that both Paulus and Zeitzler estimated the 6th Army needed. To supplement the limited number of Junkers Ju 52 transports, the Germans pressed other aircraft into the role, such as the Heinkel He 177 bomber (some bombers performed adequately \u2013 the Heinkel He 111 proved to be quite capable and was much faster than the Ju 52). General Richthofen informed Manstein on 27 November of the small transport capacity of the Luftwaffe and the impossibility of supplying 300 tons a day by air. Manstein now saw the enormous technical difficulties of a supply by air of these dimensions. The next day he made a six-page situation report to the general staff. Based on the information of the expert Richthofen, he declared that contrary to the example of the pocket of Demyansk the permanent supply by air would be impossible. If only a narrow link could be established to Sixth Army, he proposed that this should be used to pull it out from the encirclement, and said that the Luftwaffe should instead of supplies deliver only enough ammunition and fuel for a breakout attempt. He acknowledged the heavy moral sacrifice that giving up Stalingrad would mean, but this would be made easier to bear by conserving the combat power of the Sixth Army and regaining the initiative. He ignored the limited mobility of the army and the difficulties of disengaging the Soviets. Hitler reiterated that the Sixth Army would stay at Stalingrad and that the air bridge would supply it until the encirclement was broken by a new German offensive.\nSupplying the 270,000 men trapped in the \"cauldron\" required 700 tons of supplies a day. That would mean 350 Ju 52 flights a day into Pitomnik. At a minimum, 500 tons were required. However, according to Adam, \"On not one single day have the minimal essential number of tons of supplies been flown in.\" The \"Luftwaffe\" was able to deliver an average of 85 tonnes of supplies per day out of an air transport capacity of 106 tonnes per day. The most successful day, 19 December, the \"Luftwaffe\" delivered 262 tonnes of supplies in 154 flights. The outcome of the airlift was the Luftwaffe's failure to provide its transport units with the tools they needed to maintain an adequate count of operational aircraft \u2013 tools that included airfield facilities, supplies, manpower, and even aircraft suited to the prevailing conditions. These factors, taken together, prevented the Luftwaffe from effectively employing the full potential of its transport forces, ensuring that they were unable to deliver the quantity of supplies needed to sustain the 6th Army.\nIn the early parts of the operation, fuel was shipped at a higher priority than food and ammunition because of a belief that there would be a breakout from the city. Transport aircraft also evacuated technical specialists and sick or wounded personnel from the besieged enclave. Sources differ on the number flown out: at least 25,000 to at most 35,000.\nInitially, supply flights came in from the field at Tatsinskaya, called 'Tazi' by the German pilots. On 23 December, the Soviet 24th Tank Corps, commanded by Major-General Vasily Mikhaylovich Badanov, reached nearby Skassirskaya and in the early morning of 24 December, the tanks reached Tatsinskaya. Without any soldiers to defend the airfield, it was abandoned under heavy fire; in a little under an hour, 108 Ju 52s and 16 Ju 86s took off for Novocherkassk \u2013 leaving 72 Ju 52s and many other aircraft burning on the ground. A new base was established some from Stalingrad at Salsk, the additional distance would become another obstacle to the resupply efforts. Salsk was abandoned in turn by mid-January for a rough facility at Zverevo, near Shakhty. The field at Zverevo was attacked repeatedly on 18 January and a further 50 Ju 52s were destroyed. Winter weather conditions, technical failures, heavy Soviet anti-aircraft fire and fighter interceptions eventually led to the loss of 488 German aircraft.\nIn spite of the failure of the German offensive to reach the 6th Army, the air supply operation continued under ever more difficult circumstances. The 6th Army slowly starved. General Zeitzler, moved by their plight, began to limit himself to their slim rations at meal times. After a few weeks on such a diet, he had \"visibly lost weight\", according to Albert Speer, and Hitler \"commanded Zeitzler to resume at once taking sufficient nourishment.\"\nThe toll on the \"Transportgruppen\" was heavy. 160 aircraft were destroyed and 328 were heavily damaged (beyond repair). Some 266 Junkers Ju 52s were destroyed; one-third of the fleet's strength on the Eastern Front. The He 111 \"gruppen\" lost 165 aircraft in transport operations. Other losses included 42 Ju 86s, 9 Fw 200 Condors, 5 He 177 bombers and 1 Ju 290. The \"Luftwaffe\" also lost close to 1,000 highly experienced bomber crew personnel. So heavy were the \"Luftwaffe\"s losses that four of \"Luftflotte\" 4's transport units (KGrzbV 700, KGrzbV 900, I./KGrzbV 1 and II./KGzbV 1) were \"formally dissolved.\"\nEnd of the battle.\nOperation Winter Storm.\nManstein's plan to rescue the Sixth Army \u2013 Operation Winter Storm \u2013 was developed in full consultation with F\u00fchrer headquarters. It aimed to break through to the Sixth Army and establish a corridor to keep it supplied and reinforced, so that, according to Hitler's order, it could maintain its \"cornerstone\" position on the Volga, \"with regard to operations in 1943\". Manstein, however, who knew that Sixth Army could not survive the winter there, instructed his headquarters to draw up a further plan in the event of Hitler's seeing sense. This would include the subsequent breakout of Sixth Army, in the event of a successful first phase, and its physical reincorporation in Army Group Don. This second plan was given the name Operation Thunderclap. Winter Storm, as Zhukov had predicted, was originally planned as a two-pronged attack. One thrust would come from the area of Kotelnikovo, well to the south, and around a hundred miles from the Sixth Army. The other would start from the Chir front west of the Don, which was little more than forty miles from the edge of the Kessel, but the continuing attacks of Romanenko's 5th Tank Army against the German detachments along the river Chir ruled out that start-line. This left only the LVII Panzer Corps around Kotelnikovo, supported by the rest of Hoth's very mixed Fourth Panzer Army, to relieve Paulus's trapped divisions. The LVII Panzer Corps, commanded by General Friedrich Kirchner, had been weak at first. It consisted of two Romanian cavalry divisions and the 23rd Panzer Division, which mustered no more than thirty serviceable tanks. The 6th Panzer Division, arriving from France, was a vastly more powerful formation, but its members hardly received an encouraging impression. The Austrian divisional commander, General Erhard Raus, was summoned to Manstein's royal carriage in Kharkov station on 24 November, where the field marshal briefed him. \"He described the situation in very sombre terms\", recorded Raus. Three days later, when the first trainload of Raus's division steamed into Kotelnikovo station to unload, his troops were greeted by \"a hail of shells\" from Soviet batteries. \"As quick as lightning, the Panzergrenadiers jumped from their wagons. But already the enemy was attacking the station with their battle-cries of 'Urrah!'\" By 18 December, the German Army had pushed to within 48\u00a0km (30\u00a0mi) of Sixth Army's positions. However, the predictable nature of the relief operation brought significant risk for all German forces in the area. The starving encircled forces at Stalingrad made no attempt to break out or link up with Manstein's advance. Some German officers requested that Paulus defy Hitler's orders to stand fast and instead attempt to break out of the Stalingrad pocket. Paulus refused, concerned about the Red Army attacks on the flank of Army Group Don and Army Group B in their advance on Rostov-on-Don, \"an early abandonment\" of Stalingrad \"would result in the destruction of Army Group A in the Caucasus\", and the fact that his 6th Army tanks only had fuel for a 30\u00a0km advance towards Hoth's spearhead, a futile effort if they did not receive assurance of resupply by air. Of his questions to Army Group Don, Paulus was told, \"Wait, implement Operation 'Thunderclap' only on explicit orders!\" \u2013 Operation Thunderclap being the code word initiating the breakout.\nOperation Little Saturn.\nOn 16 December, the Soviets launched Operation Little Saturn, which attempted to punch through the Axis army (mainly Italians) on the Don and take Rostov-on-Don. The Germans set up a \"mobile defence\" of small units that were to hold towns until supporting armour arrived. From the Soviet bridgehead at Mamon, 15 divisions \u2013 supported by at least 100 tanks \u2013 attacked the Italian Cosseria and Ravenna Divisions, and although outnumbered 9 to 1, the Italians initially fought well, with the Germans praising the quality of the Italian defenders, but on 19 December, with the Italian lines disintegrating, ARMIR headquarters ordered the battered divisions to withdraw to new lines.\nThe fighting forced a total revaluation of the German situation. Sensing that this was the last chance for a breakout, Manstein pleaded with Hitler on 18 December, but Hitler refused. Paulus himself also doubted the feasibility of such a breakout. The attempt to break through to Stalingrad was abandoned and Army Group A was ordered to pull back from the Caucasus. The 6th Army now was beyond all hope of German relief. While a motorised breakout might have been possible in the first few weeks, the 6th Army now had insufficient fuel and the German soldiers would have faced great difficulty breaking through the Soviet lines on foot in harsh winter conditions. But in its defensive position on the Volga, the 6th Army continued to tie down a significant number of Soviet Armies.\nOn 23 December, the attempt to relieve Stalingrad was abandoned and Manstein's forces switched over to the defensive to deal with new Soviet offensives. As Zhukov states, \"The military and political leadership of Nazi Germany sought not to relieve them, but to get them to fight on for as long possible so as to tie up the Soviet forces. The aim was to win as much time as possible to withdraw forces from the Caucasus (Army Group A) and to rush troops from other Fronts to form a new front that would be able in some measure to check our counter-offensive.\"\nSoviet victory.\nThe Red Army High Command sent three envoys while simultaneously aircraft and loudspeakers announced terms of capitulation on 7 January 1943. The letter was signed by Colonel-General of Artillery Voronov and the commander-in-chief of the Don Front, Lieutenant-General Rokossovsky. A low-level Soviet envoy party (comprising Major Aleksandr Smyslov, Captain Nikolay Dyatlenko and a trumpeter) carried generous surrender terms to Paulus: if he surrendered within 24 hours, he would receive a guarantee of safety for all prisoners, medical care for the sick and wounded, prisoners being allowed to keep their personal belongings, \"normal\" food rations, and repatriation to any country they wished after the war. Rokossovsky's letter also stressed that Paulus' men were in an untenable situation. Paulus requested permission to surrender, but Hitler rejected Paulus' request out of hand. Accordingly, Paulus did not respond. The German High Command informed Paulus, \"Every day that the army holds out longer helps the whole front and draws away the Russian divisions from it.\"\nThe Germans inside the pocket retreated from the suburbs of Stalingrad to the city itself. The loss of the two airfields, at Pitomnik on 16 January 1943 and Gumrak on the night of 21/22 January, meant an end to air supplies and to the evacuation of the wounded. The third and last serviceable runway was at the Stalingradskaya flight school, which reportedly had the last landings and takeoffs on 23 January. After 23 January, there were no more reported landings, just intermittent air drops of ammunition and food until the end.\nThe Germans were now not only starving but running out of ammunition. Nevertheless, they continued to resist, in part because they believed the Soviets would execute any who surrendered. In particular, the so-called \"HiWis\", Soviet citizens fighting for the Germans, had no illusions about their fate if captured. The Soviets were initially surprised by the number of Germans they had trapped and had to reinforce their encircling troops. Bloody urban warfare began again in Stalingrad, but this time it was the Germans who were pushed back to the banks of the Volga. The Germans adopted a simple defence of fixing wire nets over all windows to protect themselves from grenades. The Soviets responded by fixing fish hooks to the grenades so they stuck to the nets when thrown. The Germans had no usable tanks in the city, and those that still functioned could, at best, be used as makeshift pillboxes. The Soviets did not bother employing tanks in areas where urban destruction restricted their mobility.\nOn 22 January, Rokossovsky once again offered Paulus a chance to surrender. Paulus requested that he be granted permission to accept the terms. He told Hitler that he was no longer able to command his men, who were without ammunition or food. Hitler rejected it on a point of honour. He telegraphed the 6th Army later that day, claiming that it had made a historic contribution to the greatest struggle in German history and that it should stand fast \"to the last soldier and the last bullet.\" Hitler told Goebbels that the plight of the 6th Army was a \"heroic drama of German history.\" On 24 January, in his radio report to Hitler, Paulus reported: \"18,000 wounded without the slightest aid of bandages and medicines.\"\nOn 26 January 1943, the German forces inside Stalingrad were split into two pockets north and south of Mamayev-Kurgan. The northern pocket consisting of the VIIIth Corps, under General Walter Heitz, and the XIth Corps, was now cut off from telephone communication with Paulus in the southern pocket. Now \"each part of the cauldron came personally under Hitler.\" On 28 January, the cauldron was split into three parts. The northern cauldron consisted of the XIth Corps, the central with the VIIIth and LIst Corps, and the southern with the XIVth Panzer Corps and IVth Corps \"without units\". The sick and wounded reached 40,000 to 50,000.\nOn 30 January 1943, the 10th anniversary of Hitler's coming to power, Goebbels read out a proclamation that included the sentence: \"The heroic struggle of our soldiers on the Volga should be a warning for everybody to do the utmost for the struggle for Germany's freedom and the future of our people, and thus in a wider sense for the maintenance of our entire continent.\" Paulus notified Hitler that his men would likely collapse before the day was out. In response, Hitler issued a tranche of field promotions to the Sixth Army's officers. Most notably, he promoted Paulus to the rank of \"Generalfeldmarschall\". In deciding to promote Paulus, Hitler noted that there was no record of a German or Prussian field marshal having ever surrendered. The implication was clear: if Paulus surrendered, he would shame himself and would become the highest-ranking German officer ever to be captured. Hitler believed that Paulus would either fight to the last man or commit suicide.\nOn the next day, the southern pocket in Stalingrad collapsed. Soviet forces reached the entrance to the German headquarters in the ruined GUM department store. When interrogated by the Soviets, Paulus claimed that he had not surrendered. He said that he had been taken by surprise. He denied that he was the commander of the remaining northern pocket in Stalingrad and refused to issue an order in his name for them to surrender.\nThere was no cameraman to film the capture of Paulus, but one of them (Roman Karmen) was able to record his first interrogation this same day, at Shumilov's 64th Army's HQ, and a few hours later at Rokossovsky's Don Front HQ.\nThe central pocket, under the command of Heitz, surrendered the same day, while the northern pocket, under the command of General Karl Strecker, held out for two more days. Four Soviet armies were deployed against the northern pocket. At four in the morning on 2 February, Strecker was informed that one of his own officers had gone to the Soviets to negotiate surrender terms. Seeing no point in continuing, he sent a radio message saying that his command had done its duty and fought to the last man. When Strecker finally surrendered, he and his chief of staff, Helmuth Groscurth, drafted the final signal sent from Stalingrad, purposely omitting the customary exclamation to Hitler, replacing it with \"Long live Germany!\"\nAround 91,000 exhausted, ill, wounded, and starving prisoners were taken, including 3,000 Romanians (the survivors of the 20th Infantry Division, 1st Cavalry Division and \"Col. Voicu\" Detachment). The prisoners included 22 generals. Hitler was furious and confided that Paulus \"could have freed himself from all sorrow and ascended into eternity and national immortality, but he prefers to go to Moscow.\"\nCasualties.\nThe calculation of casualties depends on what scope is given to the Battle of Stalingrad. The scope can vary from the fighting in the city and suburbs to the inclusion of almost all fighting on the southern wing of the Soviet-German front from the spring of 1942 to the end of the fighting in the city in the winter of 1943. Scholars have produced different estimates depending on their definition of the scope of the battle. The difference is comparing the city against the region. The Axis suffered 647,300 \u2013 968,374 total casualties (killed, wounded or captured) among all branches of the German armed forces and its allies:\n235,000 German and allied troops in total, from all units, including Manstein's ill-fated relief force, were captured during the battle.\nThe Germans lost 900 aircraft (including 274 transports and 165 bombers used as transports), 500 tanks and 6,000 artillery pieces. According to a contemporary Soviet report, 5,762 guns, 1,312 mortars, 12,701 heavy machine guns, 156,987 rifles, 80,438 sub-machine guns, 10,722 trucks, 744 aircraft; 1,666 tanks, 261 other armoured vehicles, 571 half-tracks and 10,679 motorcycles were captured by the Soviets. In addition, an unknown amount of Hungarian, Italian, and Romanian materiel was lost.\nThe situation of the Romanian tanks is known, however. Before \"Operation Uranus\", the 1st Romanian Armoured Division consisted of 121 R-2 light tanks and 19 German-produced tanks (Panzer III and IV). All of the 19 German tanks were lost, as well as 81 of the R-2 light tanks. Only 27 of the latter were lost in combat, however, the remaining 54 being abandoned after breaking down or running out of fuel. Ultimately, however, Romanian armoured warfare proved to be a tactical success, as the Romanians destroyed 127 Soviet tanks for the cost of their 100 lost units. Romanian forces destroyed 62 Soviet tanks on 20 November for the cost of 25 tanks of their own, followed by 65 more Soviet tanks on 22 November, for the cost of 10 tanks of their own. More Soviet tanks were destroyed as they overran the Romanian airfields. This was accomplished by Romanian Vickers/Re\u0219i\u021ba 75\u00a0mm anti-aircraft guns, which proved effective against Soviet armour. The battle for the German-Romanian airfield at Karpova lasted two days, with Romanian gunners destroying numerous Soviet tanks. Later, when the Tatsinskaya Airfield was also captured, the Romanian 75\u00a0mm guns destroyed five more Soviet tanks.\nThe USSR, according to archival figures, suffered 1,129,619 total casualties; 478,741 personnel killed or missing, and 650,878 wounded or sick. The USSR lost 4,341 tanks destroyed or damaged, 15,728 artillery pieces and 2,769 combat aircraft. 955 Soviet civilians died in Stalingrad and its suburbs from aerial bombing by \"Luftflotte\" 4 as the German 4th Panzer and 6th Armies approached the city.\nLuftwaffe losses.\nThe losses of transport planes were especially serious, as they destroyed the capacity for supply of the trapped 6th Army. The destruction of 72 aircraft when the airfield at Tatsinskaya was overrun meant the loss of about 10 percent of the Luftwaffe transport fleet.\nThese losses amounted to about 50 percent of the aircraft committed and the Luftwaffe training program was stopped and sorties in other theatres of war were significantly reduced to save fuel for use at Stalingrad.\nAftermath.\nThe German public was not officially told of the impending disaster until the end of January 1943, though positive media reports had stopped in the weeks before the announcement. Stalingrad marked the first time that the Nazi government publicly acknowledged a failure in its war effort. On 31 January, regular programmes on German state radio were replaced by a broadcast of the sombre Adagio movement from Anton Bruckner's Seventh Symphony, followed by the announcement of the defeat at Stalingrad. On 18 February, Minister of Propaganda Joseph Goebbels gave the famous \"Sportpalast\" speech in Berlin, encouraging the Germans to accept a total war that would claim all resources and efforts from the entire population.\nBased on Soviet records, over 10,000 German soldiers continued to resist in isolated groups within the city for the next month. Some have presumed that they were motivated by a belief that fighting on was better than a slow death in Soviet captivity. Brown University historian Omer Bartov claims they were motivated by National Socialism. He studied 11,237 letters sent by soldiers inside of Stalingrad between 20 December 1942 and 16 January 1943 to their families in Germany. Almost every letter expressed belief in Germany's ultimate victory and their willingness to fight and die at Stalingrad to achieve that victory. Bartov reported that a great many of the soldiers were well aware that they would not be able to escape from Stalingrad but in their letters to their families boasted that they were proud to \"sacrifice themselves for the F\u00fchrer\".\nThe remaining forces continued to resist, hiding in cellars and sewers but by early March 1943, the last small and isolated pockets of resistance had surrendered. According to Soviet intelligence documents shown in the documentary, a remarkable NKVD report from March 1943 is available showing the tenacity of some of these German groups:\nThe operative report of the Don Front's staff issued on 5 February 1943, 22:00 said,\nThe condition of the troops that surrendered was pitiful. British war correspondent Alexander Werth described the following scene in his \"Russia at War\" book, based on a first-hand account of his visit to Stalingrad on 3\u20135 February 1943,\nOut of the nearly 91,000 German prisoners captured in Stalingrad, only about 5,000 returned. Weakened by disease, starvation and lack of medical care during the encirclement, they were sent on foot marches to prisoner camps and later to labour camps all over the Soviet Union. Some 35,000 were eventually sent on transports, of which 17,000 did not survive. Most died of wounds, disease (particularly typhus), cold, overwork, mistreatment and malnutrition. Some were kept in the city to help rebuild it.\nA handful of senior officers were taken to Moscow and used for propaganda purposes, and some of them joined the National Committee for a Free Germany. Some, including Paulus, signed anti-Hitler statements that were broadcast to German troops. Paulus testified for the prosecution during the Nuremberg Trials and assured families in Germany that those soldiers taken prisoner at Stalingrad were safe. He remained in the Soviet Union until 1952, then moved to Dresden in East Germany, where he spent the remainder of his days defending his actions at Stalingrad and was quoted as saying that Communism was the best hope for postwar Europe. General Walther von Seydlitz-Kurzbach offered to raise an anti-Hitler army from the Stalingrad survivors, but the Soviets did not accept. It was not until 1955 that the last of the 5,000\u20136,000 survivors were repatriated (to West Germany) after a plea to the Politburo by Konrad Adenauer.\nSignificance.\nStalingrad has been described as the biggest defeat in the history of the German Army. It is often identified as the turning point on the Eastern Front, in the war against Germany overall, and in the entire Second World War. The Red Army had the initiative, and the Wehrmacht was in retreat. A year of German gains during Case Blue had been wiped out. Germany's Sixth Army had ceased to exist, and the forces of Germany's European allies, except Finland, had been shattered. In a speech on 9 November 1944, Hitler himself blamed Stalingrad for Germany's impending doom.\nThe destruction of an entire army (the largest killed, captured, wounded figures for Axis soldiers, nearly 1\u00a0million, during the war) and the frustration of Germany's grand strategy made the battle a watershed moment. At the time, the global significance of the battle was not in doubt. Writing in his diary on 1 January 1943, British General Alan Brooke, Chief of the Imperial General Staff, reflected on the change in the position from a year before:\nAt this point, the British had won the Battle of El Alamein in November 1942. However, there were only about 50,000 German soldiers at El Alamein in Egypt, while at Stalingrad 300,000 to 400,000 Germans had been lost.\nRegardless of the strategic implications, there is little doubt about Stalingrad's symbolism. Germany's defeat shattered its reputation for invincibility and dealt a devastating blow to German morale. On 30 January 1943, the tenth anniversary of his coming to power, Hitler chose not to speak. Joseph Goebbels read the text of his speech for him on the radio. The speech contained an oblique reference to the battle, which suggested that Germany was now in a defensive war. The public mood was sullen, depressed, fearful, and war-weary. Germany was looking in the face of defeat.\nThe reverse was the case on the Soviet side. There was an overwhelming surge in confidence and belief in victory. A common saying was: \"You cannot stop an army which has done Stalingrad.\" Stalin was feted as the hero of the hour and made a Marshal of the Soviet Union.\nThe news of the battle echoed round the world, with many people now believing that Hitler's defeat was inevitable. The Turkish Consul in Moscow predicted that \"the lands which the Germans have destined for their living space will become their dying space\". Britain's conservative \"The Daily Telegraph\" proclaimed that the victory had saved European civilisation. The country celebrated \"Red Army Day\" on 23 February 1943. A ceremonial Sword of Stalingrad was forged by King George VI. After being put on public display in Britain, this was presented to Stalin by Winston Churchill at the Tehran Conference later in 1943. Soviet propaganda spared no effort and wasted no time in capitalising on the triumph, impressing a global audience. The prestige of Stalin, the Soviet Union, and the worldwide Communist movement was immense, and their political position greatly enhanced.\nCommemoration.\nIn recognition of the determination of its defenders, Stalingrad was awarded the title Hero City in 1945. A colossal monument called The Motherland Calls was erected in 1967 on Mamayev Kurgan, the hill overlooking the city where bones and rusty metal splinters can still be found. The statue forms part of a war memorial complex which includes the ruins of the Grain Silo and Pavlov's House. On 2 February 2013 Volgograd hosted a military parade and other events to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the final victory. Since then, military parades have always commemorated the victory in the city.\nEvery year, hundreds of bodies of killed soldiers are still recovered in the area around Stalingrad and reburied in the cemeteries at Mamayev Kurgan or Rossoshka.\nIn popular culture.\nThe events of the Battle for Stalingrad have been covered in numerous media works of British, American, German, and Russian origin, for its significance as a turning point in the Second World War and for the loss of life associated with the battle. The term Stalingrad has become almost synonymous with large-scale urban battles with high casualties on both sides."}
{"id": "4285", "revid": "29539620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4285", "title": "Bodhidharma", "text": "Bodhidharma was a semi-legendary Buddhist monk who lived during the 5th or 6th century. He is traditionally credited as the transmitter of Chan Buddhism to China, and regarded as its first Chinese patriarch. According to Chinese legend, he also began the physical training of the monks of Shaolin Monastery that led to the creation of Shaolin kungfu. In Japan, he is known as Daruma. His name means \"\"dharma\" of awakening (bodhi)\" in Sanskrit.\nLittle contemporary biographical information on Bodhidharma is extant, and subsequent accounts became layered with legend and unreliable details.\nAccording to the principal Chinese sources, Bodhidharma came from the Western Regions, which refers to Central Asia but may also include the Indian subcontinent, and is described as either a \"Persian Central Asian\" or a \"South Indian [...] the third son of a great Indian king.\"\nThroughout Buddhist art, Bodhidharma is depicted as an ill-tempered, profusely-bearded, wide-eyed non-Chinese person. He is referred as \"The Blue-Eyed Barbarian\" () in Chan texts.\nAside from the Chinese accounts, several popular traditions also exist regarding Bodhidharma's origins.\nThe accounts also differ on the date of his arrival, with one early account claiming that he arrived during the Liu Song dynasty (420\u2013479) and later accounts dating his arrival to the Liang dynasty (502\u2013557). Bodhidharma was primarily active in the territory of the Northern Wei (386\u2013534). Modern scholarship dates him to about the early 5th century.\nBodhidharma's teachings and practice centered on meditation and the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\". The \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\" (952) identifies Bodhidharma as the 28th Patriarch of Buddhism in an uninterrupted line that extends all the way back to the Gautama Buddha himself. Bodhidharma also known as \"The Wall-Gazing Brahmin\".\nBiography.\nPrincipal sources.\nThere are two known extant accounts written by contemporaries of Bodhidharma. According to these sources, Bodhidharma came from the Western Regions, and is described as either a \"Persian Central Asian\" or a \"South Indian [...] the third son of a great Indian king.\" Later sources draw on these two sources, adding additional details, including a change to being descendent from a \"Brahmin\" king, which accords with the reign of the Pallavas, who \"claim[ed] to belong to a brahmin lineage.\"\nThe \"Western Regions\" was a historical name specified in the Chinese chronicles between the 3rd century BC to the 8th century AD that referred to the regions west of Yumen Pass, most often Central Asia or sometimes more specifically the easternmost portion of it (e.g. Altishahr or the Tarim Basin in southern Xinjiang). Sometimes it was used more generally to refer to other regions to the west of China as well, such as the Indian subcontinent (as in the novel \"Journey to the West\").\n\"The Record of the Buddhist Monasteries of Luoyang\".\nThe earliest text mentioning Bodhidharma is \"The Record of the Buddhist Monasteries of Luoyang\" ( \"Lu\u00f2y\u00e1ng Qi\u00e9l\u00e1nj\u00ec\") which was compiled in 547 by Yang Xuanzhi (), a writer and translator of Mahayana sutras into Chinese. Yang gave the following account:\nThe account of Bodhidharma in the Luoyan Record does not particularly associate him with meditation, but rather depicts him as a thaumaturge capable of mystical feats. This may have played a role in his subsequent association with the martial arts and esoteric knowledge.\nTanlin \u2013 preface to the Two Entrances and Four Acts.\nThe second account was written by Tanlin (\u66c7\u6797; 506\u2013574). Tanlin's brief biography of the \"Dharma Master\" is found in his preface to the \"Long Scroll of the Treatise on the Two Entrances and Four Practices\", a text traditionally attributed to Bodhidharma and the first text to identify him as South Indian:\nTanlin's account was the first to mention that Bodhidharma attracted disciples, specifically mentioning Daoyu () and Dazu Huike (), the latter of whom would later figure very prominently in the Bodhidharma literature. Although Tanlin has traditionally been considered a disciple of Bodhidharma, it is more likely that he was a student of Huike.\n\"Chronicle of the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra\" Masters\".\nTanlin's preface has also been preserved in Jingjue's (683\u2013750) \"Lengjie Shizi ji\" \"Chronicle of the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra\" Masters\", which dates from 713\u2013716./ca. 715 He writes, \n\"Further Biographies of Eminent Monks\".\nIn the 7th-century historical work \"Further Biographies of Eminent Monks\" (\u7e8c\u9ad8\u50e7\u50b3 \"X\u00f9 g\u0101os\u0113ng zhu\u00e0n\"), Daoxuan () possibly drew on Tanlin's preface as a basic source, but made several significant additions:\nFirstly, Daoxuan adds more detail concerning Bodhidharma's origins, writing that he was of \"South Indian Brahmin stock\" (\u5357\u5929\u7afa\u5a46\u7f85\u9580\u7a2e \"n\u00e1n ti\u0101nzh\u00fa p\u00f3lu\u00f3m\u00e9n zh\u014fng\").\nSecondly, more detail is provided concerning Bodhidharma's journeys. Tanlin's original is imprecise about Bodhidharma's travels, saying only that he \"crossed distant mountains and seas\" before arriving in Wei. Daoxuan's account, however, implies \"a specific itinerary\": \"He first arrived at Nan-y\u00fceh during the Sung period. From there he turned north and came to the Kingdom of Wei\" This implies that Bodhidharma had travelled to China by sea and that he had crossed over the Yangtze.\nThirdly, Daoxuan suggests a date for Bodhidharma's arrival in China. He writes that Bodhidharma makes landfall in the time of the Song, thus making his arrival no later than the time of the Song's fall to the Southern Qi in 479.\nFinally, Daoxuan provides information concerning Bodhidharma's death. Bodhidharma, he writes, died at the banks of the Luo River, where he was interred by his disciple Dazu Huike, possibly in a cave. According to Daoxuan's chronology, Bodhidharma's death must have occurred prior to 534, the date of the Northern Wei's fall, because Dazu Huike subsequently leaves Luoyang for Ye. Furthermore, citing the shore of the Luo River as the place of death might possibly suggest that Bodhidharma died in the mass executions at Heyin () in 528. Supporting this possibility is a report in the Chinese Buddhist canon stating that a Buddhist monk was among the victims at H\u00e9y\u012bn.\nLater accounts.\n\"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\".\nIn the \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\" (\u7956\u5802\u96c6 \"Z\u01d4t\u00e1ngj\u00ed\") of 952, the elements of the traditional Bodhidharma story are in place. Bodhidharma is said to have been a disciple of Praj\u00f1\u0101t\u0101ra, thus establishing the latter as the 27th patriarch in India. After a three-year journey, Bodhidharma reached China in 527, during the Liang (as opposed to the Song in Daoxuan's text). The \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\" includes Bodhidharma's encounter with Emperor Wu of Liang, which was first recorded around 758 in the appendix to a text by Shenhui (), a disciple of Huineng.\nFinally, as opposed to Daoxuan's figure of \"over 180 years,\" the \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\" states that Bodhidharma died at the age of 150. He was then buried on Mount Xiong'er (\u718a\u8033\u5c71) to the west of Luoyang. However, three years after the burial, in the Pamir Mountains, Song Yun ()\u2014an official of one of the later Wei kingdoms\u2014encountered Bodhidharma, who claimed to be returning to India and was carrying a single sandal. Bodhidharma predicted the death of Song Yun's ruler, a prediction which was borne out upon the latter's return. Bodhidharma's tomb was then opened, and only a single sandal was found inside.\nAccording to the \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\", Bodhidharma left the Liang court in 527 and relocated to Mount Song near Luoyang and the Shaolin Monastery, where he \"faced a wall for nine years, not speaking for the entire time\", his date of death can have been no earlier than 536. Moreover, his encounter with the Wei official indicates a date of death no later than 554, three years before the fall of the Western Wei.\n\"Record of the Masters and Students of the La\u1e45ka\".\nThe \"Record of the Masters and Students of the La\u1e45ka\", which survives both in Chinese and in Tibetan translation (although the surviving Tibetan translation is apparently of older provenance than the surviving Chinese version), states that Bodhidharma is not the first ancestor of Zen, but instead the second. This text instead claims that Gu\u1e47abhadra, the translator of the La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra, is the first ancestor in the lineage. It further states that Bodhidharma was his student. The Tibetan translation is estimated to have been made in the late eighth or early ninth century, indicating that the original Chinese text was written at some point before that.\nDaoyuan \u2013 Transmission of the Lamp.\nSubsequent to the \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\", the only dated addition to the biography of Bodhidharma is in the \"Jingde Records of the Transmission of the Lamp\" (\u666f\u5fb7\u50b3\u71c8\u9304 \"J\u012dngd\u00e9 chu\u00e1nd\u0113ng l\u00f9\", published 1004 CE), by Daoyuan (), in which it is stated that Bodhidharma's original name had been Bodhit\u0101ra but was changed by his master Praj\u00f1\u0101t\u0101ra. The same account is given by the Japanese master Keizan's 13th-century work of the same title.\nPopular traditions.\nSeveral contemporary popular traditions also exist regarding Bodhidharma's origins. An Indian tradition regards Bodhidharma to be the third son of a Pallava king from Kanchipuram. This is consistent with the Southeast Asian traditions which also describe Bodhidharma as a former South Indian Tamil prince who had awakened his kundalini and renounced royal life to become a monk. The Tibetan version similarly characterises him as a dark-skinned siddha from South India. Conversely, the Japanese tradition generally regards Bodhidharma as Persian.\nLegends about Bodhidharma.\nSeveral stories about Bodhidharma have become popular legends, which are still being used in the Ch'an, Seon and Zen-tradition.\nEncounter with Emperor Wu of Liang.\nThe \"Anthology of the Patriarchal Hall\" says that in 527, Bodhidharma visited Emperor Wu of Liang, a fervent patron of Buddhism:\nThis encounter was included as the first k\u014dan of the \"Blue Cliff Record\".\nNine years of wall-gazing.\nFailing to make a favorable impression in South China, Bodhidharma is said to have travelled to the Shaolin Monastery. After either being refused entry or being ejected after a short time, he lived in a nearby cave, where he \"faced a wall for nine years, not speaking for the entire time\".\nThe biographical tradition is littered with apocryphal tales about Bodhidharma's life and circumstances. In one version of the story, he is said to have fallen asleep seven years into his nine years of wall-gazing. Becoming angry with himself, he cut off his eyelids to prevent it from happening again. According to the legend, as his eyelids hit the floor the first tea plants sprang up, and thereafter tea would provide a stimulant to help keep students of Chan awake during zazen.\nThe most popular account relates that Bodhidharma was admitted into the Shaolin temple after nine years in the cave and taught there for some time. However, other versions report that he \"passed away, seated upright\"; or that he disappeared, leaving behind the \"Yijin Jing\"; or that his legs atrophied after nine years of sitting, which is why Daruma dolls have no legs.\nHuike cuts off his arm.\nIn one legend, Bodhidharma refused to resume teaching until his would-be student, Dazu Huike, who had kept vigil for weeks in the deep snow outside of the monastery, cut off his own left arm to demonstrate sincerity.\nTransmission.\nSkin, flesh, bone, marrow.\n\"Jingde Records of the Transmission of the Lamp\" (\u666f\u5fb7\u4f20\u706f\u5f55) of Daoyuan, presented to the emperor in 1004, records that Bodhidharma wished to return to India and called together his disciples:\nBodhidharma passed on the symbolic robe and bowl of dharma succession to Dazu Huike and, some texts claim, a copy of the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\". Bodhidharma then either returned to India or died.\nBodhidharma at Shaolin.\nSome Chinese myths and legends describe Bodhidharma as being disturbed by the poor physical shape of the Shaolin monks, after which he instructed them in techniques to maintain their physical condition as well as teaching meditation. He is said to have taught a series of external exercises called the Eighteen Arhat Hands and an internal practice called the Sinew Metamorphosis Classic. In addition, after his departure from the temple, two manuscripts by Bodhidharma were said to be discovered inside the temple: the \"Yijin Jing\" and the \"Xisui Jing\". Copies and translations of the \"Yijin Jing\" survive to the modern day. The \"Xisui Jing\" has been lost.\nTravels in Southeast Asia.\nAccording to Southeast Asian folklore, Bodhidharma travelled from Jambudvipa by sea to Palembang, Indonesia. Passing through Sumatra, Java, Bali, and Malaysia, he eventually entered China through Nanyue. In his travels through the region, Bodhidharma is said to have transmitted his knowledge of the Mahayana doctrine and the martial arts. Malay legend holds that he introduced forms to silat.\nVajrayana tradition links Bodhidharma with the 11th-century south Indian monk Dampa Sangye who travelled extensively to Tibet and China spreading tantric teachings.\nAppearance after his death.\nThree years after Bodhidharma's death, Ambassador Song Yun of northern Wei is said to have seen him walking while holding a shoe at the Pamir Mountains. Song asked Bodhidharma where he was going, to which Bodhidharma replied \"I am going home\". When asked why he was holding his shoe, Bodhidharma answered \"You will know when you reach Shaolin monastery. Don't mention that you saw me or you will meet with disaster\". After arriving at the palace, Song told the emperor that he met Bodhidharma on the way. The emperor said Bodhidharma was already dead and buried and had Song arrested for lying. At Shaolin Monastery, the monks informed them that Bodhidharma was dead and had been buried in a hill behind the temple. The grave was exhumed and was found to contain a single shoe. The monks then said \"Master has gone back home\" and prostrated three times: \"For nine years he had remained and nobody knew him; Carrying a shoe in hand he went home quietly, without ceremony.\"\nPractice and teaching.\nBodhidharma is traditionally seen as introducing dhyana-practice in China.\nPointing directly to one's mind.\nOne of the fundamental Ch\u00e1n texts attributed to Bodhidharma is a four-line stanza whose first two verses echo the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\"s disdain for words and whose second two verses stress the importance of the insight into reality achieved through \"self-realization\":\nThe stanza, in fact, is not Bodhidharma's, but rather dates to the year 1108.\nWall-gazing.\nTanlin, in the preface to \"Two Entrances and Four Acts\", and Daoxuan, in the \"Further Biographies of Eminent Monks\", mention a practice of Bodhidharma's termed \"wall-gazing\" (\u58c1\u89c0 \"b\u00ecgu\u0101n\"). Both Tanlin and Daoxuan associate this \"wall-gazing\" with \"quieting [the] mind\" ().\nIn the \"Two Entrances and Four Acts\", traditionally attributed to Bodhidharma, the term \"wall-gazing\" is given as follows: Daoxuan states, \"The merits of Mah\u0101y\u0101na wall-gazing are the highest\".\nThese are the first mentions in the historical record of what may be a type of meditation being ascribed to Bodhidharma.\nExactly what sort of practice Bodhidharma's \"wall-gazing\" was remains uncertain. Nearly all accounts have treated it either as an undefined variety of meditation, as Daoxuan and Dumoulin, or as a variety of seated meditation akin to the zazen () that later became a defining characteristic of Chan. The latter interpretation is particularly common among those working from a Chan standpoint.\nThere have also, however, been interpretations of \"wall-gazing\" as a non-meditative phenomenon.\nThe La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra.\nThere are early texts which explicitly associate Bodhidharma with the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\". Daoxuan, for example, in a late recension of his biography of Bodhidharma's successor Huike, has the s\u016btra as a basic and important element of the teachings passed down by Bodhidharma:\nAnother early text, the \"Record of the Masters and Disciples of the La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\" () of Jingjue (\u6de8\u89ba; 683\u2013750), also mentions Bodhidharma in relation to this text. Jingjue's account also makes explicit mention of \"sitting meditation\" or zazen:\nIn other early texts, the school that would later become known as Chan Buddhism is sometimes referred to as the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra school\" (\u695e\u4f3d\u5b97 \"L\u00e9ngqi\u00e9 z\u014dng\").\nThe \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\", one of the Mahayana sutras, is a highly \"difficult and obscure\" text whose basic thrust is to emphasize \"the inner enlightenment that does away with all duality and is raised above all distinctions\". It is among the first and most important texts for East Asian Yog\u0101c\u0101ra.\nOne of the recurrent emphases in the \"La\u1e45k\u0101vat\u0101ra S\u016btra\" is a lack of reliance on words to effectively express reality:\nIn contrast to the ineffectiveness of words, the s\u016btra instead stresses the importance of the \"self-realization\" that is \"attained by noble wisdom\" and occurs \"when one has an insight into reality as it is\": \"The truth is the state of self-realization and is beyond categories of discrimination\". The s\u016btra goes on to outline the ultimate effects of an experience of self-realization:\nLineage.\nConstruction of lineages.\nThe idea of a patriarchal lineage in Ch'an dates back to the epitaph for Faru (), a disciple of the 5th patriarch Hongren (). In the \"Long Scroll of the Treatise on the Two Entrances and Four Practices\" and the \"Continued Biographies of Eminent Monks\", Daoyu and Dazu Huike are the only explicitly identified disciples of Bodhidharma. The epitaph gives a line of descent identifying Bodhidharma as the first patriarch.\nIn the 6th century biographies of famous monks were collected. From this genre the typical Chan lineage was developed:\nD. T. Suzuki contends that Chan's growth in popularity during the 7th and 8th centuries attracted criticism that it had \"no authorized records of its direct transmission from the founder of Buddhism\" and that Chan historians made Bodhidharma the 28th patriarch of Buddhism in response to such attacks.\nSix patriarchs.\nThe earliest lineages described the lineage from Bodhidharma into the 5th to 7th generation of patriarchs. Various records of different authors are known, which give a variation of transmission lines:\nContinuous lineage from Gautama Buddha.\nEventually these descriptions of the lineage evolved into a continuous lineage from \u015a\u0101kyamuni Buddha to Bodhidharma. The idea of a line of descent from \u015a\u0101kyamuni Buddha is the basis for the distinctive lineage tradition of Chan Buddhism.\nAccording to the \"Song of Enlightenment\" (\u8b49\u9053\u6b4c \"Zh\u00e8ngd\u00e0o g\u0113\") by Yongjia Xuanjue, one of the chief disciples of Hu\u00ecn\u00e9ng, was Bodhidharma, the 28th Patriarch of Buddhism in a line of descent from Gautama Buddha via his disciple Mah\u0101k\u0101\u015byapa:\n&lt;poem&gt;Mahakashyapa was the first, leading the line of transmission;\nTwenty-eight Fathers followed him in the West;\nThe Lamp was then brought over the sea to this country;\nAnd Bodhidharma became the First Father here\nHis mantle, as we all know, passed over six Fathers,\nAnd by them many minds came to see the Light.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe \"Transmission of the Light\" gives 28 patriarchs in this transmission:\nModern scholarship.\nBodhidharma has been the subject of critical scientific research, which has shed new light on the traditional stories about Bodhidharma.\nBiography as a hagiographic process.\nAccording to John McRae, Bodhidharma has been the subject of a hagiographic process which served the needs of Chan Buddhism. According to him it is not possible to write an accurate biography of Bodhidharma:\nMcRae's standpoint accords with Yanagida's standpoint: \"Yanagida ascribes great historical value to the witness of the disciple Tanlin, but at the same time acknowledges the presence of \"many puzzles in the biography of Bodhidharma\". Given the present state of the sources, he considers it impossible to compile a reliable account of Bodhidharma's life.\nSeveral scholars have suggested that the composed image of Bodhidharma depended on the combination of supposed historical information on various historical figures over several centuries. Bodhidharma as a historical person may even never have actually existed.\nOrigins and place of birth.\nDumoulin comments on the three principal sources. The Persian heritage is doubtful, according to Dumoulin: \"In the \"Description of the Lo-yang temple\", Bodhidharma is called a Persian. Given the ambiguity of geographical references in writings of this period, such a statement should not be taken too seriously.\" Dumoulin considers Tanlin's account of Bodhidharma being \"the third son of a great Brahman king\" to be a later addition, and finds the exact meaning of \"South Indian Brahman stock\" unclear: \"And when Daoxuan speaks of origins from South Indian Brahman stock, it is not clear whether he is referring to roots in nobility or to India in general as the land of the Brahmans.\"\nThese Chinese sources lend themselves to make inferences about Bodhidharma's origins. \"The third son of a Brahman king\" has been speculated to mean \"the third son of a Pallavine king\". Based on a specific pronunciation of the Chinese characters \u9999\u81f3 as Kang-zhi, \"meaning fragrance extreme\", Tsutomu Kambe identifies \u9999\u81f3 to be Kanchipuram, an old capital town in the state Tamil Nadu, India. According to Tsutomu Kambe, \"Kanchi means 'a radiant jewel' or 'a luxury belt with jewels', and puram means a town or a state in the sense of earlier times. Thus, it is understood that the '\u9999\u81f3-Kingdom' corresponds to the old capital 'Kanchipuram'.\"\nAcharya Raghu, in his work 'Bodhidharma Retold', used a combination of multiple factors to identify Bodhidharma from the state of Andhra Pradesh in South India, specifically to the geography around Mt. Sailum or modern day Srisailam. \nThe Pakistani scholar Ahmad Hasan Dani speculated that according to popular accounts in Pakistan's northwest, Bodhidharma may be from the region around the Peshawar valley, or possibly around modern Afghanistan's eastern border with Pakistan.\nCaste.\nIn the context of the Indian caste system the mention of \"Brahman king\" acquires a nuance. Broughton notes that \"king\" implies that Bodhidharma was of caste of warriors and rulers. Brahman is, in western contexts, easily understood as Brahmana or Brahmin, which means \"priest\".\nName.\nAccording to tradition Bodhidharma was given this name by his teacher known variously as Panyatara, Prajnatara, or Praj\u00f1\u0101dhara. His name prior to monkhood is said to be Jayavarman.\nBodhidharma is associated with several other names, and is also known by the name Bodhitara. Faure notes that:\nTibetan sources give his name as \"Bodhidharmottara\" or \"Dharmottara\", that is, \"Highest teaching (dharma) of enlightenment\".\nAbode in China.\nBuswell dates Bodhidharma abode in China approximately at the early 5th century. Broughton dates Bodhidharma's presence in Luoyang to between 516 and 526, when the temple referred to\u2014Yongning Temple (), was at the height of its glory. Starting in 526, Y\u01d2ngn\u00edngs\u00ec suffered damage from a series of events, ultimately leading to its destruction in 534.\nShaolin boxing.\nTraditionally Bodhidharma is credited as founder of the martial arts at the Shaolin Temple. However, martial arts historians have shown this legend stems from a 17th-century qigong manual known as the \"Yijin Jing\". The preface of this work says that Bodhidharma left behind the \"Yi Jin Jing\", from which the monks obtained the fighting skills which made them gain some fame.\nThe authenticity of the \"Yijin Jing\" has been discredited by some historians including Tang Hao, Xu Zhen and Matsuda Ryuchi. According to Lin Boyuan, \"This manuscript is full of errors, absurdities and fantastic claims; it cannot be taken as a legitimate source.\"\nThe oldest available copy was published in 1827. The composition of the text itself has been dated to 1624. Even then, the association of Bodhidharma with martial arts only became widespread as a result of the 1904\u20131907 serialization of the novel \"The Travels of Lao Ts'an\" in \"Illustrated Fiction Magazine\". According to Henning, the \"story is clearly a twentieth-century invention,\" which \"is confirmed by writings going back at least 250 years earlier, which mention both Bodhidharma and martial arts but make no connection between the two.\""}
{"id": "4286", "revid": "1590599", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4286", "title": "Biconditional introduction", "text": "In propositional logic, biconditional introduction is a valid rule of inference. It allows for one to infer a biconditional from two conditional statements. The rule makes it possible to introduce a biconditional statement into a logical proof. If formula_1 is true, and if formula_2 is true, then one may infer that formula_3 is true. For example, from the statements \"if I'm breathing, then I'm alive\" and \"if I'm alive, then I'm breathing\", it can be inferred that \"I'm breathing if and only if I'm alive\". Biconditional introduction is the converse of biconditional elimination. The rule can be stated formally as:\nwhere the rule is that wherever instances of \"formula_1\" and \"formula_2\" appear on lines of a proof, \"formula_3\" can validly be placed on a subsequent line.\nFormal notation.\nThe \"biconditional introduction\" rule may be written in sequent notation:\nwhere formula_9 is a metalogical symbol meaning that formula_3 is a syntactic consequence when formula_1 and formula_2 are both in a proof;\nor as the statement of a truth-functional tautology or theorem of propositional logic:\nwhere formula_14, and formula_15 are propositions expressed in some formal system."}
{"id": "4287", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4287", "title": "Biconditional elimination", "text": "Biconditional elimination is the name of two valid rules of inference of propositional logic. It allows for one to infer a conditional from a biconditional. If formula_1 is true, then one may infer that formula_2 is true, and also that formula_3 is true. For example, if it's true that I'm breathing if and only if I'm alive, then it's true that if I'm breathing, I'm alive; likewise, it's true that if I'm alive, I'm breathing. The rules can be stated formally as:\nand\nwhere the rule is that wherever an instance of \"formula_1\" appears on a line of a proof, either \"formula_2\" or \"formula_3\" can be placed on a subsequent line;\nFormal notation.\nThe \"biconditional elimination\" rule may be written in sequent notation:\nand\nwhere formula_11 is a metalogical symbol meaning that formula_2, in the first case, and formula_3 in the other are syntactic consequences of formula_1 in some logical system;\nor as the statement of a truth-functional tautology or theorem of propositional logic:\nwhere formula_17, and formula_18 are propositions expressed in some formal system."}
{"id": "4290", "revid": "22831189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4290", "title": "Buddhist", "text": ""}
{"id": "4291", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4291", "title": "Buddhists", "text": ""}
{"id": "4292", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4292", "title": "Base pair", "text": "A base pair (bp) is a fundamental unit of double-stranded nucleic acids consisting of two nucleobases bound to each other by hydrogen bonds. They form the building blocks of the DNA double helix and contribute to the folded structure of both DNA and RNA. Dictated by specific hydrogen bonding patterns, \"Watson\u2013Crick\" base pairs (guanine\u2013cytosine and adenine\u2013thymine) allow the DNA helix to maintain a regular helical structure that is subtly dependent on its nucleotide sequence. The complementary nature of this based-paired structure provides a redundant copy of the genetic information encoded within each strand of DNA. The regular structure and data redundancy provided by the DNA double helix make DNA well suited to the storage of genetic information, while base-pairing between DNA and incoming nucleotides provides the mechanism through which DNA polymerase replicates DNA and RNA polymerase transcribes DNA into RNA. Many DNA-binding proteins can recognize specific base-pairing patterns that identify particular regulatory regions of genes.\nIntramolecular base pairs can occur within single-stranded nucleic acids. This is particularly important in RNA molecules (e.g., transfer RNA), where Watson\u2013Crick base pairs (guanine\u2013cytosine and adenine\u2013uracil) permit the formation of short double-stranded helices, and a wide variety of non\u2013Watson\u2013Crick interactions (e.g., G\u2013U or A\u2013A) allow RNAs to fold into a vast range of specific three-dimensional structures. In addition, base-pairing between transfer RNA (tRNA) and messenger RNA (mRNA) forms the basis for the molecular recognition events that result in the nucleotide sequence of mRNA becoming translated into the amino acid sequence of proteins via the genetic code.\nThe size of an individual gene or an organism's entire genome is often measured in base pairs because DNA is usually double-stranded. Hence, the number of total base pairs is equal to the number of nucleotides in one of the strands (with the exception of non-coding single-stranded regions of telomeres). The haploid human genome (23 chromosomes) is estimated to be about 3.2 billion bases long and to contain 20,000\u201325,000 distinct protein-coding genes. A kilobase (kb) is a unit of measurement in molecular biology equal to 1000 base pairs of DNA or RNA. The total number of DNA base pairs on Earth is estimated at 5.0 with a weight of 50 billion tonnes. In comparison, the total mass of the biosphere has been estimated to be as much as 4\u00a0TtC (trillion tons of carbon).\nHydrogen bonding and stability.\nTop, a G.C base pair with three hydrogen bonds. Bottom, an A.T base pair with two hydrogen bonds. Non-covalent hydrogen bonds between the bases are shown as dashed lines. The wiggly lines stand for the connection to the pentose sugar and point in the direction of the minor groove. \nHydrogen bonding is the chemical interaction that underlies the base-pairing rules described above. Appropriate geometrical correspondence of hydrogen bond donors and acceptors allows only the \"right\" pairs to form stably. DNA with high GC-content is more stable than DNA with low GC-content. But, contrary to popular belief, the hydrogen bonds do not stabilize the DNA significantly; stabilization is mainly due to stacking interactions.\nThe bigger nucleobases, adenine and guanine, are members of a class of double-ringed chemical structures called purines; the smaller nucleobases, cytosine and thymine (and uracil), are members of a class of single-ringed chemical structures called pyrimidines. Purines are complementary only with pyrimidines: pyrimidine-pyrimidine pairings are energetically unfavorable because the molecules are too far apart for hydrogen bonding to be established; purine-purine pairings are energetically unfavorable because the molecules are too close, leading to overlap repulsion. Purine-pyrimidine base-pairing of AT or GC or UA (in RNA) results in proper duplex structure. The only other purine-pyrimidine pairings would be AC and GT and UG (in RNA); these pairings are mismatches because the patterns of hydrogen donors and acceptors do not correspond. The GU pairing, with two hydrogen bonds, does occur fairly often in RNA (see wobble base pair).\nPaired DNA and RNA molecules are comparatively stable at room temperature, but the two nucleotide strands will separate above a melting point that is determined by the length of the molecules, the extent of mispairing (if any), and the GC content. Higher GC content results in higher melting temperatures; it is, therefore, unsurprising that the genomes of extremophile organisms such as \"Thermus thermophilus\" are particularly GC-rich. On the converse, regions of a genome that need to separate frequently \u2014 for example, the promoter regions for often-transcribed genes \u2014 are comparatively GC-poor (for example, see TATA box). GC content and melting temperature must also be taken into account when designing primers for PCR reactions.\nExamples.\nThe following DNA sequences illustrate pair double-stranded patterns. By convention, the top strand is written from the 5' end to the 3' end; thus, the bottom strand is written 3' to 5'.\nBase analogs and intercalators.\nChemical analogs of nucleotides can take the place of proper nucleotides and establish non-canonical base-pairing, leading to errors (mostly point mutations) in DNA replication and DNA transcription. This is due to their isosteric chemistry. One common mutagenic base analog is 5-bromouracil, which resembles thymine but can base-pair to guanine in its enol form.\nOther chemicals, known as DNA intercalators, fit into the gap between adjacent bases on a single strand and induce frameshift mutations by \"masquerading\" as a base, causing the DNA replication machinery to skip or insert additional nucleotides at the intercalated site. Most intercalators are large polyaromatic compounds and are known or suspected carcinogens. Examples include ethidium bromide and acridine.\nUnnatural base pair (UBP).\nAn unnatural base pair (UBP) is a designed subunit (or nucleobase) of DNA which is created in a laboratory and does not occur in nature. DNA sequences have been described which use newly created nucleobases to form a third base pair, in addition to the two base pairs found in nature, A-T (adenine \u2013 thymine) and G-C (guanine \u2013 cytosine). A few research groups have been searching for a third base pair for DNA, including teams led by Steven A. Benner, Philippe Marliere, Floyd E. Romesberg and Ichiro Hirao. Some new base pairs based on alternative hydrogen bonding, hydrophobic interactions and metal coordination have been reported.\nIn 1989 Steven Benner (then working at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich) and his team led with modified forms of cytosine and guanine into DNA molecules \"in vitro\". The nucleotides, which encoded RNA and proteins, were successfully replicated \"in vitro\". Since then, Benner's team has been trying to engineer cells that can make foreign bases from scratch, obviating the need for a feedstock.\nIn 2002, Ichiro Hirao's group in Japan developed an unnatural base pair between 2-amino-8-(2-thienyl)purine (s) and pyridine-2-one (y) that functions in transcription and translation, for the site-specific incorporation of non-standard amino acids into proteins. In 2006, they created 7-(2-thienyl)imidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (Ds) and pyrrole-2-carbaldehyde (Pa) as a third base pair for replication and transcription. Afterward, Ds and 4-[3-(6-aminohexanamido)-1-propynyl]-2-nitropyrrole (Px) was discovered as a high fidelity pair in PCR amplification. In 2013, they applied the Ds-Px pair to DNA aptamer generation by \"in vitro\" selection (SELEX) and demonstrated the genetic alphabet expansion significantly augment DNA aptamer affinities to target proteins.\nIn 2012, a group of American scientists led by Floyd Romesberg, a chemical biologist at the Scripps Research Institute in San Diego, California, published that his team designed an unnatural base pair (UBP). The two new artificial nucleotides or \"Unnatural Base Pair\" (UBP) were named d5SICS and dNaM. More technically, these artificial nucleotides bearing hydrophobic nucleobases, feature two fused aromatic rings that form a (d5SICS\u2013dNaM) complex or base pair in DNA. His team designed a variety of \"in vitro\" or \"test tube\" templates containing the unnatural base pair and they confirmed that it was efficiently replicated with high fidelity in virtually all sequence contexts using the modern standard \"in vitro\" techniques, namely PCR amplification of DNA and PCR-based applications. Their results show that for PCR and PCR-based applications, the d5SICS\u2013dNaM unnatural base pair is functionally equivalent to a natural base pair, and when combined with the other two natural base pairs used by all organisms, A\u2013T and G\u2013C, they provide a fully functional and expanded six-letter \"genetic alphabet\".\nIn 2014 the same team from the Scripps Research Institute reported that they synthesized a stretch of circular DNA known as a plasmid containing natural T-A and C-G base pairs along with the best-performing UBP Romesberg's laboratory had designed and inserted it into cells of the common bacterium \"E. coli\" that successfully replicated the unnatural base pairs through multiple generations. The transfection did not hamper the growth of the \"E. coli\" cells and showed no sign of losing its unnatural base pairs to its natural DNA repair mechanisms. This is the first known example of a living organism passing along an expanded genetic code to subsequent generations. Romesberg said he and his colleagues created 300 variants to refine the design of nucleotides that would be stable enough and would be replicated as easily as the natural ones when the cells divide. This was in part achieved by the addition of a supportive algal gene that expresses a nucleotide triphosphate transporter which efficiently imports the triphosphates of both d5SICSTP and dNaMTP into \"E. coli\" bacteria. Then, the natural bacterial replication pathways use them to accurately replicate a plasmid containing d5SICS\u2013dNaM. Other researchers were surprised that the bacteria replicated these human-made DNA subunits.\nThe successful incorporation of a third base pair is a significant breakthrough toward the goal of greatly expanding the number of amino acids which can be encoded by DNA, from the existing 20 amino acids to a theoretically possible 172, thereby expanding the potential for living organisms to produce novel proteins. The artificial strings of DNA do not encode for anything yet, but scientists speculate they could be designed to manufacture new proteins which could have industrial or pharmaceutical uses. Experts said the synthetic DNA incorporating the unnatural base pair raises the possibility of life forms based on a different DNA code.\nLength measurements.\nThe following abbreviations are commonly used to describe the length of a D/RNA molecule:\nFor single-stranded DNA/RNA, units of nucleotides are used\u2014abbreviated nt (or knt, Mnt, Gnt)\u2014as they are not paired.\nTo distinguish between units of computer storage and bases, kbp, Mbp, Gbp, etc. may be used for base pairs.\nThe centimorgan is also often used to imply distance along a chromosome, but the number of base pairs it corresponds to varies widely. In the human genome, the centimorgan is about 1 million base pairs."}
{"id": "4293", "revid": "22152051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4293", "title": "Baltimore Ravens", "text": "The Baltimore Ravens are a professional American football team based in Baltimore. The Ravens compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member club of the American Football Conference (AFC) North division. The team plays its home games at M&amp;T Bank Stadium and is headquartered in Owings Mills, Maryland.\nThe club was established in 1996, after Art Modell, who was then the owner of the Cleveland Browns, announced plans in 1995 to relocate the franchise from Cleveland to Baltimore. As part of a settlement between the league and the city of Cleveland, Modell was required to leave the Browns' history and records in Cleveland for a replacement team and replacement personnel that would resume play in 1999. In return, he was allowed to take his own personnel and team to Baltimore, where such personnel would then form an expansion team.\nThe Ravens have been one of the more successful franchises since their inception; the team has qualified for the NFL playoffs 13 times since 2000 with two Super Bowl championship titles (Super Bowl XXXV and Super Bowl XLVII), two AFC Championship titles (2000 and 2012), four AFC Championship game appearances (2000, 2008, 2011 and 2012), six AFC North division titles (2003, 2006, 2011, 2012, 2018, and 2019) and 16 playoff victories. They are one of two teams to be undefeated in multiple Super Bowl appearances, along with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. The Ravens organization was led by general manager Ozzie Newsome from 1996 until his retirement following the 2018 season, and has had three head coaches: Ted Marchibroda, Brian Billick, and since 2008, John Harbaugh. Starting with a record-breaking defensive performance in their 2000 season, the Ravens have established a reputation for strong defensive play throughout team history. Former players such as middle linebacker Ray Lewis, safety Ed Reed, and offensive tackle Jonathan Ogden have been enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame. The team is owned by Steve Bisciotti and valued at $2.98 billion, making the Ravens the 33rd-most valuable sports franchise in the world.\nHistory.\nTeam name.\nThe name \"Ravens\" was inspired by Edgar Allan Poe's poem \"The Raven\". Chosen in a fan contest that drew 33,288 voters, the allusion honors Poe who spent the early part of his career in Baltimore and is buried there. As \"The Baltimore Sun\" reported at the time, fans also \"liked the tie-in with the other birds in town, the Orioles, and found it easy to visualize a tough, menacing black bird\". Edgar Allan Poe also had distant relatives who played football for the Princeton Tigers in the 1880s through the early 1900s. These brothers were infamous players in the early days of American football. \nBefore the football team, there was the Baltimore Ravens wheelchair basketball team \u2014 the original Baltimore Ravens. In 1972, the Ravens wheelchair basketball team was founded by Ralph Smith, long-term resident of Baltimore, second Vice President of the National Wheelchair Basketball Association (NWBA) and Member of the NWBA Hall of Fame. The name \"Ravens\" was inspired by Bob Ardinger, a member of the Ravens wheelchair basketball team. In the 1990s, the naming rights were later sold to the football team when they came to the city and the wheelchair basketball team became known as the Maryland Ravens, Inc.\nBackground.\nAfter the controversial relocation of the Colts to Indianapolis, several attempts were made to bring an NFL team back to Baltimore. In 1993, ahead of the 1995 league expansion, the city was considered a favorite, behind only St. Louis, to be granted one of two new franchises. League officials and team owners feared litigation due to conflicts between rival bidding groups if St. Louis was awarded a franchise. In October Charlotte, North Carolina was the first city chosen. Several weeks later, Baltimore's bid for a franchise\u2014dubbed the Baltimore Bombers, in honor of the locally produced Martin B-26 Marauder bomber\u2014had three ownership groups in place and a state financial package which included a proposed $200 million, rent-free stadium and permission to charge up to $80 million in personal seat license fees. Baltimore, however, was unexpectedly passed over in favor of Jacksonville, Florida, despite Jacksonville's minor TV market status and that the city had withdrawn from contention in the summer, only to return with then-Commissioner Paul Tagliabue's urging. Although league officials denied that any city had been favored, it was reported that Tagliabue and his longtime friend Washington Redskins owner Jack Kent Cooke had lobbied against Baltimore due to its proximity to Washington, D.C., and that Tagliabue had used the initial committee voting system to prevent the entire league ownership from voting on Baltimore's bid. This led to public outrage and \"The Baltimore Sun\" describing Tagliabue as having an \"Anybody But Baltimore\" policy. Maryland governor William Donald Schaefer said afterward that Tagliabue had led him on, praising Baltimore and the proposed owners while working behind-the-scenes to oppose Baltimore's bid.\nBy May 1994, Baltimore Orioles owner Peter Angelos had gathered a new group of investors, including author Tom Clancy, to bid on teams whose owners had expressed interest in relocating. Angelos found a potential partner in Georgia Frontiere, who was open to moving the Los Angeles Rams to Baltimore. Jack Kent Cooke opposed the move, intending to build the Redskins' new stadium in Laurel, Maryland, close enough to Baltimore to cool outside interest in bringing in a new franchise. This led to heated arguments between Cooke and Angelos, who accused Cooke of being a \"carpetbagger.\" The league eventually persuaded Rams team president John Shaw to relocate to St. Louis instead, leading to a league-wide rumor that Tagliabue was again steering interest away from Baltimore, a claim which Tagliabue denied. In response to anger in Baltimore, including Governor Schaefer's threat to announce over the loudspeakers Tagliabue's exact location in Camden Yards any time he attended a Baltimore Orioles game, Tagliabue remarked of Baltimore's financial package: \"Maybe (Baltimore) can open another museum with that money.\" Following this, Angelos made an unsuccessful $200 million bid to bring the Tampa Bay Buccaneers to Baltimore.\nHaving failed to obtain a franchise via the expansion, the city, despite having \"misgivings,\" turned to the possibility of obtaining the Cleveland Browns, whose owner Art Modell was financially struggling and at odds with the city of Cleveland over needed improvements to the team's stadium.\nReturn of American football in Baltimore.\nEnticed by Baltimore's available funds for a first-class stadium and a promised yearly operating subsidy of $25 million, Modell announced on November 6, 1995, his intention to relocate the team from Cleveland to Baltimore the following year. The resulting controversy ended when representatives of Cleveland and the NFL reached a settlement on February 8, 1996. Tagliabue promised the city of Cleveland that an NFL team would be located in Cleveland, either through relocation or expansion, \"no later than 1999\". Additionally, the agreement stipulated that the Browns' name, colors, uniform design and franchise records would remain in Cleveland. The franchise history includes Browns club records and connections with Pro Football Hall of Fame players. Modell's Baltimore team, while retaining all current player contracts, would, for purposes of team history, appear as an expansion team, a new franchise. Not all players, staff or front office would make the move to Baltimore, however.\nAfter relocation, Modell hired Ted Marchibroda as the head coach for his new team in Baltimore. Marchibroda was already well known because of his work as head coach of the Baltimore Colts during the 1970s and the Indianapolis Colts during the early 1990s. Ozzie Newsome, the Browns' tight end for many seasons, joined Modell in Baltimore as director of football operations. He was later promoted to vice-president/general manager.\nThe home stadium for the Ravens first two seasons was Baltimore's Memorial Stadium, previously home to the Baltimore Colts, the Baltimore Orioles, and the Canadian Football League\u2019s Baltimore Stallions. The Ravens moved to their own new stadium, now known as M&amp;T Bank Stadium, next to Camden Yards in 1998.\nThe early years and Ted Marchibroda era (1996\u20131998).\nIn the 1996 NFL Draft, the Ravens, with two picks in the first round, drafted offensive tackle Jonathan Ogden at No. 4 overall and linebacker Ray Lewis at No. 26 overall. Both Ogden and Lewis went on to play for the Ravens for their entire professional careers and were both inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nThe 1996 Ravens won their opening game against the Oakland Raiders, but finished the season 4\u201312 despite receiver Michael Jackson leading the league with 14 touchdown catches. The 1997 Ravens started 3\u20131. Peter Boulware, a rookie defender from Florida State, recorded 11.5 sacks and was named AFC Defensive Rookie of the Year. The team finished 6\u20139\u20131. On October 26, the team made its first trip to Landover, Maryland to play their new regional rivals, the Washington Redskins. The Ravens won the game 20\u201317. On December 14, 1997, the Ravens played the final professional sporting event at Baltimore\u2019s historic Memorial Stadium, winning 21\u201319 over the Tennessee Oilers.\n1998 marked the opening of a new stadium for the Ravens, currently known as M&amp;T Bank Stadium, but originally named \u201cPSINet Stadium\u201d after the now-defunct internet service provider which purchased the original naming rights. Quarterback Vinny Testaverde left for the New York Jets before the season, and was replaced by former Indianapolis Colt Jim Harbaugh, and later Eric Zeier. Cornerback Rod Woodson joined the team after a successful stint with the Pittsburgh Steelers, and Priest Holmes started getting the first playing time of his career and ran for 1,000 yards. The Ravens finished 1998 with a 6\u201310 record. On November 29, the Ravens welcomed the Colts back to Baltimore for the first time in 15 years. Amidst a shower of negative cheers towards the Colts, the Ravens won 38\u201331.\nBrian Billick era (1999\u20132007).\nThree consecutive losing seasons under Marchibroda led to a change in the head coach. Brian Billick took over as head coach in 1999. Billick had been offensive coordinator for the record-setting Minnesota Vikings the season before. Quarterback Tony Banks came to Baltimore from the St. Louis Rams and had the best season of his career with 17 touchdown passes and an 81.2 pass rating. He was joined by receiver Qadry Ismail, who posted a 1,000-yard season. The Ravens initially struggled with a record of 4\u20137 but managed to finish with an 8\u20138 record.\nDue to continual financial hardships for the organization, the NFL took an unusual move and directed Modell to initiate the sale of his franchise. On March 27, 2000, NFL owners approved the sale of 49% of the Ravens to Steve Bisciotti. In the deal, Bisciotti had an option to purchase the remaining 51% for $325 million in 2004 from Art Modell. On April 9, 2004, the NFL approved Steve Bisciotti's purchase of the majority stake in the club.\n2000: Super Bowl XXXV champions.\nBanks shared playing time in the 2000 regular season with Trent Dilfer. Both players put up decent numbers (and a 1,364-yard rushing season by rookie Jamal Lewis helped too) but the defense became the team's hallmark and bailed a struggling offense out in many instances through the season. Ray Lewis was named Defensive Player of the Year. Two of his defensive teammates, Sam Adams and Rod Woodson, made the Pro Bowl. Baltimore's season started strong with a 5\u20131 record. But the team struggled through mid-season, at one point going five games without scoring an offensive touchdown. The team regrouped and won each of their last seven games, finishing 12\u20134 and making the playoffs for the first time.\nDuring the 2000 season, the Ravens' dominating defense broke two notable NFL records. They held opposing teams to 165 total points, surpassing the 1985 Chicago Bears mark of 198 points for a 16-game season as well as surpassing the 1986 Chicago Bears mark of 187 points for a 16-game season, which at that time was the current NFL record these things along with outstanding play by the defense places the 2000 Ravens in the discussion as one of the greatest NFL defenses of all time along with the 1985 Chicago Bears, 2002 Tampa Bay Buccaneers, and the 2015 Denver Broncos defenses.\nSince the divisional rival Tennessee Titans had a record of 13\u20133, the Ravens had to play in the wild card round. They dominated the Denver Broncos 21\u20133 in their first game. In the divisional playoff, they went on the road to Tennessee. With the score tied 10\u201310 in the fourth quarter, an Al Del Greco field goal attempt was blocked and returned for a touchdown by Anthony Mitchell, and a Ray Lewis interception return for a score put the game squarely in Baltimore's favor. The 24\u201310 win put the Ravens in the AFC Championship against the Oakland Raiders. The game was rarely in doubt. Shannon Sharpe's 96-yard touchdown catch early in the second quarter followed by an injury to Raiders quarterback Rich Gannon were crucial as the Ravens won easily, 16\u20133.\nBaltimore then went to Tampa for Super Bowl XXXV against the New York Giants. The Ravens\u2019 defense carried them to a win. They recorded four sacks and forced five turnovers, one of which was a Kerry Collins interception returned for a touchdown by Duane Starks. The Giants' only score was a Ron Dixon kickoff return for a touchdown; however, the Ravens immediately countered with a touchdown return on the ensuing kickoff by Jermaine Lewis. The Ravens became champions with a 34\u20137 win.\n2001-07.\nIn 2001, the Ravens attempted to defend their title with Elvis Grbac as their new starting quarterback, but a season-ending injury to Jamal Lewis on the first day of training camp and poor offensive performances stymied the team. After a 3\u20133 start, the Ravens defeated the Minnesota Vikings in the final week to clinch a wild card berth at 10\u20136. In the first round the Ravens showed flashes of their previous year with a 20\u20133 win over the Miami Dolphins, in which the team forced three turnovers and out-gained the Dolphins 347 yards to 151. In the divisional playoff the Ravens played the Pittsburgh Steelers. Three interceptions by Grbac ended the Ravens' season, as they lost 27\u201310.\nBaltimore ran into salary cap problems entering the 2002 season and was forced to part with a number of impact players. In the NFL Draft, the team selected Ed Reed with the 24th overall pick. Reed would go on to become one of the best safeties in NFL history, making nine Pro Bowls until leaving the Ravens for the Houston Texans in 2013. Despite low expectations, the Ravens stayed somewhat competitive in 2002 until a losing streak in December eliminated any chances of a post-season berth and a 7\u20139 finish.\nIn 2003, the Ravens drafted their new quarterback, Kyle Boller, but he was injured midway through the season and was replaced by Anthony Wright. Jamal Lewis ran for 2,066 yards (including a then-NFL record 295 yards in one game against the Cleveland Browns on September 14). With a 10\u20136 record, Baltimore won their first AFC North division title. Their first playoff game, at home against the Tennessee Titans, went back and forth, with the Ravens being held to only 54 yards total rushing. The Titans won 20\u201317 on a late field goal, and Baltimore's season ended early.\nRay Lewis was also named Defensive Player of the year for the second time in his career.\nIn April 2003, Art Modell sold 49% of the team to Steve Bisciotti, a local businessman who had made his fortune in the temporary staffing field. After the season, Art Modell sold his remaining 51% ownership to Bisciotti, ending over 40 years of tenure as an NFL franchise owner.\nThe Ravens did not make the playoffs in 2004 and finished the season with a record of 9\u20137 with Boller spending the season at QB. They did get good play from veteran corner Deion Sanders and third-year safety Ed Reed, who won the NFL Defensive Player of the Year award. They were also the only team to defeat the 15\u20131 Pittsburgh Steelers in the regular season.\nThe next offseason, the Ravens looked to augment their receiving corps (which was second-worst in the NFL in 2004) by signing Derrick Mason from the Titans and drafting Oklahoma wide receiver Mark Clayton in the first round of the 2005 NFL Draft. However, the Ravens ended their season 6\u201310.\nThe 2006 Baltimore Ravens season began with the team trying to improve on their 6\u201310 record of 2005. The Ravens, for the first time in franchise history, started 4\u20130, under the leadership of former Titans quarterback Steve McNair.\nIn 2006, The Ravens lost two straight games mid-season on offensive troubles, prompting coach Billick to drop their offensive coordinator Jim Fassel in their week seven bye. After the bye, and with Billick calling the offense, Baltimore would record a five-game win streak before losing to the Cincinnati Bengals in week 13. Still ranked second overall to first-place San Diego Chargers, the Ravens continued on. They defeated the Kansas City Chiefs, and held the defending Super Bowl champion Pittsburgh Steelers to only one touchdown at Heinz Field, allowing the Ravens to clinch the AFC North.\nThe Ravens ended the regular season with a franchise-best 13\u20133 record. Baltimore had secured the AFC North title, the No. 2 AFC playoff seed, and clinched a 1st-round bye by season's end. The Ravens were slated to face the Indianapolis Colts in the second round of the playoffs, in the first meeting of the two teams in the playoffs. Many Baltimore and Indianapolis fans saw this historic meeting as a sort of \"Judgment Day\" with the new team of Baltimore facing the old team of Baltimore (the former Baltimore Colts having left Baltimore under questionable circumstances in 1984). Both Indianapolis and Baltimore were held to scoring only field goals as the two defenses slugged it out all over M&amp;T Bank Stadium. McNair threw two costly interceptions, including one at the 1-yard line. The eventual Super Bowl champion Colts won 15\u20136, ending Baltimore's season.\nThe Ravens hoped to improve upon their 13\u20133 record but injuries and poor play plagued the team. The Ravens finished the 2007 season in the AFC North cellar with a disappointing 5\u201311 record. A humiliating 22\u201316 overtime loss to the previously winless Miami Dolphins on December 16 ultimately led to Billick's dismissal after the end of the regular season. He was replaced by John Harbaugh, the special teams coach of the Philadelphia Eagles and the older brother of former Ravens quarterback Jim Harbaugh (1998).\nJohn Harbaugh/Joe Flacco era (2008\u20132018).\n2008: Arrival of Harbaugh and Flacco.\nWith rookies at head coach (John Harbaugh) and quarterback (Joe Flacco), the Ravens entered the 2008 campaign with much uncertainty. Baltimore smartly recovered in 2008, winning eleven games and achieving a wild card spot in the postseason. On the strength of four interceptions, one resulting in an Ed Reed touchdown, the Ravens began its postseason run by winning a rematch over Miami 27\u20139 at Dolphin Stadium on January 4, 2009 in a wild-card game. Six days later, they advanced to the AFC Championship Game by avenging a Week 5 loss to the Titans 13\u201310 at LP Field on a Matt Stover field goal with 53 seconds left in regulation time. The Ravens fell one victory short of Super Bowl XLIII by losing to the Steelers 23\u201314 at Heinz Field on January 18, 2009.\n2009\u201311.\nIn 2009, the Ravens won their first three matches, then lost the next three, including a close match in Minnesota. The rest of the season was an uneven string of wins and losses, which included a home victory over Pittsburgh in overtime followed by a Monday Night loss in Green Bay. That game was notable for the number of penalties committed, costing a total of 310 yards, and almost tying with the record set by Tampa Bay and Seattle in 1976. Afterwards, the Ravens easily crushed the Lions and Bears, giving up less than ten points in both games. The next match was against the Steelers, where Baltimore lost a close one before beating the Raiders to end the season. With a record of 9\u20137, the team finished second in the division and gained another wild card. Moving into the playoffs, they overwhelmed the Patriots; nevertheless they did not reach the AFC Championship because they were routed 20\u20133 by the Colts in the Divisional Round a week later.\nBaltimore managed to beat the Jets 10\u20139 on the 2010 opener, but then lost a poorly played game against Cincinnati the following week. The Ravens rebounded against the other two division teams, beating Cleveland 24\u201317 in Week 3 and then . The Ravens scored a fine win (31\u201317) at home against Denver in Week 5. The Ravens finished the season 12\u20134, second in the division due to a tiebreaker with Pittsburgh, and earning a wild card spot. Baltimore headed to Kansas City and defeated the Chiefs 30\u20137, but once again were knocked from the playoffs by Pittsburgh in a hard-fought game.\nThe Ravens hosted their arch-enemy in Week 1 of the 2011 season. On a hot, humid day in M&amp;T Bank Stadium, crowd noise and multiple Steelers mistakes allowed Baltimore to crush them with three touchdowns 35\u20137. The frustrated Pittsburgh players also committed several costly penalties. Thus, the Ravens had gained their first-ever victory over the Steelers with Ben Roethlisberger playing and avenged themselves of repeated regular and postseason losses in the series.\nBut in Week 2, the Ravens collapsed in Tennessee and lost 26\u201313. They rebounded by routing the Rams in Week 3 and then overpowering the Jets 34\u201317 in Week 4.\nWeek 5, the Ravens had a bye week, following a game against the Texans. But in Week 7, Baltimore had a stunning MNF upset loss in Jacksonville as they were held to one touchdown in a 12\u20137 loss. Their final scoring drive failed as Joe Flacco threw an interception in the closing seconds of the game.\nAfter beating the Cincinnati Bengals in Week 17 of the regular season, the Ravens advanced to the playoffs as the Number 2 seed in the AFC with a record of 12\u20134. They gained the distinction of AFC North Champions over Pittsburgh (12-4) due to a tie-breaker.\nRavens' Lee Evans was stripped of a 14-yard touchdown pass by the Patriots Sterling Moore with 22 seconds left and Ravens kicker Billy Cundiff pushed a 32-yard field goal attempt wide left on fourth down as the Patriots held on to beat the Ravens 23-20 during the AFC championship game and advance to Super Bowl XLVI.\n2012: Ray Lewis' final season and second Super Bowl victory.\nThe Ravens' attempt to convert Joe Flacco into a pocket passer remained a work in progress as the 2012 season began. Terrell Suggs suffered a tendon injury during an off-season basketball game and was unable to play for at least several weeks. In the opener on September 10, Baltimore routed Cincinnati 44\u201313. After this easy win, the team headed to Philadelphia, but lost 24\u201323.\nReturning home for a primetime rematch of the AFC Championship, another bizarre game ensued. New England picked apart the Baltimore defense (which was considerably weakened without Terrell Suggs and some other players lost over the off-season) for the first half. Trouble began early in the game when a streaker ran out onto the field and had to be tackled by security, and accelerated when, at 2:18 in the 4th quarter, the referees made a holding call on RG Marshal Yanda. Enraged fans repeatedly chanted an obscenity at this penalty. The Ravens finally drove downfield and on the last play of the game, Justin Tucker kicked a 27-yard field goal to win the game 31\u201330, capping off a second intense and controversially officiated game in a row for the Ravens.\nThe Ravens would win the AFC North with a 10\u20136 record, but finished 4th in the AFC playoff seeding, and thus had to play a wild-card game. After defeating the Indianapolis Colts 24\u20139 at home (the final home game of Ray Lewis), the Ravens traveled to Denver to play against the top-seeded Broncos. In a very back-and-forth contest, the Ravens pulled out a 38-35 victory in two overtimes. They then won their 2nd AFC championship by coming back from a 13-7 halftime deficit to defeat the Patriots once again, 28\u201313.\nThe Ravens played the Super Bowl XLVII against the San Francisco 49ers. Baltimore built a 28\u20136 lead early in the third quarter before a partial power outage in the Superdome suspended play for 34 minutes (earning the game the added nickname of the Blackout Bowl). After play resumed, San Francisco scored 17 unanswered third-quarter points to cut the Ravens' lead, 28\u201323, and continued to chip away in the fourth quarter. With the Ravens leading late in the game, 34\u201329, the 49ers advanced to the Baltimore 7-yard line just before the two-minute warning but turned the ball over on downs. The Ravens then took an intentional safety in the waning moments of the game to preserve the victory. Baltimore quarterback Joe Flacco, who completed 22 of 33 passes for 287 yards and three touchdowns, was named Super Bowl MVP.\n2013\u201318.\nComing off as the defending Super Bowl champions, this was the first year in franchise history for the team without Ray Lewis. The Ravens started out 3\u20132, and started the 2-0 Houston Texans 14-loss streak by shutting them 30\u20139 in Week 3. However, the Ravens lost their next 3 games, losing to the Green Bay Packers and Pittsburgh Steelers in last-minute field goals and were shut out in an attempt to tie the game against the Cleveland Browns 24\u201318.\nAfter winning and losing their next game, the Ravens came out 4\u20136, but managed winning their next four games in dominating the Jets 19\u20133, a Steelers win 22-20 during Thanksgiving, a booming ending in Baltimore against the Vikings 29\u201326, and an 18\u201316 win at Detroit, including Justin Tucker's 61-yard game-winning field goal. The Ravens were 8\u20136, with the 6th seed, but after losing their next two games, and the San Diego Chargers winning their next two to clinch the 6th seed, the Ravens finished 8-8 and missed the playoffs for the first time since 2007.\nOn January 27, 2014, the Ravens hired former Houston Texans head coach Gary Kubiak to be their new offensive coordinator after Jim Caldwell accepted the new available head coaching job with the Detroit Lions. On February 15, 2014, star running back Ray Rice and his fianc\u00e9e Janay Palmer were arrested and charged with assault after a physical altercation at Revel Casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey. Celebrity news website TMZ posted a video of Rice dragging Palmer's body out of an elevator after apparently knocking her out. For the incident, Rice was initially suspended for the first two games of the 2014 NFL season on July 25, 2014, which led to widespread criticism of the NFL.\nIn Week 1, on September 7, the Baltimore Ravens lost to the Cincinnati Bengals, 23\u201316. The next day, on September 8, 2014, TMZ released additional footage from an elevator camera showing Rice punching Palmer. The Baltimore Ravens terminated Rice's contract as a result, and was later indefinitely suspended by the NFL, although a judge later vacated this indefinite suspension. In Week 12, the Ravens traveled down for an interconference battle with the New Orleans Saints, which the Ravens won. In Week 16, the Ravens traveled to Houston to take on the Texans. In one of Flacco's worst performances, the offense sputtered against the Houston defense and Flacco threw three interceptions, falling to the Texans 25\u201313. With their playoff chances and season hanging in the balance, the Ravens took on the Browns in Week 17 at home. After three quarters had gone by and down 10\u20133, Joe Flacco led the Ravens on a comeback scoring 17 unanswered points, winning 20\u201310. With the win, and the Kansas City Chiefs defeating the San Diego Chargers, the Ravens clinched their sixth playoff berth in seven seasons.\nIn the wild card round, the Ravens won 30\u201317 against their divisional rivals, the Pittsburgh Steelers, at Heinz Field. In the next game in the Divisional round, the Ravens faced the New England Patriots. Despite a strong offensive effort and having a 14-point lead twice in the game, the Ravens were defeated by the Patriots 35\u201331, ending their season.\nThe 2015 season marked 20 seasons of the franchise's existence competing in the NFL, which the franchise recognized with a special badge being worn on their uniforms during the 2015 NFL season.\nThe Ravens lost key players such as Joe Flacco, Justin Forsett, Terrell Suggs, Steve Smith Sr., and Eugene Monroe to season-ending injuries. Injuries and their inability to win close games early in the season led to the first losing season in the Harbaugh-Flacco era. The 2016 Ravens finished 8\u20138, but failed to qualify the playoffs for the second straight year. They were eliminated from playoff contention after their Week 16 loss to their division rivals, the Steelers. This was the first time the Ravens missed the playoffs in consecutive seasons since 2004\u20132005, as well as the first in the Harbaugh/Flacco era.\nDuring the 2017 season, the Ravens improved upon their 8\u20138 record from 2016 by one win, finishing the season 9-7 and missing the playoffs for the third year in a row. This marked the first time the Ravens failed to make the playoffs in three straight seasons since the team's first three years of existence (1996-1998). The Ravens suffered a loss at home to the Cincinnati Bengals in the final game of the season that prevented them from earning a playoff berth.\nLamar Jackson era (2018\u2013present).\nThe Ravens drafted QB Lamar Jackson with the 32nd pick in the 2018 draft. After the team started the season with a 4\u20135 record, Jackson took over as the starting QB in Week 11 when Joe Flacco was sidelined with a hip injury. The team won six of its next seven games, finishing the 2018 season with a 10\u20136 record and winning the AFC North, giving them their first playoff appearance since 2014 and their first division title since 2012. The Ravens lost to the Los Angeles Chargers in the Wild Card round with Jackson at quarterback, making him the youngest QB in NFL history to start a playoff game. At the conclusion of the season, Ozzie Newsome stepped down as the team's general manager. He was replaced by longtime assistant Eric DeCosta.\nOn March 13, 2019, the Ravens traded Joe Flacco to the Denver Broncos in exchange for a fourth-round pick in the 2019 NFL Draft. That season, Lamar Jackson led the Ravens to a franchise-best 14\u20132 record, including a 12-game winning streak to finish the regular season. On December 22, they clinched home field advantage for the first time in franchise history following a win over the Cleveland Browns. On December 8, Jackson became only the second player in NFL history to rush for over 1,000 yards from the quarterback position. Four days later, Jackson broke Michael Vick's single-season quarterback rushing record of 1,037 yards. Thirteen Ravens were selected to the 2019 Pro Bowl, matching the all-time NFL record.\nThe Ravens finished the 2019 regular season with 3,296 rushing yards, the most rushing yards by any team in NFL history during a season and they became the first team in NFL history to average at least 200 passing yards and 200 rushing yards per game in the same season.\nDespite earning the number-one seed in the playoffs, the Ravens were eliminated by the sixth-seeded Tennessee Titans in the Divisional Round of the playoffs, 28\u201312. Lamar Jackson was unanimously voted AP NFL MVP, becoming only the second player in NFL history to do so, after Tom Brady in 2010.\nIn 2020, the Ravens went 6\u20135 in their first 11 games, but rebounded and finished the season 11\u20135, taking second place in the AFC North and earning a Wild Card playoff berth with the fifth seed. They also led the NFL in rushing yards for the second year in a row during the regular season, with 3,071 yards. In the Wild Card round, they defeated the fourth-seeded Tennessee Titans in Nashville 20\u201313. In the Divisional Round, they fell to the second-seeded Buffalo Bills, 17\u20133.\nRivalries.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nBy far the team's biggest rival is the Pittsburgh Steelers. Pittsburgh and Baltimore are separated by a less-than-5-hour drive along Interstate 70. Both teams are known for their hard-hitting physical style of play. They play twice a year in the AFC North, and have met four times in the playoffs. Pittsburgh leads the all-time series, 30\u201324, and holds a 3\u20131 advantage in the four matchups in the postseason. Games between these two teams usually come down to the wire as most within the last 5 years have come down to under 4 points.\nThe rivalry is considered one of the most significant and intense in the NFL today.\nOther AFC North rivals.\nThe Ravens also have divisional rivalries with the Cleveland Browns and Cincinnati Bengals. The rivalry with the Browns has been very one-sided; Baltimore holds an advantage of 33\u201311 against Cleveland. The rivalry with Cincinnati has been closer, with the Ravens slightly holding the edge in the all-time series 27-23 as of the end of the 2020 NFL season.\nNew England Patriots.\nThe Ravens first met the New England Patriots in 1996, but the rivalry truly started in 2007 when the Ravens suffered a bitter 27\u201324 loss in the Patriots' quest for perfection. The rivalry began to escalate in 2009 when the Patriots beat the Ravens 27\u201321 in a game that involved a confrontation between Patriots quarterback Tom Brady and Ravens linebacker Terrell Suggs. Both players would go on to take verbal shots at each other through the media after the game.\nWhile the Patriots lead the overall series, 11\u20134, the teams have split four postseason meetings, 2\u20132. The Ravens won the , 33\u201314, and the , 28\u201313. The Patriots won the 23\u201320 and the , 35\u201331.\nLogo controversy.\nThe team's first helmet logo, used from 1996 through the 1999 Pro Bowl, featured raven wings outspread from a shield displaying a letter \"B\" framed by the word \"Ravens\" overhead and a cross bottony underneath. The US Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed a jury verdict that the logo infringed on a copyright retained by Frederick E. Bouchat, an amateur artist and security guard in Maryland, but that he was entitled to only three dollars in damages from the NFL.\nBouchat had submitted his design to the Maryland Stadium Authority by fax after learning that Baltimore was to acquire an NFL team. He was not credited for the design when the logo was announced. Bouchat sued the team, claiming to be the designer of the emblem; representatives of the team asserted that the image had been designed independently. The court ruled in favor of Bouchat, noting that team owner Modell had access to Bouchat's work. Bouchat's fax had gone to John Moag, the Maryland Stadium Authority chairman, whose office was located in the same building as Modell's. Bouchat ultimately was not awarded monetary compensation in the damages phase of the case.\n\"The Baltimore Sun\" ran a poll showing three designs for new helmet logos. Fans participating in the poll expressed a preference for a raven's head in profile over other designs. Art Modell announced that he would honor this preference but still wanted a letter \"B\" to appear somewhere in the design. The new Ravens logo, introduced in 1999, featured a raven's head in profile with the letter superimposed. The secondary logo is a shield that honors Baltimore's history of heraldry. Alternating Calvert and Crossland emblems (seen also in the flag of Maryland and the flag of Baltimore) are interlocked with stylized letters \"B\" and \"R\".\nUniforms.\nThe design of the Ravens uniform has remained essentially unchanged since the team's inaugural season in 1996. Art Modell admitted to ESPN's Roy Firestone that the Ravens' colors, introduced in early 1996, were inspired by the Northwestern Wildcats 1995 dream season. Helmets are black with purple \"talon\" stripes rising from the facemask to the crown. Players normally wear purple jerseys at home and white jerseys on the road. In 1996 the team wore black pants with a single large white stripe for all games.\nIn 1997 the Ravens opted for a more classic NFL look with white pants sporting stripes in purple and black, along with the jerseys sporting a different font for the uniform numbers. The white pants were worn with both home and road jerseys. The road uniform (white pants with white jerseys) was worn by the Ravens in Super Bowl XXXV, at the end of the 2000 NFL season.\nIn the 2002 season the Ravens began the practice of wearing white jerseys for the home opener that has a 1:00 kickoff. In recent seasons, the practice has come when the home game is played in week one. Since John Harbaugh became the head coach in 2008, the Ravens have also worn their white jerseys at home for preseason games.\nIn November 2004 the team introduced an alternate uniform design featuring black jerseys and solid black pants with black socks. The all-black uniform was first worn for a home game against the Cleveland Browns, entitled \"Pitch Black\" night, that resulted in a Ravens win. The uniform has since been worn for select prime-time national game broadcasts and other games of significance.\nThe Ravens began wearing black pants again with the white jersey in 2008. On December 7, 2008, during a Sunday Night Football game against the Washington Redskins, the Ravens introduced a new combination of black jersey with white pants. It was believed to be due to the fact that John Harbaugh doesn't like the \"blackout\" look. However, on December 19, 2010, the Ravens wore their black jerseys and black pants in a 30\u201324 victory over the New Orleans Saints.\nSince 2010, the Ravens have worn their black jerseys at least twice each season. From 2011 to 2013 and again in 2015, they wore the all blacks once and the black on white once. In 2014 and 2016, they wore all black both times they wore alternate uniforms. In 2017, they wore all black twice and black on white once (although the league is supposed to limit teams to wearing alternate jerseys a maximum of two times a season).\nOn December 5, 2010, the Ravens reverted to the black pants with the purple jerseys versus the Pittsburgh Steelers during NBC's \"Sunday Night Football\" telecast. The Ravens lost to the Steelers 13\u201310. They wore the same look again for their game against the Cleveland Browns on December 24, 2011, and they won, 20\u201314. They wore this combination a third time against the Houston Texans on January 15, 2012 in the AFC Divisional playoff. They won 20\u201313. They would again wear this combination on January 6, 2013, during the AFC Wild Card playoff and what turned out to be Ray Lewis' final home game, where they defeated the Indianapolis Colts 24\u20139.\nFrom their inaugural season until 2006, the Ravens wore white cleats with their uniforms; they switched to black cleats in 2007.\nOn December 20, 2015, the team unexpectedly debuted gold pants for the first time, wearing them with their regular purple jerseys against the Kansas City Chiefs. Although gold is an official accent color of the Ravens, the pants got an overwhelmingly negative response on social media by both Ravens fans and fans of other NFL teams, with some comparisons being made to the rival Pittsburgh Steelers' pants, and mustard.\nDuring the 2015 season, the NFL announced a jersey promotion called Color Rush in which teams would wear uniforms typically of one color head-to-toe during select prime-time games. The promotion was used three times that season; all the games that featured them were on Thursday Night and had both teams wear them in each. The following season, the league released uniforms for all 32 teams and announced they would be worn during all Thursday Night games that year, as well as on Christmas. The Ravens had one Thursday Night game in 2016; they wore their all-purple Color Rush uniforms and won 28\u20137 over the division rival Cleveland Browns. They had one other Thursday Night game the following season, in which they again wore the jerseys and won 40\u20130 over the Miami Dolphins. In their Christmas 2016 game against the Steelers, the Ravens wore their regular all-white uniforms while their rivals wore their Color Rush uniforms.\nOn September 13, 2018, the Ravens debuted a new combination in a road game against the Cincinnati Bengals, wearing white jerseys with purple pants. The purple pants are similar to the ones used for Color Rush except that it has side stripes of black and white; the Color Rush purple pants have gold and white stripes. Then on October 21 against the New Orleans Saints, the Ravens paired their new purple pants with their regular purple uniforms. For the regular-season finale against the Browns on December 30, the Ravens wore their black uniforms with purple pants.\nMarching band.\nThe team marching band is called Baltimore's Marching Ravens. They began as the Colts' marching band and have operated continuously from September 7, 1947, to the present. They helped campaign for football to return to Baltimore after the Colts moved. Because they stayed in Baltimore after the Colts left, the band is nicknamed \"the band that would not die\" and were the subject of an episode of ESPN's \"30 for 30\". The Washington Football Team are the only other NFL team that currently has a marching band.\nPlayers of note.\nPro Football Hall of Fame.\nNote: The following lists players who officially played for the Ravens. For other Hall of Famers, players whose numbers were retired, and players who played for the Baltimore Colts, see Indianapolis Colts. Bold number notes player inducted as a member of the Ravens. For Cleveland Browns players, including those in the Hall of Fame and those whose numbers were retired, see Cleveland Browns.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Ravens do not have officially retired numbers. However, the number 19 has not been issued out of respect for Baltimore Colts quarterback Johnny Unitas, except for quarterback Scott Mitchell in his lone season in Baltimore in 1999. In addition, numbers 75, 52, and 20, in honor of Jonathan Ogden, Ray Lewis, and Ed Reed respectively, have not been issued since those players' retirements from football.\nRing of Honor.\nThe Ravens have a \"Ring of Honor\" which is on permanent display encircling the field of M&amp;T Bank Stadium. The ring currently honors 19 members, including eight former members of the Baltimore Colts.\nKey/Legend\nFirst round draft picks.\nThe Baltimore Ravens had their first draft in 1996, where they selected offensive lineman from UCLA and current NFL Hall of Famer, and 11-time Pro-Bowler Jonathan Ogden. Along with their pick in the next year's draft, this was the highest first-round draft pick that the Ravens have had. They also selected Ray Lewis with the 26th pick. In both 1996 and 2000, the Ravens had two first-round draft picks. However, in 2004 they had none. In their history, the Ravens have drafted 4 offensive linemen, 3 linebackers, 2 wide receivers, 2 cornerbacks, 2 quarterbacks, a running back, tight end, safety, and defensive tackle. The Ravens have 56 combined Pro-Bowl appearances from their first-round draft picks.\nTeam records.\nPassing.\n+ = min. 500 attempts, # = min. 100 attempts, \u2217 = minimum 15 attempts,\nRushing.\n\u2217 = minimum 15 attempts, # = min. 100 attempts, + = min. 500 attempts\nReceiving.\n\u2217 = minimum 4 receptions, # = min. 20 receptions, + = min. 200 receptions\nOther Career Records.\n\"All records as of December 18, 2019 per Pro-Football Reference.com\""}
{"id": "4294", "revid": "38851357", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4294", "title": "British National Party", "text": "The British National Party (BNP) is a far-right, fascist political party in the United Kingdom. It is headquartered in Wigton, Cumbria, and its current leader is Adam Walker. A minor party, it has no elected representatives at any level of UK government. Founded in 1982, the party reached its greatest level of success in the 2000s, when it had over fifty seats in local government, one seat on the London Assembly, and two Members of the European Parliament.\nTaking its name from that of a defunct 1960s far-right party, the BNP was created by John Tyndall and other former members of the fascist National Front (NF). During the 1980s and 1990s, the BNP placed little emphasis on contesting elections, in which it did poorly. Instead, it focused on street marches and rallies, creating the Combat 18 paramilitary\u2014its name a coded reference to Nazi German leader Adolf Hitler\u2014to protect its events from anti-fascist protesters. A growing 'moderniser' faction was frustrated by Tyndall's leadership, and ousted him in 1999. The new leader Nick Griffin sought to broaden the BNP's electoral base by presenting a more moderate image, targeting concerns about rising immigration rates, and emphasising localised community campaigns. This resulted in increased electoral growth throughout the 2000s, to the extent that it became the most electorally successful far-right party in British history. Concerns regarding financial mismanagement resulted in Griffin being removed as leader in 2014. By this point the BNP's membership and vote share had declined dramatically, groups like Britain First and National Action had splintered off, and the English Defence League had supplanted it as the UK's foremost far-right group.\nIdeologically positioned on the extreme-right or far-right of British politics, the BNP has been characterised as fascist or neo-fascist by political scientists. Under Tyndall's leadership, it was more specifically regarded as neo-Nazi. The party is ethnic nationalist, and it espouses the view that only white people should be citizens of the United Kingdom. It calls for an end to non-white migration into the UK and for non-white Britons to be stripped of citizenship and removed from the country. Initially, it called for the compulsory expulsion of non-whites, although since 1999 has advocated voluntary removals with financial incentives. It promotes biological racism and the white genocide conspiracy theory, calling for global racial separatism and condemning interracial relationships. Under Tyndall, the BNP emphasised anti-semitism and Holocaust denial, promoting the conspiracy theory that Jews seek to dominate the world through both communism and international capitalism. Under Griffin, the party's focus switched from anti-semitism towards Islamophobia. It promotes economic protectionism, Euroscepticism, and a transformation away from liberal democracy, while its social policies oppose feminism, LGBT rights, and societal permissiveness.\nOperating around a highly centralised structure that gave its chair near total control, the BNP built links with far-right parties across Europe and created various sub-groups, including a record label and trade union. The BNP attracted most support from within White British working-class communities in northern and eastern England, particularly among middle-aged and elderly men. A poll in the 2000s suggested that most Britons favoured a ban on the party. It faced much opposition from anti-fascists, religious organisations, the mainstream media, and most politicians, and BNP members were banned from various professions.\nHistory.\nJohn Tyndall's leadership: 1982\u20131999.\nThe British National Party (BNP) was founded by the extreme-right political activist John Tyndall. Tyndall had been involved in neo-Nazi groups since the late 1950s before leading the far-right National Front (NF) throughout most of the 1970s. Following an argument with senior party member Martin Webster, he resigned from the NF in 1980. In June 1980 Tyndall established a rival, the New National Front (NNF). At the recommendation of Ray Hill\u2014who was secretly an anti-fascist spy seeking to sow disharmony among Britain's far-right\u2014Tyndall decided to unite an array of extreme-right groups as a single party. To this end, Tyndall established a Committee for Nationalist Unity (CNU) in January 1982. In March 1982, the CNU held a conference at the Charing Cross Hotel in London, at which 50 far-right activists agreed to the formation of the BNP.\nThe BNP was formally launched on 7 April 1982 at a press conference in Victoria. Led by Tyndall, most of its early members came from the NNF, although others were defectors from the NF, British Movement, British Democratic Party, and Nationalist Party. Tyndall remarked that there was \"scarcely any difference [between the BNP and NF] in ideology or policy save in the minutest detail\", and most of the BNP's leading activists had formerly been senior NF figures. Under Tyndall's leadership the party was neo-Nazi in orientation and engaged in nostalgia for Nazi Germany. It adopted the NF's tactic of holding street marches and rallies, believing that these boosted morale and attracted new recruits. Their first march took place in London on St. George's Day 1982. These marches often involved clashes with anti-fascist protesters and resulted in multiple arrests, helping to cement the BNP's association with political violence and older fascist groups in the public eye. As a result, BNP organisers began to favour indoor rallies, although street marches continued to be held throughout the mid-to-late 1980s.\nIn its early years, the BNP's involvement in elections was \"irregular and intermittent\", and for its first two decades it faced consistent electoral failure. It suffered from low finances and few personnel, and its leadership was aware that its electoral viability was weakened by the anti-immigration rhetoric of Conservative Party Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. In the 1983 general election the BNP stood 54 candidates, although it only campaigned in five seats. Although it was able to air its first party political broadcast, it averaged a vote share of 0.06% in the seats it contested.\nAfter the Representation of the People Act 1985 raised the electoral deposit to \u00a3500, the BNP adopted a policy of \"very limited involvement\" in elections. It abstained in the 1987 general election, and stood only 13 candidates in the 1992 general election. In a 1993 local by-election the BNP gained one council seat\u2014won by Derek Beackon in the East London district of Millwall\u2014after a campaign that played to local whites who were angry at the perceived preferential treatment received by Bangladeshi migrants in social housing. Following an anti-BNP campaign launched by local religious groups and the Anti-Nazi League, it lost this seat during the 1994 local elections. In the 1997 general election, it contested 55 seats and gained an average 1.4% of the vote.\nIn the early 1990s, the paramilitary group Combat 18 (C18) was formed to protect BNP events from anti-fascists. In 1992, C18 carried out attacks on left-wing targets like an anarchist bookshop and the headquarters of the \"Morning Star\". Tyndall was angered by C18's growing influence on the BNP's street activities, and by August 1993, C18 activists were physically clashing with other BNP members. In December 1993, Tyndall issued a bulletin to BNP branches declaring C18 to be a proscribed organisation, furthermore suggesting that it may have been established by agents of the state to discredit the party. To counter the group's influence among militant British nationalists, he secured the American white nationalist militant William Pierce as a guest speaker at the BNP's annual rally in November 1995.\nIn the early 1990s, a \"moderniser\" faction emerged within the party, favouring a more electorally palatable strategy and an emphasis on building grassroots support to win local elections. They were impressed by the electoral gains made by a number of extreme-right parties in continental Europe\u2014such as J\u00f6rg Haider's Austrian Freedom Party and Jean-Marie Le Pen's National Front\u2014which had been achieved by both switching focus from biological racism to the perceived cultural incompatibility of different racial groups and by replacing anti-democratic platforms with populist ones. \nThe modernisers called for community campaigns among the white working-class populations of London's East End, and Northern England. While the modernisers gained some concessions from the party's hard-liners, Tyndall opposed many of their ideas and sought to stem their growing influence. In his view, \"we should not be looking for ways of applying ideological cosmetic surgery to ourselves in order to make our features more appealing to the public\".\nNick Griffin's leadership: 1999\u20132014.\nAfter the BNP's poor performance at the 1997 general election, opposition to Tyndall's leadership grew. The modernisers called the party's first leadership election, and in October 1999 Tyndall was ousted when two-thirds of those voting backed Nick Griffin, who offered an improved administration, financial transparency, and greater support for local branches. Often characterised as a political chameleon, Griffin had once been considered a party hardliner before switching allegiance to the modernisers in the late 1990s. In his youth, he had been involved in the NF as well as Third Positionist groups like Political Soldier and the International Third Position. Criticising his predecessors for fuelling the image of the BNP as \"thugs, losers and troublemakers\", Griffin inaugurated a period of change in the party.\nInfluenced by Le Pen's National Front in France, Griffin sought to widen the BNP's appeal to individuals who were concerned about immigration but had not previously voted for the extreme-right. The BNP replaced Tyndall's policy of compulsory deportation of non-whites to a voluntary system whereby non-whites would be given financial incentives to emigrate. It downplayed biological racism and stressed the cultural incompatibility of different racial groups. This emphasis on culture allowed it to foreground Islamophobia, and following the September 11 attacks in 2001 it launched a \"Campaign Against Islam\". It stressed the claim that the BNP was \"\"not\" a racist party\" but an \"organised response to anti-white racism\". At the same time Griffin sought to reassure the party's base that these reforms were based on pragmatism and not a change in principle.\nGriffin also sought to shed the BNP's image as a single-issue party, by embracing a diverse array of social and economic issues. Griffin renamed the party's monthly newspaper from \"British Nationalist\" to \"The Voice of Freedom\", and established a new journal, \"Identity\". The party developed community-based campaigns, through which it targeted local issues, particularly in those areas with large numbers of skilled white working-class people who were disaffected with the Labour Party government. For instance, in Burnley it campaigned for lower speed limits on housing estates and against the closure of a local swimming bath, while in South Birmingham it targeted pensioners' concerns about youth gangs. In 2006 the party urged its activists to carry out local activities like cleaning up children's play areas and removing graffiti while wearing high-vis jackets emblazoned with the party logo.\nGriffin believed that Peak Oil and a growth in Third World migrants arriving in Britain would result in a BNP government coming to power by 2040. \nThe close of the twentieth century produced more favourable conditions for the extreme-right in Britain as a result of increased public concerns about immigration and established Muslim communities coupled with growing dissatisfaction with the established mainstream parties. In turn, the BNP gained rapidly growing levels of support over the coming years. In July 2000, it came second in the council elections for the North End of the London Borough of Bexley, its best result since 1993. At the 2001 general election it gained 16% of the vote in one constituency and over 10% in two others. In the 2002 local elections the BNP gained four councillors, three of whom were in Burnley, where it had capitalised on white anger surrounding the disproportionately high levels of funding being directed to the Asian-dominated Daneshouse ward. This breakthrough generated public anxieties about the party, with a poll finding that six in ten supported a ban on it. In the 2003 local elections the BNP gained 13 additional councillors, including seven more in Burnley, having attained over 100,000 votes. Concerned that much of their potential vote was going to the UK Independence Party (UKIP), in 2003 the BNP offered UKIP an electoral pact but was rebuffed. Griffin then accused UKIP of being a Labour Party scheme to steal the BNP's votes. They invested much in the campaign for the 2004 European Parliament election, at which they gained 800,000 votes but failed to secure a parliamentary seat. In the 2004 local elections, they secured four more seats, including three in Epping.\nFor the 2005 general election, the BNP expanded its number of candidates to 119 and targeted specific regions. Its average vote in the areas it contested rose to 4.3%. It gained significantly more support in three seats, achieving 10% in Burnley, 13% in Dewsbury, and 17% in Barking. In the 2006 local elections the party gained 220,000 votes, with 33 additional councillors, having averaged a vote share of 18% in the areas it contested. In Barking and Dagenham, it saw 12 of its 13 candidates elected to the council. At the 2008 London Assembly election, the BNP gained 130,000 votes, reaching the 5% mark and thus gaining an Assembly seat. At the 2009 European Parliament election, the party gained almost 1 million votes, with two of its candidates, Nick Griffin and Andrew Brons, being elected as Members of the European Parliament for North West England and Yorkshire and the Humber respectively. That election also saw extreme-right parties winning seats for various other EU member-states. This victory marked a major watershed for the party. Amid significant public controversy, Griffin was invited to appear on the BBC show \"Question Time\" in October 2009, the first time that the BNP had been invited to share a national television platform with mainstream panellists. Griffin's performance was however widely regarded as poor.\nDespite its success, there was dissent in the party. In 2007 a group of senior members known as the \"December rebels\" challenged Griffin, calling for internal party democracy and financial transparency, but were expelled. In 2008, a group of BNP activists in Bradford split to form the Democratic Nationalists. In November 2008, the BNP membership list was posted to WikiLeaks, after appearing briefly on a weblog. A year later, in October 2009, another list of BNP members was leaked.\nEddy Butler then led a challenge to Griffin's leadership, alleging financial corruption, but he had insufficient support. The rebels who supported him split into two groups: one section remained as the internal Reform Group, the other left the BNP to form the British Freedom Party.\nBy 2010, there was discontent among the party's grassroots, a result of the change to its white-only membership policy and rumours of financial corruption among its leadership. Some defected to the National Front or left to form parties like the Britannica Party. Anti-fascist groups like Hope not Hate had campaigned extensively in Barking to stop the area's locals voting for the BNP. At the 2010 general election, the BNP had hoped to make a breakthrough by gaining a seat in the House of Commons, although it failed to achieve this. It nevertheless gained the fifth largest national vote share, with 1.9% of the vote, representing the most successful electoral performance for an extreme-right party in UK history. In the 2010 local elections, it lost all of its councillors in Barking and Dagenham. Nationally, the party's number of councillors dropped from over fifty to 28. Griffin described the results as \"disastrous\".\nDecline: 2014\u2013present.\nIn a 2011 leadership election, Griffin secured a narrow victory, beating Brons by nine votes of a total of 2,316 votes cast. In October 2012, Brons left the party, leaving Griffin as its sole MEP. In the 2012 local elections, the party lost all of its seats and saw its vote share fall dramatically; whereas it gained over 240,000 votes in 2008, this had fallen to under 26,000 by 2012. Commenting on the result, the political scientist Matthew Goodwin noted: \"Put simply, the BNP's electoral challenge is over.\" In the 2012 London mayoral election, the BNP candidate came seventh, with 1.3% of first-preference votes, its poorest showing in the London mayoral contest. The 2012 election results established that the BNP's steady growth had ended. In the 2013 local elections, the BNP fielded 99 candidates but failed to win any council seats, leaving it with only two.\nIn June 2013, Griffin visited Syria along with members of Hungarian far-right party Jobbik to meet with government officials, including the Speaker of the Syrian People's Assembly, Mohammad Jihad al-Laham, and the Prime Minister Wael Nader al-Halqi. Griffin claims he was influential in the speaker of Syria's Parliament writing an open letter to British MPs urging them to \"turn Great Britain from the warpath\" by not intervening in the Syrian conflict. Griffin lost his European Parliament seat in the May 2014 European election. The party blamed the UK Independence Party for its decline, accusing the latter of stealing BNP policies and slogans. In July 2014, Griffin resigned and was succeeded by Adam Walker as acting chairman. In October, Griffin was expelled from the party for \"trying to cause disunity [in the party] by deliberately fabricating a state of crisis\".\nIn January 2015, membership of the party numbered 500, down from 4,220 in December 2013. At the general election in 2015, the BNP fielded eight candidates, down from 338 in 2010. The party's vote share declined 99.7% from its 2010 result. In January 2016, the Electoral Commission de-registered the BNP for failing to pay its annual registration fee of \u00a325. At this time, it was estimated that BNP assets totalled less than \u00a350,000. According to the Commission, \"BNP candidates cannot, at present, use the party's name, descriptions or emblems on the ballot paper at elections.\" A month later, the party was re-registered. There were ten BNP candidates at the general election in 2017. At the 2018 local elections, the party's last remaining councillor\u2014Brian Parker of Pendle\u2014decided not to stand for re-election, leaving the party without representation at any level of UK government. The BNP fielded only one candidate at the 2019 general election in Hornchurch and Upminster, where he came last.\nIdeology.\nFar-right politics, fascism, and neo-Nazism.\nMany academic historians and political scientists have described the BNP as a far-right party, or as an extreme-right party. As the political scientist Matthew Goodwin used it, the term referred to \"a particular form of political ideology that is defined by two anti-constitutional and anti-democratic elements: first, right-wing extremists are \"extremist\" because they reject or undermine the values, procedures and institutions of the democratic constitutional state; and second they are \"right-wing\" because they reject the principle of fundamental human equality\".\nVarious political scientists and historians have described the BNP as being fascist in ideology. Others have instead described it as neo-fascist, a term which the historian Nigel Copsey argued was more exact. Academic observers\u2014including the historians Copsey, Graham Macklin, and Roger Griffin, and the political theologian Andrew P. Davey\u2014have argued that Nick Griffin's reforms were little more than a cosmetic process to obfuscate the party's fascist roots. According to Copsey, under Griffin the BNP was \"fascism recalibrated \u2013 a form of neo-fascism \u2013 to suit contemporary sensibilities\". Macklin noted that despite Griffin's 'modernisation' project, the BNP retained its ideological continuity with earlier fascist groups and thus had not transformed itself into a genuinely \"post-fascist\" party. In this it was distinct from parties like the Italian National Alliance of Gianfranco Fini, which has been credited with successfully shedding its fascist past and becoming post-fascist.\nThe anti-fascist activist Gerry Gable referred to the BNP as a \"Nazi organisation\", while the Anti-Nazi League published leaflets describing the BNP as the \"British Nazi Party\". Copsey suggested that while the BNP under Tyndall could be described as neo-Nazi, it was not \"crudely mimetic\" of the original German Nazism. Davey characterised the BNP as a \"populist ethno-nationalist\" party.\nIn his writings, Griffin acknowledged that much of his 'modernisation' was an attempt to hide the BNP's core ideology behind more electorally palatable policies. Like the National Front, the BNP's private discourse differed from its public one, with Griffin stating that \"Of course we must teach the truth to the hardcore... [but] when it comes to influencing the public, forget about racial differences, genetics, Zionism, historical revisionism and so on... we must at all times present them with an image of moderate reasonableness\". The BNP has eschewed the labels \"fascist\" and \"Nazi\", claiming that it is neither. In its 1992 electoral manifesto, it insisted that \"Fascism was Italian. Nazism was German. We are British. We will do things our own way; we will not copy foreigners\". In 2009, Griffin that the term \"fascism\" was simply \"a smear that comes from the far left\"; he added that the term should be reserved for groups that engaged in \"political violence\" and desired a state that \"should impose its will on people\", claiming that it was the anti-fascist group Unite Against Fascism\u2014and not the BNP\u2014who were the real fascists. More broadly, many on Britain's extreme-right sought to avoid the term \"British fascism\" because of its electorally unpalatable connotations, utilising \"British nationalism\" in its place.\nAfter Griffin took control of the party, it made increasing use of nativist themes in order to emphasise its \"British\" credentials. In its published material, the party made appeals to the idea of Britain and Britishness in a manner not dissimilar to mainstream political parties. In this material it has also made prominent use of the Union flag and the colours red, white, and blue. Roger Griffin noted that the terms \"Britain\" and \"England\" appear \"confusingly interchangeable\" in BNP literature, while Copsey has pointed out that the BNP's form of British nationalism is \"Anglo-centric\". The party employed militaristic rhetoric under both Tyndall and Griffin's leadership; under the latter for example its published material spoke of a \"war without uniforms\" and a \"war for our survival as a people\". Tyndall described the BNP as a revolutionary party, calling it a \"guerrilla army operating in occupied territory\".\nEthnic nationalism and biological racism.\nThe BNP adheres to biological racist ideas, displaying an obsession with the perceived differences of racial groups. Both Tyndall and Griffin believed that there was a biologically distinct white-skinned \"British race\" which was one branch of a wider Nordic race, a view akin to those of earlier fascists such as Hitler and Arnold Leese.\nThe BNP adheres to an ideology of ethnic nationalism. It promotes the idea that not all citizens of the United Kingdom belong to the British nation. Instead, it claims that the nation only belongs to \"the English, Scots, Irish and Welsh along with the limited numbers of peoples of European descent, who have arrived centuries or decades ago and who have fully integrated into our society\". This is a group that Griffin referred to as the \"home people\" or \"the folk\". According to Tyndall, \"The BNP is a racial nationalist party which believes in Britain for the British, that is to say racial separatism.\" Richard Edmonds in 1993 told \"The Guardian\"'s Duncan Campbell that \"we [the BNP] are 100% racist\". The BNP does not regard UK citizens who are not ethnic white Europeans as \"British\", and party literature calls on supporters to avoid referring to such individuals as \"Black Britons\" or \"Asian Britons\", instead describing them as \"racial foreigners\".\nTyndall believed the white British and the broader Nordic race to be superior to other races, and under his leadership, the BNP promoted pseudoscientific claims in support of white supremacy. Following Griffin's ascendency to power in the party, it officially repudiated racial supremacism and insisted that no racial group was superior or inferior to another. Instead it foregrounded an \"ethno-pluralist\" racial separatism, claiming that different racial groups had to be kept separate and distinct for their own preservation, maintaining that global ethno-cultural diversity was something to be protected. This switch in focus owed much to the discourse of the French Nouvelle Droite movement which had emerged within France's extreme-right during the 1960s.\nAt the same time the BNP switched focus from openly promoting biological racism to stressing what it perceived as the cultural incompatibility of racial groups. It placed great focus on opposing what it referred to as \"multiculturalism\", characterising this as a form of \"cultural genocide\", and claiming that it promoted the interests of non-whites at the expense of the white British population. However, internal documents produced and circulated under Griffin's leadership demonstrated that\u2014despite the shift in its public statements\u2014it remained privately committed to biological racist ideas.\nThe party emphasises what it sees as the need to protect the racial purity of the white British. It condemns miscegenation and \"race mixing\", claiming that this is a threat to the British race. Tyndall stated that he \"felt deeply sorry for the child of a mixed marriage\" but had \"no sympathy whatsoever for the parents\". Griffin similarly stated that mixed-race children were \"the most tragic victims of enforced multi-racism\", and that the party would not \"accept miscegenation as moral or normal ... we never will\". In its 1983 election manifesto, the BNP stated that \"family size is a private matter\" but still called for white Britons who are \"of intelligent, healthy and industrious stock\" to have large families and thus raise the white British birth-rate. The encouragement of high birth rates among white British families continued under Griffin's leadership.\nUnder Tyndall's leadership, the BNP promoted eugenics, calling for the forced sterilisation of those with genetically transmittable disabilities. In party literature, it talked of improving the British 'racial stock' by removing \"inferior strains within the indigenous races of the British Isles\". Tyndall argued that medical professionals should be responsible for determining whom to sterilise, while a lowering of welfare benefits would discourage breeding among those he deemed to be genetic inferiors. In his magazine \"Spearhead\", Tyndall also stated that \"the gas chamber system\" should be used to eliminate \"sub-human elements\", \"perverts\", and \"asocials\" from British society.\nAnti-immigration and repatriation.\nOpposition to immigration has been central to the BNP's political platform. It has engaged in xenophobic campaigns which emphasise the idea that immigrants and ethnic minorities are both different from, and a threat to, the white British and white Irish populations. In its campaign material it presented non-whites both as a source of crime in the UK, and as a socio-economic threat to the white British population by taking jobs, housing, and welfare away from them. It engaged in welfare chauvinism, calling for white Britons to be prioritised by the UK's welfare state. Party literature included such as claims as that the BNP was the only party which could \"do anything effective about the swamping of Britain by the Third World\" or \"lead the native peoples of Britain in our version of the New Crusade that must be organised if Europe is not to sink under the Islamic yoke\".\nMuch of its published material made claims about a forthcoming race war and promoted the conspiracy theory about white genocide. In a 2009 radio interview, Griffin referred to this as a \"bloodless genocide\". It presents the idea that white Britons are engaged in a battle against their own extinction as a racial group. It reiterated a sense of urgency about the situation, claiming that both high immigration rates and high birth rates among ethnic minorities were a threat to the white British. In 2010, it for instance was promoting the idea that at current levels, \"indigenous Britons\" would be a minority within the UK by 2060.\nThe BNP calls for the non-white population of Britain to either be reduced in size or removed from the country altogether. Under Tyndall's leadership it promoted the compulsory removal of non-whites from the UK, stating that under a BNP government they would be \"repatriated\" to their countries of origin. In the early 1990s it produced stickers with the slogan \"Our Final Solution: Repatriation\". Tyndall understood this to be a two-stage process that would take ten to twenty years, with some non-whites initially leaving willingly and the others then being forcibly deported. During the 1990s, party modernisers suggested that the BNP move away from a policy of compulsory repatriation and toward a voluntary system, whereby non-white persons would be offered financial incentives to leave the UK. This idea, adopted from Powellism, was deemed more electorally palatable.\nWhen Griffin took control of the party, the policy of voluntary repatriation was officially adopted, with the party suggesting that this could be financed through the use of the UK's pre-existing foreign aid budget. It stated that any non-whites who refused to leave would be stripped of their British citizenship and categorised as \"permanent guests\", while continuing to be offered incentives to emigrate. Griffin's BNP also stressed its support for an immediate halt to non-white immigration into Britain and for the deportation of any migrants illegally in the country. Speaking on the BBC's \"Andrew Marr Show\" in 2009, Griffin declared that, unlike Tyndall, he \"does not want all-white UK\" because \"nobody out there wants it or would pay for it\".\nAnti-Semitism and Islamophobia.\nUnder Tyndall's leadership, the BNP was openly anti-Semitic. From A. K. Chesterton, Tyndall had inherited a belief that there was a global conspiracy of Jews bent on world domination, viewing the \"Protocols of the Elders of Zion\" as genuine evidence for this. He believed that Jews were responsible for both communism and international finance capitalism and that they were responsible for undermining the British Empire and the British race. He believed that both democratic government and immigration into Europe were parts of the Jewish conspiracy to weaken other races. In an early edition of \"Spearhead\" published in the 1960s, Tyndall wrote that \"if Britain were to become Jew-clean she would have no nigger neighbours to worry about... It is the Jews who are our misfortune: T-h-e J-e-w-s. Do you hear me? THE JEWS?\" Tyndall added Holocaust denial to the anti-Semitic beliefs inherited from Chesterton, believing that the Holocaust was a hoax created by the Jews to gain sympathy for themselves and thus aid their plot for world domination. Among those to endorse such anti-Semitic conspiracy theories was Griffin, who promoted them in his 1997 pamphlet, \"Who are the Mind Benders?\" Griffin also engaged in Holocaust denial, publishing articles promoting such ideas in \"The Rune\", a magazine produced by the Croydon BNP. In 1998, these articles resulted in Griffin being convicted of inciting racial hatred.\nWhen Griffin took power, he sought to banish overt anti-Semitic discourse from the party. He informed party members that \"we can get away with criticising Zionists, but any criticism of Jews is likely to be legal and political suicide\". In 2006, he complained that the \"obsession\" that many BNP members had with \"the Jews\" was \"insane and politically disastrous\". In 2004, the party selected a Jewish candidate, Pat Richardson, to stand for it during local council elections, something Tyndall lambasted as a \"gimmick\". References to Jews in BNP literature were often coded to hide the party's electorally unpalatable anti-Semitic ideas. For instance, the term \"Zionists\" was often used in party literature as a euphemism for \"Jews\". As noted by Macklin, Griffin still framed many of his arguments \"within the parameters of recognizably anti-Semitic discourse\". The BNP's literature is replete with references to a conspiratorial group who have sought to suppress nationalist sentiment among the British population, who have encouraged immigration and mixed-race relationships, and who are promoting the Islamification of the country. This group is likely a reference to the Jews, being an old fascist canard.\nSectors of the extreme-right were highly critical of Griffin's softening on the subject of the Jews, claiming that he had \"sold out\" to the 'Zionist Occupied Government'. In 2006, John Bean, editor of \"Identity\", included an article in which he reassured BNP members that the party had not \"sold out to the Jews\" or \"embraced Zionism\" but that it remained \"committed to fighting... subversive Jews\". Under Griffin, the BNP's website linked to other web pages that explicitly portrayed immigration as part of a Jewish conspiracy, while it also sold books that promoted Holocaust denial. In 2004, secretly filmed footage was captured in which Griffin was seen claiming that \"the Jews simply bought the West, in terms of press and so on, for their own political ends\".\nCopsey noted that a \"culture of anti-Semitism\" still pervaded the BNP. In 2004, a London activist told reporters that \"most of us hate Jews\", while a Scottish BNP group was observed making Nazi salutes while shouting \"Auschwitz\". The party's Newcastle upon Tyne Central candidate compared the Auschwitz concentration camp to Disneyland, while their Luton North candidate stated her refusal to buy from \"the kikes that run Tesco\". In 2009, a BNP councillor from Stoke-on-Trent resigned from the party, complaining that it still contained Holocaust deniers and Nazi sympathisers.\nGriffin informed BNP members that rather than \"bang on\" about the Jews\u2014which would be deemed extremist and prove electorally unpopular\u2014their party should focus on criticising Islam, an issue that would be more resonant among the British public. After Griffin took over, the party increasingly embraced an Islamophobic stance, launching a \"Campaign Against Islam\" in September 2001. In \"Islam: A Threat to Us All\", a leaflet distributed to London households in 2007, the BNP claimed that it would stand up to both Islamic extremism and \"the threat that 'mainstream' Islam poses to our British culture\". In contrast to the mainstream British view that the actions of militant Islamists\u2014such as those who perpetrated the 7 July 2005 London bombings\u2014are not representative of mainstream Islam, the BNP insists that they are. In some of its literature it presents the view that every Muslim in Britain is a threat to the country. Griffin referred to Islam as an \"evil, wicked faith\", and elsewhere publicly described it as a \"cancer\" that needed to be removed from Europe through \"chemotherapy\".\nThe BNP has called for the prohibition of immigration from Muslim countries and for the banning of the burka, halal meat, and the building of new mosques in the UK. It also called for the immediate deportation of radical Islamist preachers from the country. In 2005 the party claimed that its primary issue of concern was the \"growth of fundamentalist-militant Islam in the UK and its ever-increasing threat to Western civilization and our implicit values\". To broaden its anti-Islamic agenda, Griffin's BNP made overtures to the UK's Hindu, Sikh, and Jewish communities; Griffin's claim that Jews can make \"good allies\" in the fight against Islam caused controversy within the international far-right.\nGovernment.\nTyndall believed that liberal democracy was damaging to British society, claiming that liberalism was a \"doctrine of decay and degeneration\". Under Tyndall, the party sought to dismantle the UK's liberal democratic system of parliamentary governance, although was vague about what it sought to replace this system with. In his 1988 work \"The Eleventh Hour\", Tyndall wrote of the need for \"an utter rejection of liberalism and a dedication to the resurgence of authority\". Tyndall's BNP perceived itself as a revolutionary force that would bring about a national rebirth in Britain, entailing a radical transformation of society. It proposed a state in which the Prime Minister would have full executive powers, and would be elected directly by the population for an indefinite period of time. This Prime Minister could be dismissed from office in a further election that could be called if Parliament produced a vote of no confidence in them. It stated that rather than having political parties, candidates standing for election to the parliament would be independent. During the period of Griffin's leadership, the party downplayed its anti-democratic themes and instead foregrounded populist ones. Its campaign material called for the devolution of greater powers to local communities, the reestablishment of county councils, and the introduction of citizens' initiative referendums based on those used in Switzerland.\nThe BNP has adopted a hard Eurosceptic platform from its foundation. Under Tyndall's leadership, the BNP had overt anti-Europeanist tendencies. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s he maintained the party's opposition to the European Economic Community. Antagonism toward what became the European Union was retained under Griffin's leadership, which called for the UK to leave the Union. One of Vote Leave's biggest donors during the Brexit referendum was former BNP member Gladys Bramall, and the party has claimed that its anti-Establishment rhetoric \"created the road\" to Britain's vote to leave the European Union.\nTyndall suggested replacing the EEC with a trading association among the \"White Commonwealth\", namely countries like Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. Tyndall held imperialist views and was sympathetic to the re-establishment of the British Empire through the recolonization of parts of Africa. However, officially the BNP had no plans to re-establish the British Empire or secure dominion over non-white nations. In the 2000s, it called for an immediate military withdrawal from both the Iraq War and the Afghan War. It has advocated ending overseas aid to provide economic support within the UK and to finance the voluntary repatriation of legal immigrants.\nUnder Tyndall, the BNP rejected both Welsh nationalism and Scottish nationalism, claiming that they were bogus because they caused division among the wider 'British race'. Tyndall also led the BNP in support of Ulster loyalism, for instance by holding public demonstrations against the Irish republican party Sinn F\u00e9in, and endorsing Ulster loyalist paramilitaries. Under Griffin, the BNP continued to support Ulster's membership of the United Kingdom, calling for the crushing of the Irish Republican Army and the scrapping of the Anglo-Irish Agreement. Griffin later expressed the view that \"the only solution that could possibly be acceptable to loyalists and republicans alike\" would be the reintegration of the Irish Republic into the United Kingdom, which would be reorganised along federal lines. However, while retaining the party's commitment to Ulster loyalism, under Griffin the importance of the issue was downplayed, something that was criticised by Tyndall loyalists.\nEconomic policy.\nTyndall described his approach to the economy as \"National Economics\", expressing the view that \"politics must lead, and not be led by, economic forces\". His approach rejected economic liberalism because it did not serve \"the national interest\", although still saw advantages in a capitalist system, looking favourably on individual enterprise. He called on capitalist elements to be combined with socialist ones, with the government playing a role in planning the economy. He promoted the idea of the UK becoming an autarky which was economically self-sufficient, with domestic production protected from foreign competition. This attitude was heavily informed by the corporatist system that had been introduced in Benito Mussolini's Fascist Italy.\nA number of senior members, including Griffin and John Bean, had anti-capitalist leanings, having been influenced by Strasserism and National Bolshevism. Under Griffin's leadership, the BNP promoted economic protectionism and opposed globalisation. Its economic policies reflect a vague commitment to distributist economics, ethno-socialism, and national autarky. The BNP maintains a policy of protectionism and economic nationalism, although in comparison with other far-right nationalist parties, the BNP focuses less on corporatism. It has called for British ownership of its own industries and resources and the \"subordination of the power of the City to the power of the government\". It has promoted the regeneration of farming in the United Kingdom, with the object of achieving maximum self-sufficiency in food production. In 2002, the party criticised corporatism as a \"mixture of big capitalism and state control\", saying it favoured a \"distributionist tradition established by home-grown thinkers\" favouring small business. The BNP has also called for the renationalisation of the railways.\nWhen it comes to environmentalism, the BNP refers to itself as the \"real green party\", claiming that the Green Party of England and Wales engages in \"watermelon\" politics by being green (environmentalist) on the outside but red (leftist) on the inside. Influenced by the Nouvelle Droite, it framed its arguments regarding environmentalism in an anti-immigration manner, talking about the need for 'sustainability'. It engages in climate change denial, with Griffin claiming that global warming is a hoax orchestrated by those trying to establish the New World Order.\nSocial issues.\nThe BNP is opposed to feminism and has pledged that\u2014if in government\u2014it would introduce financial incentives to encourage women to leave employment and become housewives. It would also seek to discourage children being born out of wedlock. It has stated that it would criminalise abortion, except in cases where the child has been conceived as a result of rape, the mother's life is threatened, or the child will be disabled. There are nevertheless circumstances where it has altered this anti-abortion stance; an article in \"British Nationalist\" stated that a white woman bearing the child of a black man should \"abort the pregnancy... for the good of society\". More widely, the party censures inter-racial sex and accuses the British media of encouraging inter-racial relationships.\nUnder Tyndall, the BNP called for the re-criminalisation of homosexual activity. Following Griffin's takeover, it moderated its policy on homosexuality. However, it opposed the 2004 introduction of civil partnerships for same-sex couples. During his 2009 \"Question Time\" appearance, Griffin described the sight of two men kissing as \"really creepy\". The party has also condemned the availability of pornography; its 1992 manifesto stated that the BNP would give the \"pedlars of this filth... the criminal status that they deserve\". The BNP promoted the reintroduction of capital punishment, and the sterilisation of some criminals. It also called for the reintroduction of national service in the UK, adding that on completion of this service adults would be permitted to keep their standard issue assault rifle.\nAccording to the academic Steven Woodbridge, the BNP had a \"rather ambivalent attitude toward Christian belief and religious themes in general\" during most of its history, but under Griffin's modernisation the party increasingly utilised Christian terminology and themes in its discourse. Various members of the party presented themselves as \"true Christians\", and defenders of the faith, with key ideologues claiming that the religion has been \"betrayed\" and \"sold out\" by mainstream clergy and the British establishment. British Christianity, the BNP claimed, was under threat from Islam, Marxism, multiculturalism, and \"political correctness\". On analysing the BNP's use of Christianity, Davey argued that the party's emphasis was not on Christian faith itself, but on the inheritance of European Christian culture.\nThe BNP long considered the mainstream media to be one of its major impediments to electoral success. Tyndall claimed that the media represents a \"state above the state\" which was committed to the \"left-liberal\" goals of internationalism, liberal democracy, and racial integration. The party has claimed that the mainstream media has given disproportionate coverage to the achievements of ethnic minority sportsmen and to the victims of anti-black racism while ignoring white victims of racial prejudice and the BNP's activities. Both Tyndall and Griffin have claimed that the mainstream media is controlled by Jews, who use it for their own devices; the latter promoted this idea in his \"Who are the Mind Benders?\" Griffin has described the BBC as \"a thoroughly unpleasant, ultra-leftist establishment\". The BNP has stated that if it took power, it would end \"the dictatorship of the media over free debate\". It claims that it would introduce a law prohibiting the media from disseminating falsehoods about an individual or organisation for financial or political gain, and that it would ban the media from promoting racial integration.\nBNP policy pledges to protect freedom of speech, as part of which it would repeal all laws banning racial or religious hate speech. It would repeal the 1998 Human Rights Act and withdraw from the European Convention on Human Rights.\nSupport.\nFinances.\nIn contrast to the UK's mainstream parties, the BNP received few donations from businesses, wealthy donors, or trade unions. Instead it relied on finances produced by its membership. Under Tyndall, the party operated on a shoestring budget with a lack of transparency; in 1992 it collected \u00a35000 and in 1997 it collected \u00a310,000. It also tried raising money by selling extreme-right literature, and opened a bookshop in Welling in 1989, although this was closed in 1996 after being attacked by anti-fascists and proving too costly to run. In 1992 the party formed a dining club of its wealthier supporters, which was renamed the Trafalgar Club in 2000. By the 1997 general election it admitted that its expenses had \"far out-stripped\" its income, and it was appealing for donations to pay off loans it had taken out.\nGriffin placed greater emphasis on fundraising, and from 2001 through to 2008 the BNP's annual turnover increased almost fivefold. Membership subscriptions grew from \u00a335,000 to \u00a3166,000, while its donations raised from \u00a338,000 to \u00a3660,000. However, expenses also rose as the BNP spent more on its electoral campaigns, and the party reported a financial deficit in 2004 and again in 2005. Between 2007 and 2009 the BNP accumulated debts of \u00a3500,000.\nMembership.\nFor most of its history, the BNP had a whites-only membership policy. In 2009, the state's Equality and Human Rights Commission stated that this was a violation of the Race Relations Act 1976 and called on the party to amend its constitution accordingly. Responding to this, in early 2010 members voted to remove the racial restriction to membership, although it is unlikely that many non-whites joined. \nAt its creation, the BNP had approximately 1,200 members. By the 1983 general election this had grown to approximately 2,500, although by 1987 had slumped to 1000, with no significant further growth until the 21st century. After taking control Griffin began publishing the party's membership figures: 2,174 in 2001, 3,487 in 2002, 5,737 in 2003, and 7,916 in 2004. Membership dropped slightly to 6,281 in 2005, but had grown to 9,297 in 2007 and to 10,276 in spring 2010. In 2011, it was noted that this meant that the BNP had experienced the most rapid growth since 2001 of any minor party in the UK.\nA party membership list dating from late 2007 was leaked onto the internet by a disgruntled activist, containing the names and addresses of 12,000 members. This included names, addresses and other personal details. People on the list included prison officers (barred from BNP membership), teachers, soldiers, civil servants and members of the clergy. The leaked list indicated that membership was concentrated in particular areas, namely the East Midlands, Essex, and Pennine Lancashire, but with particular clusters in Charnwood, Pendle, and Amber Valley. Many of these areas had long been targeted by extreme-right campaigns, dating back to the NF activity of the 1970s, suggesting that such longstanding activism may have had an effect on levels of BNP membership. This information also revealed that membership was most likely in urban areas with low rates of educational attainment and large numbers of economically insecure people employed in manufacturing, with further correlations to nearby Muslim communities. Following an investigation by Welsh police and the Information Commissioner's Office, two people were arrested in December 2008 for breach of the Data Protection Act concerning the leak. Matthew Single was subsequently found guilty and fined \u00a3200. The 'low' fine was criticised as an \"absolute disgrace\" by a BNP spokesman and a detective sergeant involved said he was \"disappointed\" with the outcome.\nThe leaked membership list showed that the party was 17.22% female. While women have occupied key positions within the BNP, men dominated at every level of the party. In 2009, over 80% of the party's Advisory Council was male and from 2002 to 2009, three-quarters of its councillors were male. The average percentage of female candidates presented at local elections in 2001 was 6%, although this had risen to 16% by 2010. Since 2006, the party had made a point of selecting female candidates, with Griffin stating that this was necessary to \"soften\" the party's image. Goodwin suggested that membership fell into three camps: the \"activist old guard\" who had previously been involved in the NF during the 1970s, the \"political wanderers\" who had defected from other parties to the BNP, and the \"new recruits\" who had joined post-2001 and who had little or no political interest or experience beforehand.\nHaving performed qualitative research among the BNP by interviewing various members, Goodwin noted that few of those he interviewed \"conformed to the popular stereotypes of them being irrational and uninformed crude racists\". He noted that most strongly identified with the working class and claimed to have either been former Labour voters or from a Labour-voting family. None of those interviewed claimed a family background in the ethnic nationalist movement. Instead, he noted that members claimed that they joined the party as a result of a \"profound sense of anxiety over immigration and rising ethno-cultural diversity\" in Britain, along with its concomitant impact on \"British culture and society\". He noted that among these members, the perceived cultural threat of immigrants and ethnic minorities was given greater prominence than the perceived economic threat that they posed to white Britons. He noted that in his interviews with them, members often framed Islam in particular as a threat to British values and society, expressing the fear that British Muslims wanted to Islamicise the country and eventually impose \"sharia\" law on its population.\nVoter base.\nGoodwin described the BNP's voters as being \"socially distinct and concerned about a specific set of issues\". Under Griffin's leadership, the party targeted areas with high proportions of skilled white working-class voters, particularly those who were disenchanted with the Labour government. It has attempted to appeal to disaffected Labour voters with slogans such as \"We are the Labour Party your Grandfather Voted For\". The BNP had little success in gaining support from women, the middle classes, and the more educated.\nGoodwin noted a \"strong male bias\" in the party's support base, with statistical polling revealing that between 2002 and 2006, seven out of ten BNP voters were male. That same research also indicated that BNP voters were disproportionately middle-aged and elderly, with three quarters being aged over 35, and only 11% aged between 18 and 24. This contrasted to the NF's support base during the 1970s, when 40% of its voters were aged between 18 and 24. Goodwin suggested two possibilities for the BNP's failure to appeal to younger voters: one was the 'life cycle effect', that older people have obtained more during their life and thus have more to lose, feeling both more threatened by change and more socially conservative in their views. The other explanation was the 'generational effect', with younger Britons who have grown up since the onset of mass immigration having had greater social exposure to ethnic minorities and thus being more tolerant toward them. Conversely, many older voters came of age during the 1970s, under the impact of the anti-immigrant rhetoric promoted by Powellism, Thatcherism, and the NF, and thus have less tolerant attitudes.\nMost BNP voters had no formal qualifications and the party's support was centred largely in areas with low educational attainment. According to the 2002\u201306 data, two-thirds of BNP voters had either no formal qualifications or had left education after their O-levels/GCSEs. Only one in ten BNP voters possessed an A-level, and an even smaller percentage had a university degree. Most of the BNP's voting base were from the financially insecure lower classes. Research conducted from 2002 to 2006 indicated that seven out of ten BNP voters were either skilled or unskilled workers or unemployed. A 2009 poll found that six out of ten BNP voters fitted this profile. Goodwin suggested that it was the skilled working classes rather than their unskilled or unemployed neighbours who were the main support base behind the BNP, because they owned some assets and thus felt that they had more to lose as a result of the economic threat posed by immigrants and ethnic minorities.\nResearch indicated that BNP voters also held opinions that were distinct from the average British citizen. They were far more pessimistic about their economic prospects than average, with seven out of ten BNP voters expecting their economic prospects to decline in future, contrasted with four out of ten who held this view in the wider population. In the 2002\u201306 period, 59% of BNP voters considered immigration to be the most important issue facing the UK, compared with only 16% of the wider population who agreed. By 2009, 87% of BNP voters identified immigration and asylum as the most important issue, to 49% of the wider population. BNP voters were also more likely to identify law and order, the EU, and Islamic extremism as the most important issues facing the UK than other voters, and less likely than average to rate the economy, NHS, pensions, and housing market as the most important.\nBNP voters were also more likely than average to believe both that white Britons face unfair discrimination, and that Muslims, non-whites, and homosexuals had unfair advantages in British society. 78% of BNP voters endorsed the belief that the Labour Party prioritised immigrants and ethnic minorities over white British people, to 44% of the wider population. When asked questions about immigration and Muslims, BNP voters were found to be far more hostile to them than the average Briton, and also more willing than average to support outright racially discriminatory policies toward them. Copsey believed that \"popular racism\"\u2014namely against asylum seekers and Muslims\u2014generated the BNP's \"largest reservoir of support\", and that in many Northern English towns the main factors behind BNP support were white resentment toward Asian communities, anger at Asian-on-white crime, and the perception that Asians received disproportionately high levels of public funding.\nResearch also indicated that BNP voters were more mistrustful of the establishment than average citizens. In 2002\u201306, 92% of BNP voters described themselves as being dissatisfied with the government, to 62% of the wider population. Over 80% of BNP voters were found to distrust their local Member of Parliament, council officials, and civil servants, and were also more likely than average to think that politicians were personally corrupt. There was also a tendency for BNP voters to read tabloids like the \"Daily Mail\", \"Daily Express\", and \"The Sun\", all of which promote anti-immigration sentiment. Whether these voters gained such sentiment as a result of reading these tabloids or they read these tabloids because it endorsed their pre-existing views is unclear.\nThe early stronghold of the BNP was in London, where it established enclaves of support in the boroughs of Enfield, Hackney, Lewisham, Southwark, and Tower Hamlets, with smaller units in Bexley, Camden, Greenwich, Hillingdon, Lambeth, and Redbridge. By the late 1990s, the party was increasingly retreating from its original East End heartland, finding that its electoral support had declined in the area. Griffin expressed the view that it was too dangerous for BNP activists to campaign in the East End, suggesting that they would likely be attacked by opponents. Instead the party shifted its focus to parts of Outer London, in particular the boroughs of Barking, Bexley, Dagenham, Greenwich, and Havering. After Griffin took power, the party focused on building support in the North of England, taking advantage of the anxieties generated by the ethnic riots that took place in Bradford, Oldham, and Burnley in 2001. In the period between 2002 and 2006, over 40% of the BNP's voters were in Northern England.\nThe decline of the BNP as an electoral force around 2014 helped to open the way for the growth of another right-wing party, UKIP. In a study Goodwin produced with Robert Ford, the two political scientists noted that UKIP's support base mirrored the BNP's in that it had the same \"very clear social profile\": the \"old, male, working class, white and less educated\". One area where the two differed, they noted, was in the fact that BNP support had been highest among the middle-aged before tailing off among the over 55s, whereas UKIP retained strong support with those over 55. Ford and Goodwin suggested that this might be because more over 55s had \"direct or indirect experiences\" of the Second World War, in which Britain defeated the fascist powers, resulting in them being less inclined to support fascist parties than their younger counterparts. Despite these commonalities, UKIP proved far more successful at mobilising these social groups than did the BNP. This was likely in part because UKIP had a \"reputational shield\"; it emerged from within the Eurosceptic tradition of British politics rather than from the far-right and thus, while often ridiculed by the mainstream, was regarded as a legitimate democratic actor in a way that the BNP was not.\nOrganisation and structure.\nOn its formation, the BNP avoided the National Front's committee-rule system of collective leadership in the hope of evading the infighting and factionalism that had damaged the NF. Instead it was founded around what it called the \"leadership principle\", with a central chairman having complete control over the party, which was then arranged in a highly hierarchical structure. The BNP lacked any internal democracy, with the grassroots membership having no formal powers. On taking power, Griffin retained the leadership principle inherited from Tyndall. He nevertheless established an Advisory Council which would meet several times a year; the members were to be selected by Griffin himself and would serve as his advisors.\nThe party's branches and local groups were referred to as \"units\" within the party. These were designed to recruit followers, raise funds, and campaign during elections. Under Tyndall, the party operated with a skeleton organisation. It had no full-time staff and for most of the 1980s lacked a telephone number. Instead it relied on a handful of geographically scattered, unpaid regional organisers. Its early activists were recruited from within the extreme-right movement, and thus lacked the experience and skills in electoral campaigning. When Griffin took control, he introduced a variety of internal departments to help manage the party's activities: the administration and enquiries department, department for group development, legal affairs department, security department, and communications department. Griffin tried to build a more professional party machine by educating and training BNP members, providing them with incentives, establishing a steady income stream, and overcoming factionalism and dissent. He launched an \"annual college\" for activists in 2001 and formed an education and training department in 2007. In 2008 and 2010 he oversaw the establishment of \"summer schools\" for high-ranking officials. The party also began employing full-time members of staff, having three in 2001 and 13 in 2007.\nTo incentivise members to remain committed to the party, Griffin followed the example of the Swedish National Democrats by implementing a new \"voting membership\" scheme in 2007. This meant that those who had been BNP members for two years could become a \"voting member\", at which they would go on a year's probation. During this year they were required to attend educational and training seminars, to engage in a certain amount of activism, and to donate a specified amount of money to the party. Once completed, they were allowed to vote on certain matters at general members' meetings and annual conferences, to participate in policy debates, and to be eligible for intermediate and senior positions. This policy ensured that those who reached the higher echelons of the BNP were fully trained in the party's ideology and electoral strategy.\nSub-groups and propaganda output.\nGriffin hoped to build a wider social movement around the BNP by establishing affiliated networks and organisations. In many cases, these were presented to the public in a way that concealed any direct connection to the BNP. Most of these affiliated groups were poorly funded and had few members. The party established its own record label, Great White Records, a radio station, and a trade union known as Solidarity \u2013 The Union for British Workers. It formed a group for young people known as the Young BNP, although in 2010 renamed this group as the BNP Crusaders, \"to pay homage to our ancestors from the Middle Ages who saved Christian Europe from the onslaught of Islam\". It established a Land and People group to recruit support in rural areas, a Family Circle to recruit women and families, and both a Veterans Group and an Association of British ex-Servicemen for former military servicemen. A group called Families Against Immigrant Racism was established to counter perceived racism against white Britons, while an Ethnic Liaison Committee was created to build links with anti-Muslim Hindu and Sikh groups active in Britain. Another group was the American Friends of the British National Party (AFBNP), set up by Mark Cotterill in 1999 to gain support from sympathisers in the United States. In 2001 it had 100 members, and by 2008 had 107.\nA group called Islands of the North Atlantic (IONA) was established to promote the BNP's view of British culture and identity. The British Students Association was founded to promote the party's views among university students in 2000.\nAlbion Life Insurance was set up in September 2006 as an insurance brokerage company established on behalf of the BNP to raise funds for its activities. The firm ceased to operate in November 2006. In 2006, the BNP launched the Christian Council of Britain (CCB), a group designed to rival the Muslim Council of Britain and oppose the growing \"Islamification\" of inner city areas. The CCB was established and run by BNP member Robert West, who claimed to have been ordained by the Apostolic Church, a claim that the church denies. West is a Calvinist and espouses a theology of nations which is influenced by Calvinist theologians like Abraham Kuyper, holding that God wishes every race and nation to remain separate until end time.\nGriffin's BNP also established an annual Red, White and Blue festival, which was based on the 'Blue Blanc Rouge' organised by France's National Front. The festival brought party activists together and aimed to promote a more family friendly image for the group, although it also provided a venue for white power skinhead bands like Stigger, Nemesis and Warlord. Around 1,000 BNP members attended the party's 2001 festival.\nUnder Griffin's leadership, the BNP zealously embraced the use of alternative media to promote itself in a way different from the negative portrayal that featured in the mainstream media. On its website\u2014which had been established in 1995\u2014it created an internet television channel, 'BNPtv'. It has created blogs that cover different themes without being explicitly political in order to promote the party's message. The BNP established an online marketing platform, Excalibur, through which to sell its merchandise. In 2003, the BNP claimed that it had the most viewed website of a political party in Britain, and by 2011 was claiming to have the most viewed such website in Europe. In September 2007, \"The Daily Telegraph\" newspaper reported that Hitwise, the online competitive intelligence service, said that the BNP website had more hits than any other website of a British political party.\nAffiliations in the wider extreme-right.\nUnder Griffin, the BNP forged stronger links with various extreme-right parties elsewhere in Europe, among them France's National Front, Germany's National Democratic Party (NPD), Sweden's National Democrats, and Hungary's Jobbik. Griffin unsuccessfully urged the NPD to move away from neo-Nazism and embark on the same 'modernisation' project that he had taken the BNP. Jean-Marie Le Pen of the French Front National was the guest of honour at an \"Anglo-French Patriotic Dinner\" held by the BNP in April 2004.\nGriffin met leaders of the Hungarian far right party Jobbik to discuss co-operation between the two parties and spoke at a Jobbik party rally in August 2008. In April 2009, Simon Darby, deputy chairman of the BNP, was welcomed with fascist salutes by members of the Italian nationalist Forza Nuova during a trip to Milan. Darby stated that the BNP would look to form an alliance with France's Front National in the European Parliament. Following the election of two BNP MEPs in 2009, the following year saw the BNP join with other extreme-right parties to form the Alliance of European National Movements, with Griffin becoming its vice president. The party also had close links with the Historical Review Press, a publisher focused on promoting Holocaust denial.\nBritain's extreme-right has long faced internal and public divisions. Disgruntled BNP members left the party to found or join a wide range of rivals, among them the British Freedom Party, White Nationalist Party, Nationalist Alliance, Wolf's Hook White Brotherhood, British People's Party, England First Party, Britain First, Democratic Nationalists, and the New Nationalist Party. Various BNP members were involved in the nascent English Defence League (EDL)\u2014with EDL leader Tommy Robinson having been a former BNP activist\u2014although Griffin proscribed the organisation and condemned it as having been manipulated by \"Zionists\". The political scientist Chris Allen noted that the EDL shared much of the BNP's ideology, but that its \"strategies and actions\" were very different, with the EDL favouring street marches over electoral politics. By 2014, both the BNP and EDL were in decline, and Britain First\u2014founded by former BNP members James Dowson and Paul Golding\u2014had risen to prominence. It combined the electoral tactics of the BNP with the street marches of the EDL.\nThe Steadfast Trust was established as a charity in 2004 with the stated aims of reducing poverty among those of Anglo-Saxon descent and supporting English culture. It has many former and current BNP, NF and British Ku Klux Klan members. It was deregistered as a charity by the Charity Commission in February 2014. In 2014, after Nick Griffin lost the leadership of BNP, he set up British Voice, but before it was launched, he decided to set up a different group, British Unity.\nSome members of the BNP were radicalised during their involvement with the party and subsequently sought to carry out acts of violence and terrorism. Tony Lecomber was imprisoned for three years for possessing explosives, after a nail bomb exploded while he was transporting it to the offices of the Workers' Revolutionary Party in 1985. He was imprisoned for three years in 1991 whilst serving as the BNP's Director of Propaganda for assaulting a Jewish teacher. In 1999, the ex-BNP member David Copeland used nail bombs to target homosexuals and ethnic minorities in London. In 2005, the BNP's Burnley candidate Robert Cottage was convicted of stockpiling chemicals for use in what he believed was a coming civil war, while a Yorkshire BNP member, Terry Gavan, was convicted in 2010 for stockpiling firearms and nail bombs.\nElectoral performance.\nThe BNP has contested seats in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. Research from Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin shows that BNP support is concentrated among older and less educated working-class men living in the declining industrial towns of the North and Midlands regions, in contrast to previous significant far-right parties like the National Front, which drew support from a younger demographic.\nGeneral elections.\nThe BNP placed comparatively little emphasis on elections to the British House of Commons, aware that the first past the post voting system was a major obstacle.\nThe British National Party has contested general elections since 1983.\nThe BNP in the 2001 general election saved five deposits (out of 33 contested seats) and secured its best general election result in Oldham West and Royton (which had recently been the scene of racially motivated rioting between white and Asian youths) where party leader Nick Griffin secured 16% of the vote.\nThe 2005 general election was considered a major breakthrough by the BNP, as they picked up 192,746 votes in the 119 constituencies it contested, took a 0.7% share of the overall vote, and retained a deposit in 40 of the seats.\nThe BNP put forward candidates for 338 out of 650 seats for the 2010 general election gaining 563,743 votes (1.9%), finishing in fifth place and failing to win any seats. However, a record of 73 deposits were saved. Party chairman Griffin came third in the Barking constituency, behind Margaret Hodge of Labour and Simon Marcus of the Conservatives, who were first and second respectively. At 14.6%, this was the BNP's best result in any of the seats it contested that year.\nLocal elections.\nThe BNP's first electoral success came in 1993, when Derek Beackon was returned as a councillor in Millwall, London. He lost his seat in elections the following year. The next BNP success in local elections was not until the 2002 local elections, when three BNP candidates gained seats on the Burnley council. The BNP's first councillor for six years was John Haycock, elected as a parish councillor for Bromyard and Winslow in Herefordshire in 2000. Haycock failed to attend any council meetings for six months and was later disqualified from office.\nThe party had 55 councillors for a time in 2009. After the 2013 local county council elections, the BNP was left with a total of two borough councillors in England:\nAs of 2011, the BNP had yet to make \"a major breakthrough\" on local councils.\nThe BNP's councillors usually had \"an extremely limited impact on local politics\" because they were isolated as individuals or small groups on the council. Councillors from the main parties often disliked their BNP colleagues and deemed having to work alongside them as an affront to dignity and decency.\nQuestions were often raised as to whether BNP councillors could adequately represent the interests of all of their local constituents. On being elected, Beackon for instance stated that he refused to serve his Asian constituents in Millwall. There were also allegations made that BNP councillors had particularly low attendance at council meetings, although research indicated that this was not the case, with the BNP's attendance record being largely average.\nThere is evidence to suggest that racially and religiously motivated crime increased in those areas where BNP councillors had been elected. For instance, after the 1993 election of Beackon, there was a spike in racist attacks in the borough of Tower Hamlets. BNP members were directly responsible for some of this; the party's national organiser Richard Edmonds was sentenced to three months imprisonment for his part in an attack on a black man and his white girlfriend.\nRegional assemblies and parliaments.\nBNP lead candidate Richard Barnbrook won a seat in the London Assembly in May 2008, after the party gained 5.3% of the London-wide vote. However, in August 2010, he resigned the party whip and became an independent.\nIn the 2007 Welsh Assembly elections, the BNP fielded 20 candidates, four in each of the five regional lists, with Nick Griffin standing in the South Wales West region. It did not win any seats, but was the only minor party to have saved deposits in the electoral regions, one in the North Wales region and the other in the South Wales West region. In total the BNP polled 42,197 votes (4.3%).\nIn the 2011 Welsh Assembly elections, the BNP fielded 20 candidates, four in each of the five regional lists and for the first time 7 candidates were fielded in FPTP constituencies. On the regional lists, the BNP polled 22,610 votes (2.4%), down 1.9% from 2007. In 2 out of the 7 FPTP constituencies contested the BNP saved deposits: (Swansea East and Islwyn).\nIn the 2007 Scottish Parliament election, the party fielded 32 candidates, entitling it to public funding and an election broadcast, prompting criticism. The BNP received 24,616 votes (1.2%), no seats were won, nor were any deposits saved. In the 2011 Scottish Parliament election, the BNP fielded 32 candidates in the regional lists. 15,580 votes were polled (0.78%).\nThe BNP fielded 3 candidates for the first time in three constituencies each in the 2011 Northern Ireland Legislative Assembly elections (Belfast East, East Antrim and South Antrim). 1,252 votes were polled (0.2%), winning no seats for the party.\nEuropean Parliament.\nThe BNP has taken part in European Parliament elections since 1999, when they received 1.13% of the total vote (102,647 votes).\nIn the 2004 elections to the European Parliament, the BNP won 4.9% of the vote, making it the sixth biggest party overall, but did not win any seats.\nThe BNP won two seats in the European Parliament in the 2009 elections. Andrew Brons was elected in the Yorkshire and the Humber regional constituency with 9.8% of the vote. Party chairman Nick Griffin was elected in the North West region, with 8% of the vote. Nationally, the BNP received 6.26%.\nThe British Government announced in 2009 that the BNP's two MEPs would be denied some of the access and information afforded to other MEPs. The BNP would be subject to the \"same general principles governing official impartiality\" and they would receive \"standard written briefings as appropriate from time to time\", but diplomats would not be \"proactive\" in dealing with the BNP MEPs and that any requests for policy briefings from them would be treated differently and on a discretionary basis.\nThe BNP did not stand any candidates in the 2019 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom.\nAssociation with violence.\nThe leaders and senior officers of the BNP have criminal convictions for inciting racial hatred.\nJohn Hagan claims that the BNP has conducted right-wing extremist violence to gain \"institutionalized power\". Critics of the BNP, such as Human Rights Watch in a 1997 report, have asserted that the party recruits from skinhead groups and that it promotes racist violence.\nIn the past, Nick Griffin has defended the threat of violence to further the party's aims. After the BNP won its first council seat in 1993, he wrote that the BNP should not be a \"postmodernist rightist party\" but \"a strong, disciplined organisation with the ability to back up its slogan 'Defend Rights for Whites' with well-directed boots and fists. When the crunch comes, power is the product of force and will, not of rational debate\". In 1997 he said: \"It is more important to control the streets of a city than its council chambers.\"\nA BBC \"Panorama\" programme reported on a number of BNP members who have had criminal convictions, some racially motivated. Some of the more notable convictions include:\nReception.\nIn 2011, Goodwin described the BNP as being \"the most successful party in the history of the extreme right in Britain\". That same year, John E. Richardson noted that it had achieved \"a level of electoral success that is unparalleled in the history of British fascism\". The historian Alan Sykes stated that \"in electoral terms\", the BNP achieved \"more in the first three years of the twenty-first century\" than the British far right \"as a whole achieved in the previous seventy\". However, Copsey said that the party's belief that one day the conditions would be right for it to win a general election belonged to the \"Never-Never Land of British politics\". Copsey also said that the BNP's electoral successes had been modest in comparison to those achieved by extreme-right groups elsewhere in Western Europe such as France's National Front, Italy's National Alliance, and Belgium's Vlaams Blok.\nThe BNP's growth met a hostile reaction, and in 2011 the political scientists Copsey and Macklin described it as \"Britain's most disliked party\". It was widely reviled as racist and even following Griffin's \"modernisation\" project it was still heavily tainted by its associations with neo-Nazism. For many years it remained closely associated with the National Front in the British public imagination.\nThe BNP remained unable to gain a broad appeal or widespread credibility. In a 2004 poll, seven out of ten voters said that they would never consider voting for the BNP. A 2009 poll found that two-thirds would \"under no circumstances\" consider voting BNP, while only 4% of respondents would \"definitely consider\" voting for them.\nThe Conservative leader Michael Howard stated that the BNP were a \"stain\" on British democracy, adding that \"this is not a political movement, this is a bunch of thugs dressed up as a political party\". His successor David Cameron described it as a \"completely unacceptable\" organisation which \"thrives on hatred\". The Labour prime minister, Tony Blair, called it a \"nasty, extreme organisation\", while the Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg termed it a \"party of thugs and fascists\". In 2004, the General Synod of the Church of England declared that supporting the BNP was incompatible with Christianity, comparing it to \"spitting in the face of God\". Christian groups throughout Britain have maintained that the BNP's hostility toward cultural and ethnic diversity in the country was at odds with mainstream Christianity's emphasis on inclusiveness, tolerance, and interfaith dialogue. Winston Churchill's family has criticised the BNP's use of his image and quotations, labelling it \"offensive and disgusting\". The singer Vera Lynn condemned the party for selling a CD featuring her recordings on its website. In 2009, the Royal British Legion asked Griffin\u2014at first privately and then publicly\u2014to not wear their poppy symbol.\nThe British police, Fire Brigades Union, and Church of England, prohibited its members from joining the BNP. In 2002, Martin Narey, banned BNP membership among prison workers; he subsequently received death threats. In 2010, the Education Secretary Michael Gove announced bans allowing headteachers to ban their staff from being party members.\nIndividuals whose membership of the party was made public sometimes faced ostracism and the loss of their job: examples include a school headmaster who had to resign, a caretaker who was sacked after attending a BNP rally, and a police officer dismissed from his position. After BNP membership lists were leaked on the Internet, a number of police forces investigated officers whose names appeared on the lists.\nIn 2005, an invitation to Nick Griffin by the University of St Andrews Union Debating Society to participate in a debate on multiculturalism was withdrawn after protests. The BNP says that National Union of Journalists guidelines on reporting \"far right\" organisations forbid unionised journalists from reporting uncritically on the party. In April 2007, an election broadcast was cancelled by BBC Radio Wales whose lawyers believed that the broadcast was defamatory of the Chief Constable of North Wales Police, Richard Brunstrom. The BNP said that BBC editors were following an agenda.\nMainstream media and academia.\nAttitudes toward the BNP in both mainstream broadcast media and print journalism have been overwhelmingly negative, and no mainstream newspaper has endorsed the party. This hostile coverage has even been found in right-wing tabloids like the \"Daily Mail\", \"Daily Express\" and \"The Sun\" which otherwise share the BNP's hostile attitude toward issues like immigration. In 2003, the \"Daily Mail\" described the BNP as \"poisonous bigots\", while in 2004 \"The Sun\" printed the headline of \"BNP: Bloody Nasty People\". Senior BNP figures nevertheless believed that these tabloids' hostile coverage of immigration and Islam helped to legitimise and normalise the party and its views among much of the British public, a view echoed by some academic observers. When, in 2004, anti-racist activists picketed outside the \"Daily Mail\" office in central London to protest against its negative coverage of asylum seekers, BNP members organised a counter-picket at which they displayed the placard \"Vote BNP, Read the \"Daily Mail\"\".\nThe BNP initially faced a 'no platform for fascists' policy from the broadcast media, although this eroded as Griffin was invited on to a number of television programmes amid the party's growing electoral success. When the BBC invited him to appear on \"Question Time\" in 2009 it was criticised by several trade unions, sections of the media, and several Labour politicians, all of whom believed that the BNP should not be given a public platform. Anti-fascist protesters assembled outside of the television studio to protest Griffin's inclusion.\nThe first academic attention to be directed at the BNP appeared after it gained a councillor in the 1993 local elections. Nevertheless, throughout the 1990s it remained the subject of little academic research. Academic interest increased following its victories at local elections from 2002 onward. The first detailed monograph study to be devoted to the party was Nigel Copsey's \"Contemporary British Fascism\", first published in 2004. In September 2008, an academic symposium on the BNP was held at Teesside University.\nThe wider extreme-right and anti-fascists.\nOpposition to the BNP also came from the organised anti-fascist movement. By the mid-1990s, the BNP's attempts to stage public events in Scotland, the North West and the Midlands were largely thwarted by the militant disruption of the Anti-Fascist Action (AFA) group. The BNP's modernisation and move away from street demonstrations and toward electoral campaigning caused problems for the AFA, who proved unable to successfully change their tactics; on those occasions when AFA activists tried to forcibly disrupt BNP activities, they were prevented and arrested by riot police.\nMore liberal sections of the anti-fascist movement sought to counter the BNP through community-based initiatives. \"Searchlight\" encouraged trade unions to establish localised campaigns that would ensure that ethnic minority and other anti-BNP locals voted. It suggested that such campaigns should avoid associating with the mainstream parties from which BNP voters felt disenfranchised and that they should not be afraid of calling out Islamic fundamentalists and extremists active in the area. The Unite Against Fascism group also sought to maximise anti-BNP turnout at elections, calling on the electorate to vote for \"anyone but fascists\". Evidence suggests that such anti-fascist activities did little to erode the far-right vote; this was in part because anti-fascist groups had encouraged the stereotype that BNP candidates were violent skinheads, something which conflicted with the more normal, friendly image that BNP activists cultivated when canvassing.\nThe BNP often received a hostile response from other sections of the British extreme-right. Some extreme-right-wingers, such as the British Freedom Party, expressed frustration at the party's inability to moderate itself further on the issue of race, while those such as Colin Jordan and the NF accused the BNP\u2014particularly under Griffin's leadership\u2014of being too moderate. This latter view was articulated by an extreme-right groupuscule, the International Third Position, when it claimed that the BNP \"has been openly courting the Jewish vote and pumping out material which confirms what most us knew years ago: the BNP has become a multi-racist, Zionist, queer-tolerant anti-Muslim pressure group\".\nIn \"ASLEF v. United Kingdom\", the European Court of Human Rights overturned an employment appeal tribunal ruling that awarded BNP member and train driver Jay Lee damages for expulsion from a trade union. In Redfearn v United Kingdom, the court ruled that members of racist organisations could lawfully be dismissed on health and safety grounds if there was a danger of violence occurring in the workplace. In November 2012, the European Court of Human Rights made a majority ruling (4 to 3) that in Redfearn's case against the UK government, his rights under Article 11 (free association) had been infringed, but not those under Article 10 (free expression) or Article 14 (discrimination)."}
{"id": "4295", "revid": "41749802", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4295", "title": "Batavi (Germanic tribe)", "text": "The Batavi were an ancient Germanic tribe that lived around the modern Dutch Rhine delta in the area that the Romans called Batavia, from the second half of the first century BC to the third century AD. The name is also applied to several military units employed by the Romans that were originally raised among the Batavi. The tribal name, probably a derivation from \"batawj\u014d\" (\"good island\", from Germanic \"bat-\" \"good, excellent,\" which is also in the English \"better,\" and \"awj\u014d\" \"island, land near water\"), refers to the region's fertility, today known as the \"fruitbasket of the Netherlands\" (the Betuwe).\nFinds of wooden tablets show that at least some were literate.\nLocation.\nThe Batavi themselves are not mentioned by Julius Caesar in his commentary \"Commentarii de Bello Gallico\", although he is often thought to have founded his dynasty's Germanic bodyguard, which was at least in later generations dominated by Batavi. But he did mention the \"Batavian island\" in the Rhine river. The island's easternmost point is at a split in the Rhine, one arm being the Waal the other the Lower Rhine/Old Rhine (hence the Latin name \"Insula Batavorum\", \"Island of the Batavi\"). Much later Tacitus wrote that they had originally been a tribe of the Chatti, a tribe in Germany also never mentioned by Caesar (unless they were his \"Suebi\"), who were forced by internal dissension to move to their new home. The time when this happened is unknown, but Caesar does describe forced movements of tribes from the east in his time, such as the Usipetes and Tencteri.\nTacitus also reports that before their arrival the area had been \"an uninhabited district on the extremity of the coast of Gaul, and also of a neighbouring island, surrounded by the ocean in front, and by the river Rhine in the rear and on either side\". This view, however, is contradicted by the archeological evidence, which shows continuous habitation from at least the third century BC onward. \nThe strategic position, to wit the high bank of the Waal offering an unimpeded view far into Germania Transrhenana (Germania Beyond the Rhine), was recognized first by Drusus, who built a massive fortress (\"castra\") and a headquarters (\"praetorium\") in imperial style. The latter was in use until the Batavian revolt.\nArcheological evidence suggests they lived in small villages, composed of six to 12 houses in the very fertile lands between the rivers, and lived by agriculture and cattle-raising. Finds of horse skeletons in graves suggest a strong equestrian preoccupation. On the south bank of the Waal (in what is now Nijmegen) a Roman administrative center was built, called \"Oppidum Batavorum\". An Oppidum was a fortified warehouse, where a tribe's treasures were stored and guarded. This centre was razed during the Batavian Revolt. The Smetius Collection was instrumental in settling the debate about the exact location of the Batavians.\nMilitary units.\nThe first Batavi commander we know of is named Chariovalda, who led a charge across the V\u012bsurgis (Weser) river against the Cherusci led by Arminius during the campaigns of Germanicus in \"Germania Transrhenana\".\nTacitus (\"De origine et situ Germanorum\" XXIX) described the Batavi as the bravest of the tribes of the area, hardened in the Germanic wars, with cohorts under their own commanders transferred to Britannia. They retained the honour of the ancient association with the Romans, not required to pay tribute or taxes and used by the Romans only for war: \"They furnished to the Empire nothing but men and arms\", Tacitus remarked. Well regarded for their skills in horsemanship and swimming\u2014for men and horses could cross the Rhine without losing formation, according to Tacitus. Dio Cassius describes this surprise tactic employed by Aulus Plautius against the \"barbarians\"\u2014the British Celts\u2014 at the battle of the River Medway, 43:\nThe barbarians thought that Romans would not be able to cross it without a bridge, and consequently bivouacked in rather careless fashion on the opposite bank; but he sent across a detachment of Germanic tribesmen, who were accustomed to swim easily in full armour across the most turbulent streams. [...] Thence the Britons retired to the river Thames at a point near where it empties into the ocean and at flood-tide forms a lake. This they easily crossed because they knew where the firm ground and the easy passages in this region were to be found; but the Romans in attempting to follow them were not so successful. However, the Germans swam across again and some others got over by a bridge a little way up-stream, after which they assailed the barbarians from several sides at once and cut down many of them. (Cassius Dio, Roman History, Book 60:20)\nIt is uncertain how they were able to accomplish this feat. The late 4th century writer on Roman military affairs Vegetius mentions soldiers using reed rafts, drawn by leather leads, to transport equipment across rivers. But the sources suggest the Batavi were able to swim across rivers actually wearing full armour and weapons. This would only have been possible by the use of some kind of buoyancy device: Ammianus Marcellinus mentions that the \"Cornuti\" regiment swam across a river floating on their shields \"as on a canoe\" (357). Since the shields were wooden, they may have provided sufficient buoyancy\nThe Batavi were used to form the bulk of the Emperor's personal Germanic bodyguard from Augustus to Galba. They also provided a contingent for their indirect successors, the Emperor's horse guards, the \"Equites singulares Augusti\".\nA Batavian contingent was used in an amphibious assault on Ynys Mon (Anglesey), taking the assembled Druids by surprise, as they were only expecting Roman ships.\nNumerous altars and tombstones of the cohorts of Batavi, dating to the 2nd century and 3rd century, have been found along Hadrian's Wall, notably at Castlecary and Carrawburgh. As well as in Germany, Yugoslavia, Hungary, Romania and Austria.\nRevolt of the Batavi.\nDespite the alliance, one of the high-ranking Batavi, Julius Paullus, to give him his Roman name, was executed by Fonteius Capito on a false charge of rebellion. His kinsman Gaius Julius Civilis was paraded in chains in Rome before Nero; though he was acquitted by Galba, he was retained at Rome, and when he returned to his kin in the year of upheaval in the Roman Empire, 69, he headed a Batavian rebellion. He managed to capture Castra Vetera, the Romans lost two legions while two others (I Germanica and XVI Gallica) were controlled by the rebels. The rebellion became a real threat to the Empire when the conflict escalated to northern Gaul and Germania. The Roman army retaliated and invaded the \"insula Batavorum\". A bridge was built over the river Nabalia, where the warring parties approached each other on both sides to negotiate peace. The narrative was told in great detail in Tacitus' History, book iv, although, unfortunately, the narrative breaks off abruptly at the climax. Following the uprising, Legio X \"Gemina\" was housed in a stone \"castra\" to keep an eye on the Batavians.\nFate of the Batavi.\nThe Batavi were still mentioned in 355 during the reign of Constantius II (317 - 361), when their island was already dominated by the Salii, a Frankish tribe that had sought Roman protection there in 297 after having been expelled from their own country by the Saxons.\nConstantius Gallus added inhabitants of Batavia to his legions, \"of whose discipline we still make use.\" It has been assumed they merged with the Salii shortly before or after and, after having been expelled by another tribe (it has been proposed this was the Chamavi), shared their subsequent migration to Toxandria. In the Late Roman army there was a unit called \"Batavi\".\nThe name of the Bavarian town of Passau descends from the Roman \"Batavis\", which was named after the Batavi. The town's name is old as it shows the typical effects of the High German consonant shift (b &gt; p, t &gt; ss).\nThe Batavian revival.\nIn the 16th-century emergence of a popular foundation story and origin myth for the Dutch people, the Batavians came to be regarded as their ancestors during their national struggle for independence during the Eighty Years' War. The mix of fancy and fact in the \"Cronyke van Hollandt, Zeelandt ende Vriesland\" (called the \"Divisiekroniek\") by the Augustinian friar and humanist Cornelius Gerardi Aurelius, first published in 1517, brought the spare remarks in Tacitus' newly rediscovered \"Germania\" to a popular public; it was being reprinted as late as 1802. Contemporary Dutch virtues of independence, fortitude and industry were fully recognizable among the Batavians in more scholarly history represented in Hugo Grotius' \"Liber de Antiquitate Republicae Batavicorum\" (1610). The origin was perpetuated by Romeyn de Hooghe's \"Spiegel van Staat der Vereenigden Nederlanden\" (\"Mirror of the State of the United Netherlands,\" 1706), which also ran to many editions, and it was revived in the atmosphere of Romantic nationalism in the late eighteenth-century reforms that saw a short-lived Batavian Republic and, in the colony of the Dutch East Indies, a capital that was named Batavia. Though since Indonesian independence the city is called Jakarta, its inhabitants up to the present still call themselves \"Betawi\" or \"Orang Betawi\", i.e. \"People of Batavia\" - a name ultimately derived from the ancient Batavians.\nThe success of this tale of origins was mostly due to resemblance in anthropology, which was based on tribal knowledge. Being politically and geographically inclusive, this historical vision filled the needs of Dutch nation-building and integration in the 1890-1914 era.\nHowever, a disadvantage of this historical nationalism soon became apparent. It suggested there were no strong external borders, while allowing for the fairly clear-cut internal borders that were emerging as the society pillarized into three parts. After 1945 the tribal knowledge lost its grip on anthropology and mostly vanished. Modern variants of the Batavian founding myth are made more accurate by pointing out that the Batavians were one part of the ancestry of the Dutch people - together with the Frisians, Franks and Saxons - by tracing patterns of DNA. Echoes of this cultural continuity can still be found among various areas of Dutch modern culture, such as the very popular replica of the ship \"Batavia\" that can today be found in Lelystad."}
{"id": "4298", "revid": "634828", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4298", "title": "Baptism", "text": "Baptism (from the Greek noun \u03b2\u03ac\u03c0\u03c4\u03b9\u03c3\u03bc\u03b1 \"b\u00e1ptisma\") is a Christian rite of admission and adoption, almost invariably with the use of water, into Christianity. It may be performed by sprinkling or pouring water on the head, or by immersing in water either partially or completely. The synoptic gospels recount that John the Baptist baptised Jesus. Baptism is considered a sacrament in most churches, and as an ordinance in others. Baptism according to the Trinitarian formula, which is done in most mainstream Christian denominations, is seen as being a basis for Christian ecumenism, the concept of unity amongst Christians. Baptism is also called christening, although some reserve the word \"christening\" for the baptism of infants. It has also given its name to the Baptist churches and denominations. \nMartyrdom was identified early in Church history as \"baptism by blood\", enabling the salvation of martyrs who had not been baptized by water. Later, the Catholic Church identified a baptism of desire, by which those preparing for baptism who die before actually receiving the sacrament are considered saved. Some Christian thinking regards baptism as necessary for salvation, but some writers, such as Huldrych Zwingli (1484\u20131531), have denied its necessity. \nQuakers and the Salvation Army do not practice water baptism at all. Among denominations that practice water baptism, differences occur in the manner and mode of baptizing and in the understanding of the significance of the rite. Most Christians baptize using the trinitarian formula \"in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit\" (following the Great Commission), but some baptize using Jesus' name only. Much more than half of all Christians baptize infants; many others regard only adult baptism as true baptism.\nThe term \"baptism\" has also been used metaphorically to refer to any ceremony, trial, or experience by which a person is initiated, purified, or given a name.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"baptism\" is derived indirectly through Latin from the neuter Greek concept noun \"b\u00e1ptisma\" (Greek , \"washing-ism\"), which is a neologism in the New Testament derived from the masculine Greek noun \"baptism\u00f3s\" (), a term for ritual washing in Greek language texts of Hellenistic Judaism during the Second Temple period, such as the Septuagint. Both of these nouns are derived from the verb \"bapt\u00edz\u014d\" (, \"I wash\" transitive verb), which is used in Jewish texts for ritual washing, and in the New Testament both for ritual washing and also for the apparently new rite of \"b\u00e1ptisma\". \nThe Greek verb \"b\u00e1pt\u014d\" (), \"dip\", from which the verb \"bapt\u00edz\u014d\" is derived, is in turn hypothetically traced to a reconstructed Indo-European root *\"g\u02b7abh-\", \"dip\". \nThe Greek words are used in a great variety of meanings. and in Hellenism had the general usage of \"immersion,\" \"going under\" (as a material in a liquid dye) or \"perishing\" (as in a ship sinking or a person drowning), with the same double meanings as in English \"to sink into\" or \"to be overwhelmed by,\" with bathing or washing only occasionally used and usually in sacral contexts.\nHistory.\nThe practice of baptism emerged from Jewish ritualistic practices during the Second Temple Period, out of which figures such as John the Baptist emerged. For example, various texts in the Dead Sea Scrolls (DSS) corpus at Qumran describe ritual practices involving washing, bathing, sprinkling, and immersing. One example of such a text is a DSS known as the Rule of the Community, which says \"And by the compliance of his soul with all the laws of God his flesh is cleansed by being sprinkled with cleansing waters and being made holy with the waters of repentance.\" John the Baptist, who is considered a forerunner to Christianity, used baptism as the central sacrament of his messianic movement. The apostle Paul distinguished between the baptism of John, (\"baptism of repentance\") and baptism in the name of Jesus, and it is questionable whether Christian baptism was in some way linked with that of John. However, according to Mark 1:8, John seems to connect his water baptism as a type of the true, ultimate baptism of Jesus, which is by the Sprit. Christians consider Jesus to have instituted the sacrament of baptism.\nThough some form of immersion was likely the most common method of baptism in the early church, many of the writings from the ancient church appeared to view this mode of baptism as inconsequential. The Didache 7.1\u20133 (AD 60\u2013150) allowed for affusion practices in situations where immersion was not practical. Likewise, Tertullian (AD 196\u2013212) allowed for varying approaches to baptism even if those practices did not conform to biblical or traditional mandates (cf. De corona militis 3; De baptismo 17). Finally, Cyprian (ca. AD 256) explicitly stated that the amount of water was inconsequential and defended immersion, affusion, and aspersion practices (Epistle 75.12). As a result, there was no uniform or consistent mode of baptism in the ancient church prior to the fourth century.\nBy the third and fourth centuries, baptism involved catechetical instruction as well as chrismation, exorcisms, laying on of hands, and recitation of a creed.\nIn the early middle ages infant baptism became common and the rite was significantly simplified. In Western Europe Affusion became the normal mode of baptism between the twelfth and fourteenth centuries, though immersion was still practiced into the sixteenth. In the medieval period, some radical Christians rejected the sacrament of baptism. Sects such as the Tondrakians, Cathars, Arnoldists, Petrobrusians, Henricans, Brethren of the Free Spirit and the Lollards were regarded as heretics by the Catholic Church. In the sixteenth century, Martin Luther retained baptism as a sacrament, but Swiss reformer Huldrych Zwingli considered baptism and the Lord's supper to be symbolic. Anabaptists denied the validity of the practice of infant baptism, and rebaptized converts.\nMode and manner.\nBaptism is practiced in several different ways. Aspersion is the sprinkling of water on the head, and affusion is the pouring of water over the head.\nAspersion or sprinkling best describes cleansing aspect of baptism as indicated in Psalm 51:7, \u201cCleanse me with hyssop, and I will be clean; wash me, and I will be whiter than snow\u201d.\nAffusion or pouring best describes anointing, which points to the pouring of the Holy Spirit unto the believing person as indicated in many of the Old Testament types of anointing kings, prophets, and priests with oil.\nImmersion or submersion best describes burial and resurrection of the believer in Christ.\nThe word \"immersion\" is derived from late Latin \"immersio\", a noun derived from the verb \"immergere\" (\"in\" \u2013 \"into\" + \"mergere\" \"dip\"). In relation to baptism, some use it to refer to any form of dipping, whether the body is put completely under water or is only partly dipped in water; they thus speak of immersion as being either total or partial. Others, of the Anabaptist belief, use \"immersion\" to mean exclusively plunging someone entirely under the surface of the water. The term \"immersion\" is also used of a form of baptism in which water is poured over someone standing in water, without submersion of the person. On these three meanings of the word \"immersion\", see Immersion baptism.\nWhen \"immersion\" is used in opposition to \"submersion\", it indicates the form of baptism in which the candidate stands or kneels in water and water is poured over the upper part of the body. Immersion in this sense has been employed in West and East since at least the 2nd century and is the form in which baptism is generally depicted in early Christian art. In the West, this method of baptism began to be replaced by affusion baptism from around the 8th century, but it continues in use in Eastern Christianity.\nThe word submersion comes from the late Latin (\"sub-\" \"under, below\" + \"mergere\" \"plunge, dip\") and is also sometimes called \"complete immersion\". It is the form of baptism in which the water completely covers the candidate's body. Submersion is practiced in the Orthodox and several other Eastern Churches. In the Latin Church of the Catholic Church, baptism by submersion is used in the Ambrosian Rite and is one of the methods provided in the Roman Rite of the baptism of infants. It is seen as obligatory among some groups that have arisen since the Protestant Reformation, such as Baptists.\nMeaning of the Greek verb \"baptizein\".\nThe Greek-English Lexicon of Liddell and Scott gives the primary meaning of the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\", from which the English verb \"baptize\" is derived, as \"dip, plunge\", and gives examples of plunging a sword into a throat or an embryo and for drawing wine by dipping a cup in the bowl; for New Testament usage it gives two meanings: \"baptize\", with which it associates the Septuagint mention of Naaman dipping himself in the Jordan River, and \"perform ablutions\", as in Luke 11:38.\nAlthough the Greek verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" does not exclusively mean dip, plunge or immerse (it is used with literal and figurative meanings such as \"sink\", \"disable\", \"overwhelm\", \"go under\", \"overborne\", \"draw from a bowl\"), lexical sources typically cite this as a meaning of the word in both the Septuagint and the New Testament.\n\"While it is true that the basic root meaning of the Greek words for baptize and baptism is immerse/immersion, it is not true that the words can simply be reduced to this meaning, as can be seen from Mark 10:38\u201339, Luke 12:50, Matthew 3:11 Luke 3:16 and Corinthians10:2.\"\nTwo passages in the Gospels indicate that the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" did not always indicate submersion. The first is Luke 11:38, which tells how a Pharisee, at whose house Jesus ate, \"was astonished to see that he did not first wash (\"\u1f10\u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03c3\u03b8\u03b7\", aorist passive of \"\u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03b6\u03c9\"\u2014literally, \"was baptized\") before dinner\". This is the passage that Liddell and Scott cites as an instance of the use of ' to mean \"perform ablutions\". Jesus' omission of this action is similar to that of his disciples: \"Then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying, Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they wash (') not their hands when they eat bread\". The other Gospel passage pointed to is: \"The Pharisees...do not eat unless they wash (\"\", the ordinary word for washing) their hands thoroughly, observing the tradition of the elders; and when they come from the market place, they do not eat unless they wash themselves (literally, \"baptize themselves\"\u2014\"\u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03c3\u03c9\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1\u03b9\", passive or middle voice of \"\u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03b6\u03c9\")\".\nScholars of various denominations claim that these two passages show that invited guests, or people returning from market, would not be expected to immerse themselves (\"baptize themselves\") totally in water but only to practise the partial immersion of dipping their hands in water or to pour water over them, as is the only form admitted by present Jewish custom. In the second of the two passages, it is actually the hands that are specifically identified as \"washed\", not the entire person, for whom the verb used is \"bapt\u00edzomai\", literally \"be baptized\", \"be immersed\", a fact obscured by English versions that use \"wash\" as a translation of both verbs. Zodhiates concludes that the washing of the hands was done by immersing them. The Liddell\u2013Scott\u2013Jones Greek-English Lexicon (1996) cites the other passage (Luke 11:38) as an instance of the use of the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" to mean \"perform ablutions\", not \"submerge\". References to the cleaning of vessels which use \u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03b6\u03c9 also refer to immersion.\nAs already mentioned, the lexicographical work of Zodhiates says that, in the second of these two cases, the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" indicates that, after coming from the market, the Pharisees washed their hands by immersing them in collected water. Balz &amp; Schneider understand the meaning of \u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03b6\u03c9, used in place of \u1fe5\u03b1\u03bd\u03c4\u03af\u03c3\u03c9\u03bd\u03c4\u03b1\u03b9 (sprinkle), to be the same as \u03b2\u03ac\u03c0\u03c4\u03c9, to dip or immerse, a verb used of the partial dipping of a morsel held in the hand into wine or of a finger into spilled blood.\nA possible additional use of the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" to relate to ritual washing is suggested by Peter Leithart (2007) who suggests that Paul's phrase \"Else what shall they do who are baptized for the dead?\" relates to Jewish ritual washing. In Jewish Greek the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" \"baptized\" has a wider reference than just \"baptism\" and in Jewish context primarily applies to the masculine noun \"baptism\u00f3s\" \"ritual washing\" \nThe verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" occurs four times in the Septuagint in the context of ritual washing, \"baptism\u00f3s\"; Judith cleansing herself from menstrual impurity, Naaman washing seven times to be cleansed from leprosy, etc. \nAdditionally, in the New Testament only, the verb \"bapt\u00edzein\" can also relate to the neuter noun \"b\u00e1ptisma\" \"baptism\" which is a neologism unknown in the Septuagint and other pre-Christian Jewish texts. \nThis broadness in the meaning of \"bapt\u00edzein\" is reflected in English Bibles rendering \"wash\", where Jewish ritual washing is meant: for example Mark 7:4 states that the Pharisees \"except they wash (Greek \"baptize\"), they do not eat\", and \"baptize\" where \"b\u00e1ptisma\", the new Christian rite, is intended.\nDerived nouns.\nTwo nouns derived from the verb \"bapt\u00edz\u014d\" (\u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03af\u03b6\u03c9) appear in the New Testament: the masculine noun \"baptism\u00f3s\" (\u03b2\u03b1\u03c0\u03c4\u03b9\u03c3\u03bc\u03cc\u03c2) and the neuter noun \"b\u00e1ptisma\" (\u03b2\u03ac\u03c0\u03c4\u03b9\u03c3\u03bc\u03b1):\nApparel.\nUntil the Middle Ages, most baptisms were performed with the candidates naked\u2014as is evidenced by most of the early portrayals of baptism (some of which are shown in this article), and the early Church Fathers and other Christian writers. Deaconesses helped female candidates for reasons of modesty.\nTypical of these is Cyril of Jerusalem who wrote \"On the Mysteries of Baptism\" in the 4th century (c. 350\u00a0AD):\nThe symbolism is threefold:\n1. Baptism is considered to be a form of rebirth\u2014\"by water and the Spirit\"\u2014the nakedness of baptism (the second birth) paralleled the condition of one's original birth. For example, St. John Chrysostom calls the baptism \"\u03bb\u03bf\u03c7\u03b5\u03af\u03b1\u03bd\", i.e., giving birth, and \"new way of creation...from water and Spirit\" (\"to John\" speech 25,2), and later elaborates:\n2. The removal of clothing represented the \"image of putting off the old man with his deeds\" (as per Cyril, above), so the stripping of the body before for baptism represented taking off the trappings of sinful self, so that the \"new man\", which is given by Jesus, can be put on.\n3. As St. Cyril again asserts above, as Adam and Eve in scripture were naked, innocent and unashamed in the Garden of Eden, nakedness during baptism was seen as a renewal of that innocence and state of original sinlessness. Other parallels can also be drawn, such as between the exposed condition of Christ during His crucifixion, and the crucifixion of the \"old man\" of the repentant sinner in preparation for baptism.\nChanging customs and concerns regarding modesty probably contributed to the practice of permitting or requiring the baptismal candidate to either retain their undergarments (as in many Renaissance paintings of baptism such as those by da Vinci, Tintoretto, Van Scorel, Masaccio, de Wit and others) or to wear, as is almost universally the practice today, baptismal robes. These robes are most often white, symbolizing purity. Some groups today allow any suitable clothes to be worn, such as trousers and a T-shirt\u2014practical considerations include how easily the clothes will dry (denim is discouraged), and whether they will become see-through when wet.\nMeaning and effects.\nThere are differences in views about the effect of baptism for a Christian. Catholics, Orthodox, and most mainline Protestant groups assert baptism is a requirement for salvation and a sacrament, and speak of \"baptismal regeneration\". Its importance is related to their interpretation of the meaning of the \"Mystical Body of Christ\" as found in the New Testament. This view is shared by the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox denominations, and by Churches formed early during the Protestant Reformation such as Lutheran and Anglican. For example, Martin Luther said:\nThe Churches of Christ,\" Jehovah's Witnesses, Christadelphians, and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints espouse baptism as necessary for salvation.\nFor Roman Catholics, baptism by water is a sacrament of initiation into the life of the children of God (\"Catechism of the Catholic Church\", 1212\u201313). It configures the person to Christ (CCC 1272), and obliges the Christian to share in the Church's apostolic and missionary activity (CCC 1270). The Catholic holds that there are three types of baptism by which one can be saved: sacramental baptism (with water), baptism of desire (explicit or implicit desire to be part of the Church founded by Jesus Christ), and baptism of blood (martyrdom). In his encyclical \"Mystici corporis Christi\" of June 29, 1943, Pope Pius XII spoke of baptism and profession of the true faith as what makes members of the one true Church, which is the body of Jesus Christ himself, as God the Holy Spirit has taught through the Apostle Paul:\nBy contrast, Anabaptist and Evangelical Protestants recognize baptism as an outward sign of an inward reality following on an individual believer's experience of forgiving grace. Reformed and Methodist Protestants maintain a link between baptism and regeneration, but insist that it is not automatic or mechanical, and that regeneration may occur at a different time than baptism. Churches of Christ consistently teach that in baptism a believer surrenders his life in faith and obedience to God, and that God \"by the merits of Christ's blood, cleanses one from sin and truly changes the state of the person from an alien to a citizen of God's kingdom. Baptism is not a human work; it is the place where God does the work that only God can do.\" Thus, they see baptism as a passive act of faith rather than a meritorious work; it \"is a confession that a person has nothing to offer God\".\nChristian traditions.\nThe liturgy of baptism for Catholics, Eastern Orthodox, Lutheran, Anglican, and Methodist makes clear reference to baptism as not only a symbolic burial and resurrection, but an actual supernatural transformation, one that draws parallels to the experience of Noah and the passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea divided by Moses. Thus, baptism is literally and symbolically not only cleansing, but also dying and rising again with Christ. Catholics believe baptism is necessary to cleanse the taint of original sin, and so commonly baptise infants.\nThe Eastern Churches (Eastern Orthodox Church and Oriental Orthodoxy) also baptize infants on the basis of texts, such as Matthew 19:14, which are interpreted as supporting full Church membership for children. In these denominations, baptism is immediately followed by Chrismation and Communion at the next Divine Liturgy, regardless of age. Orthodox likewise believe that baptism removes what they call the ancestral sin of Adam. Anglicans believe that Baptism is also the entry into the Church and therefore allows them access to all rights and responsibilities as full members, including the privilege to receive Holy Communion. Most Methodists and Anglicans agree that it also cleanses the taint of what in the West is called original sin, in the East ancestral sin.\nEastern Orthodox Christians usually insist on complete threefold immersion as both a symbol of death and rebirth into Christ, and as a washing away of sin. Latin Church Catholics generally baptize by affusion (pouring); Eastern Catholics usually by submersion, or at least partial immersion. However, submersion is gaining in popularity within the Latin Catholic Church. In newer church sanctuaries, the baptismal font may be designed to expressly allow for baptism by immersion. Anglicans baptize by immersion or affusion.\nAccording to evidence which can be traced back to about the year 200, sponsors or godparents are present at baptism and vow to uphold the Christian education and life of the baptized.\nBaptists argue that the Greek word originally meant \"to immerse\". They interpret some Biblical passages concerning baptism as requiring submersion of the body in water. They also state that only submersion reflects the symbolic significance of being \"buried\" and \"raised\" with Christ. Baptist Churches baptize in the name of the Trinity\u2014the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. However, they do not believe that baptism is necessary for salvation; but rather that it is an act of Christian obedience.\nSome \"Full Gospel\" charismatic churches such as Oneness Pentecostals baptize only in the name of Jesus Christ, citing Peter's preaching baptism in the name of Jesus as their authority.\nEcumenical statements.\nIn 1982 the World Council of Churches published the ecumenical paper \"Baptism, Eucharist and Ministry\". The preface of the document states:\nA 1997 document, \"Becoming a Christian: The Ecumenical Implications of Our Common Baptism\", gave the views of a commission of experts brought together under the aegis of the World Council of Churches. It states:\nThose who heard, who were baptized and entered the community's life, were already made witnesses of and partakers in the promises of God for the last days: the forgiveness of sins through baptism in the name of Jesus and the outpouring of the Holy Ghost on all flesh. Similarly, in what may well be a baptismal pattern, 1 Peter testifies that proclamation of the resurrection of Jesus Christ and teaching about new life lead to purification and new birth. This, in turn, is followed by eating and drinking God's food, by participation in the life of the community\u2014the royal priesthood, the new temple, the people of God\u2014and by further moral formation. At the beginning of 1 Peter the writer sets this baptism in the context of obedience to Christ and sanctification by the Spirit. So baptism into Christ is seen as baptism into the Spirit. In the fourth gospel Jesus' discourse with Nicodemus indicates that birth by water and Spirit becomes the gracious means of entry into the place where God rules.\nValidity considerations by some churches.\nThe vast majority of Christian denominations admit the theological idea that baptism is a sacrament, that has actual spiritual, holy and salvific effects. Certain key criteria must be complied with for it to be valid, i.e., to actually have those effects. If these key criteria are met, violation of some rules regarding baptism, such as varying the authorized rite for the ceremony, renders the baptism illicit (contrary to the church's laws) but still valid.\nOne of the criteria for validity is use of the correct form of words. The Roman Catholic Church teaches that the use of the verb \"baptize\" is essential. Catholics of the Latin Church, Anglicans and Methodists use the form \"I baptize you...\" Eastern Orthodox and some Eastern Catholics use a passive voice form \"The Servant/(Handmaiden) of God is baptized in the name of...\" or \"This person is baptized by my hands...\"\nUse of the Trinitarian formula \"in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit\" is also considered essential; thus these churches do not accept as valid baptisms of non-Trinitarian churches such as Oneness Pentecostals. \nAnother essential condition is use of water. A baptism in which some liquid that would not usually be called water, such as wine, milk, soup or fruit juice was used would not be considered valid.\nAnother requirement is that the celebrant intends to perform baptism. This requirement entails merely the intention \"to do what the Church does\", not necessarily to have Christian faith, since it is not the person baptizing, but the Holy Spirit working through the sacrament, who produces the effects of the sacrament. Doubt about the faith of the baptizer is thus no ground for doubt about the validity of the baptism.\nSome conditions expressly do not affect validity\u2014for example, whether submersion, immersion, affusion (pouring) or aspersion (sprinkling) is used. However, if water is sprinkled, there is a danger that the water may not touch the skin of the unbaptized. As has been stated, \"it is not sufficient for the water to merely touch the candidate; it must also flow, otherwise there would seem to be no real ablution. At best, such a baptism would be considered doubtful. If the water touches only the hair, the sacrament has probably been validly conferred, though in practice the safer course must be followed. If only the clothes of the person have received the aspersion, the baptism is undoubtedly void.\" For many communions, validity is not affected if a single submersion or pouring is performed rather than a triple, but in Orthodoxy this is controversial.\nAccording to the Catholic Church, baptism imparts an indelible \"seal\" upon the soul of the baptized and therefore a person who has already been baptized cannot be validly baptized again. This teaching was affirmed against the Donatists who practiced rebaptism. The grace received in baptism is believed to operate \"ex opere operato\" and is therefore considered valid even if administered in heretical or schismatic groups.\nRecognition by other denominations.\nThe Catholic, Lutheran, Anglican, Presbyterian and Methodist Churches accept baptism performed by other denominations within this group as valid, subject to certain conditions, including the use of the Trinitarian formula. It is only possible to be baptized once, thus people with valid baptisms from other denominations may not be baptized again upon conversion or transfer. For Roman Catholics, this is affirmed in the Canon Law 864, in which it is written that \"[e]very person not yet baptized and only such a person is capable of baptism.\" Such people are accepted upon making a profession of faith and, if they have not yet validly received the sacrament/rite of confirmation or chrismation, by being confirmed. Specifically, \"Methodist theologians argued that since God never abrogated a covenant made and sealed with proper intentionality, rebaptism was never an option, unless the original baptism had been defective by not having been made in the name of the Trinity.\" In some cases it can be difficult to decide if the original baptism was in fact valid; if there is doubt, conditional baptism is administered, with a formula on the lines of \"If you are not yet baptized, I baptize you...\"\nThe Catholic Church ordinarily recognizes as valid the baptisms of Christians of the Eastern Orthodox, Churches of Christ, Congregationalist, Anglican, Lutheran, Old Catholic, Polish National Catholic, Reformed, Baptist, Brethren, Methodist, Presbyterian, Waldensian, and United Protestant denominations; Christians of these traditions are received into the Catholic Church through the sacrament of Confirmation. Some individuals of the Mennonite, Pentecostal and Adventist traditions who wish to be received into the Catholic Church may be required to receive a conditional baptism due to concerns about the validity of the sacraments in those traditions. On the other hand, the Catholic Church has explicitly denied the validity of the baptism conferred in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe Reformed Churches recognize as valid baptisms administered in the Catholic Church, among other Churches using the Trinitarian formula.\nPractice in the Eastern Orthodox Church for converts from other communions is not uniform. However, generally baptisms performed in the name of the Holy Trinity are accepted by the Orthodox Christian Church; Christians of the Oriental Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Lutheran, Old Catholic, Moravian, Anglican, Methodist, Reformed, Presbyterian, Brethren, Assemblies of God, or Baptist traditions can be received into the Eastern Orthodox Church through the sacrament of Chrismation. If a convert has not received the sacrament (mysterion) of baptism, he or she must be baptised in the name of the Holy Trinity before they may enter into communion with the Orthodox Church. If he has been baptized in another Christian confession (other than Orthodox Christianity) his previous baptism is considered retroactively filled with grace by chrismation or, in rare circumstances, confession of faith alone as long as the baptism was done in the name of the Holy Trinity (Father, Son and Holy Spirit). The exact procedure is dependent on local canons and is the subject of some controversy.\nOriental Orthodox Churches recognise the validity of baptisms performed within the Eastern Orthodox Communion. Some also recognise baptisms performed by Catholic Churches. Any supposed baptism not performed using the Trinitarian formula is considered invalid.\nIn the eyes of the Catholic Church, all Orthodox Churches, Anglican and Lutheran Churches, the baptism conferred by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is invalid. An article published together with the official declaration to that effect gave reasons for that judgment, summed up in the following words: \"The Baptism of the Catholic Church and that of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints differ essentially, both for what concerns faith in the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, in whose name Baptism is conferred, and for what concerns the relationship to Christ who instituted it.\"\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints stresses that baptism must be administered by one having proper authority; consequently, the church does not recognize the baptism of any other church as valid.\nJehovah's Witnesses do not recognise any other baptism occurring after 1914 as valid, as they believe that they are now the one true church of Christ, and that the rest of \"Christendom\" is false religion.\nOfficiator.\nThere is debate among Christian churches as to who can administer baptism. Some claim that the examples given in the New Testament only show apostles and deacons administering baptism. Ancient Christian churches interpret this as indicating that baptism should be performed by the clergy except \"in extremis\", i.e., when the one being baptized is in immediate danger of death. Then anyone may baptize, provided, in the view of the Eastern Orthodox Church, the person who does the baptizing is a member of that Church, or, in the view of the Catholic Church, that the person, even if not baptized, intends to do what the Church does in administering the rite. Many Protestant churches see no specific prohibition in the biblical examples and permit any believer to baptize another.\nIn the Roman Catholic Church, canon law for the Latin Church lays down that the ordinary minister of baptism is a bishop, priest or deacon, but its administration is one of the functions \"especially entrusted to the parish priest\". If the person to be baptized is at least fourteen years old, that person's baptism is to be referred to the bishop, so that he can decide whether to confer the baptism himself. If no ordinary minister is available, a catechist or some other person whom the local ordinary has appointed for this purpose may licitly do the baptism; indeed in a case of necessity \"any\" person (irrespective of that person's religion) who has the requisite intention may confer the baptism By \"a case of necessity\" is meant imminent danger of death because of either illness or an external threat. \"The requisite intention\" is, at the minimum level, the intention \"to do what the Church does\" through the rite of baptism.\nIn the Eastern Catholic Churches, a deacon is not considered an ordinary minister. Administration of the sacrament is reserved to the Parish Priest or to another priest to whom he or the local hierarch grants permission, a permission that can be presumed if in accordance with canon law. However, \"in case of necessity, baptism can be administered by a deacon or, in his absence or if he is impeded, by another cleric, a member of an institute of consecrated life, or by any other Christian faithful; even by the mother or father, if another person is not available who knows how to baptize.\"\nThe discipline of the Eastern Orthodox Church, Oriental Orthodoxy and the Assyrian Church of the East is similar to that of the Eastern Catholic Churches. They require the baptizer, even in cases of necessity, to be of their own faith, on the grounds that a person cannot convey what he himself does not possess, in this case membership in the Church. The Latin Catholic Church does not insist on this condition, considering that the effect of the sacrament, such as membership of the Church, is not produced by the person who baptizes, but by the Holy Spirit. For the Orthodox, while Baptism \"in extremis\" may be administered by a deacon or any lay-person, if the newly baptized person survives, a priest must still perform the other prayers of the Rite of Baptism, and administer the Mystery of Chrismation.\nThe discipline of Anglicanism and Lutheranism is similar to that of the Latin Catholic Church. For Methodists and many other Protestant denominations, too, the ordinary minister of baptism is a duly ordained or appointed minister of religion.\nNewer movements of Protestant Evangelical churches, particularly non-denominational, allow laypeople to baptize.\nIn The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, only a man who has been ordained to the Aaronic priesthood holding the priesthood office of priest or higher office in the Melchizedek priesthood may administer baptism.\nA Jehovah's Witnesses baptism is performed by a \"dedicated male\" adherent. Only in extraordinary circumstances would a \"dedicated\" baptizer be unbaptized (see section \"Jehovah's Witnesses\").\nSpecific Christian groups practicing baptism.\nAnabaptists and Baptists recognize only believer's baptism or \"adult baptism\". Baptism is seen as an act identifying one as having accepted Jesus Christ as savior.\nAnabaptist.\nEarly Anabaptists were given that name because they re-baptized persons who they felt had not been properly baptized, having received infant baptism, sprinkling.\nThe traditional form of Anabaptist baptism was pouring or sprinkling, the form commonly used in the West in the early 16th century when they emerged. Since the 18th century immersion and submersion became more widespread. Today all forms of baptism can be found among Anabaptist.\nBaptism memorializes the death, burial and resurrection of Jesus. It is considered a covenantal act, signifying entrance into the New Covenant of Christ.\nBaptist.\nFor the majority of Baptists, Christian baptism is the immersion of a believer in water in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Baptism does not accomplish anything in itself, but is an outward personal sign that the person's sins have already been washed away by the blood of Christ's cross.\nFor a new convert the general practice is that baptism also allows the person to be a registered member of the local Baptist congregation (though some churches have adopted \"new members classes\" as a mandatory step for congregational membership).\nRegarding rebaptism the general rules are:\nFor newborns, there is a ceremony called child dedication.\nChurches of Christ.\nBaptism in Churches of Christ is performed only by full bodily immersion, based on the Koine Greek verb \"baptizo\" which means to dip, immerse, submerge or plunge. Submersion is seen as more closely conforming to the death, burial and resurrection of Jesus than other modes of baptism. Churches of Christ argue that historically immersion was the mode used in the 1st century, and that pouring and sprinkling later emerged as secondary modes when immersion was not possible. Over time these secondary modes came to replace immersion. Only those mentally capable of belief and repentance are baptized (i.e., infant baptism is not practiced because the New Testament has no precedent for it).\nChurches of Christ have historically had the most conservative position on baptism among the various branches of the Restoration Movement, understanding baptism by immersion to be a necessary part of conversion. The most significant disagreements concerned the extent to which a correct understanding of the role of baptism is necessary for its validity. David Lipscomb insisted that if a believer was baptized out of a desire to obey God, the baptism was valid, even if the individual did not fully understand the role baptism plays in salvation. Austin McGary contended that to be valid, the convert must also understand that baptism is for the forgiveness of sins. McGary's view became the prevailing one in the early 20th century, but the approach advocated by Lipscomb never totally disappeared. As such, the general practice among churches of Christ is to require rebaptism by immersion of converts, even those who were previously baptized by immersion in other churches.\nMore recently, the rise of the International Churches of Christ has caused some to reexamine the issue.\nChurches of Christ consistently teach that in baptism a believer surrenders his life in faith and obedience to God, and that God \"by the merits of Christ's blood, cleanses one from sin and truly changes the state of the person from an alien to a citizen of God's kingdom. Baptism is not a human work; it is the place where God does the work that only God can do.\" Baptism is a passive act of faith rather than a meritorious work; it \"is a confession that a person has nothing to offer God.\" While Churches of Christ do not describe baptism as a \"sacrament\", their view of it can legitimately be described as \"sacramental.\" They see the power of baptism coming from God, who chose to use baptism as a vehicle, rather than from the water or the act itself, and understand baptism to be an integral part of the conversion process, rather than just a symbol of conversion. A recent trend is to emphasize the transformational aspect of baptism: instead of describing it as just a legal requirement or sign of something that happened in the past, it is seen as \"the event that places the believer 'into Christ' where God does the ongoing work of transformation.\" There is a minority that downplays the importance of baptism in order to avoid sectarianism, but the broader trend is to \"reexamine the richness of the biblical teaching of baptism and to reinforce its central and essential place in Christianity.\"\nBecause of the belief that baptism is a necessary part of salvation, some Baptists hold that the Churches of Christ endorse the doctrine of baptismal regeneration. However, members of the Churches of Christ reject this, arguing that since faith and repentance are necessary, and that the cleansing of sins is by the blood of Christ through the grace of God, baptism is not an inherently redeeming ritual. Rather, their inclination is to point to the biblical passage in which Peter, analogizing baptism to Noah's flood, posits that \"likewise baptism doth also now save us\" but parenthetically clarifies that baptism is \"\"not\" the putting away of the filth of the flesh but the \"response of a good conscience\" toward God\" (1 Peter 3:21). One author from the churches of Christ describes the relationship between faith and baptism this way, \"\"Faith\" is the \"reason why\" a person is a child of God; \"baptism\" is the \"time at which\" one is incorporated into Christ and so becomes a child of God\" (italics are in the source). Baptism is understood as a confessional expression of faith and repentance, rather than a \"work\" that earns salvation.\nLutheranism.\nIn Lutheran Christianity, baptism is a sacrament that regenerates the soul. Upon one's baptism, one receives the Holy Spirit and becomes a part of the Church.\nMethodism.\nThe Methodist Articles of Religion, with regard to baptism, teach:\nWhile baptism imparts grace, Methodists teach that a personal acceptance of Jesus Christ (the first work of grace) is essential to one's salvation; during the second work of grace, entire sanctification, a believer is purified of original sin and made holy.\nIn the Methodist Churches, baptism is a sacrament of initiation into the visible Church. Wesleyan covenant theology further teaches that baptism is a sign and a seal of the covenant of grace:\nMethodists recognize three modes of baptism as being valid\u2014\"immersion, sprinkling, or pouring\" in the name of the Holy Trinity.\nMoravianism.\nThe Moravian Church teaches that baptism is a sign and a seal, recognizing three modes of baptism as being valid: immersion, aspersion, and affusion.\nReformed Protestantism.\nIn Reformed baptismal theology, baptism is seen as primarily God's offer of union with Christ and all his benefits to the baptized. This offer is believed to be intact even when it is not received in faith by the person baptized. Reformed theologians believe the Holy Spirit brings into effect the promises signified in baptism. Baptism is held by almost the entire Reformed tradition to effect regeneration, even in infants who are incapable of faith, by effecting faith which would come to fruition later. Baptism also initiates one into the visible church and the covenant of grace. Baptism is seen as a replacement of circumcision, which is considered the rite of initiation into the covenant of grace in the Old Testament.\nReformed Christians believe that immersion is not necessary for baptism to be properly performed, but that pouring or sprinkling are acceptable. Only ordained ministers are permitted to administer baptism in Reformed churches, with no allowance for emergency baptism, though baptisms performed by non-ministers are generally considered valid. Reformed churches, while rejecting the baptismal ceremonies of the Roman Catholic church, accept the validity of baptisms performed with them and do not rebaptize.\nCatholicism.\nIn Catholic teaching, baptism is stated to be \"necessary for salvation by actual reception or at least by desire\". Catholic discipline requires the baptism ceremony to be performed by deacons, priests, or bishops, but in an emergency such as danger of death, anyone can licitly baptize. This teaching is based on the Gospel according to John which says that Jesus proclaimed: \"Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.\" It dates back to the teachings and practices of 1st-century Christians, and the connection between salvation and baptism was not, on the whole, an item of major dispute until Huldrych Zwingli denied the necessity of baptism, which he saw as merely a sign granting admission to the Christian community. The Catechism of the Catholic Church states that \"Baptism is necessary for salvation for those to whom the Gospel has been proclaimed and who have had the possibility of asking for this sacrament.\" The Council of Trent also states in the \"Decree Concerning Justification\" from session six that baptism is necessary for salvation. A person who knowingly, willfully and unrepentantly rejects baptism has no hope of salvation. However, if knowledge is absent, \"those also can attain to salvation who through no fault of their own do not know the Gospel of Christ or His Church, yet sincerely seek God and moved by grace strive by their deeds to do His will as it is known to them through the dictates of conscience.\"\nThe Catechism of the Catholic Church also states: \"Since Baptism signifies liberation from sin and from its instigator the devil, one or more exorcisms are pronounced over the candidate\". In the Roman Rite of the baptism of a child, the wording of the prayer of exorcism is: \"Almighty and ever-living God, you sent your only Son into the world to cast out the power of Satan, spirit of evil, to rescue man from the kingdom of darkness and bring him into the splendour of your kingdom of light. We pray for this child: set him (her) free from original sin, make him (her) a temple of your glory, and send your Holy Spirit to dwell with him (her). Through Christ our Lord.\"\nIn the Catholic Church by baptism all sins are forgiven, original sin and all personal sins. Given once for all, baptism cannot be repeated. Baptism not only purifies from all sins, but also makes the neophyte \"a new creature,\" an adopted son of God, who has become a \"partaker of the divine nature,\" member of Christ and co-heir with him, and a temple of the Holy Spirit. Sanctifying grace, the grace of justification, given by God by baptism, erases the original sin and personal actual sins.\nA valid baptism in the eyes of the Catholic Church, according to Canon 758 of the 1917 Code of Canon Law, are those done by water, by immersion, affusion (pouring), or aspersion (sprinkling), in the name (singular) of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit\u2014not three gods, but one God subsisting in three Persons. While sharing in the one divine essence, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are distinct, not simply three \"masks\" or manifestations of one divine being. The faith of the Church and of the individual Christian is based on a relationship with these three \"Persons\" of the one God. Adults can also be baptized through the Rite of Christian Initiation of Adults.\nIt is claimed that Pope Stephen I, St. Ambrose and Pope Nicholas I declared that baptisms in the name of \"Jesus\" only as well as in the name of \"Father, Son and Holy Spirit\" were valid. The correct interpretation of their words is disputed. Current canonical law requires the Trinitarian formula and water for validity.\nThe Church recognizes two equivalents of baptism with water: \"baptism of blood\" and \"baptism of desire\". Baptism of blood is that undergone by unbaptized individuals who are martyred for their faith, while baptism of desire generally applies to catechumens who die before they can be baptized. The Catechism of the Catholic Church describes these two forms:\nThe Church has always held the firm conviction that those who suffer death for the sake of the faith without having received Baptism are baptized by their death for and with Christ. This \"Baptism of blood\", like the desire for Baptism, brings about the fruits of Baptism without being a sacrament.\nFor catechumens who die before their Baptism, their explicit desire to receive it, together with repentance for their sins, and charity, assures them the salvation that they were not able to receive through the sacrament.\nThe Catholic Church holds that those who are ignorant of Christ's Gospel and of the Church, but who seek the truth and do God's will as they understand it, may be supposed to have an implicit desire for baptism and can be saved: Since Christ died for all, and since all men are in fact called to one and the same destiny, which is divine, we must hold that the Holy Spirit offers to all the possibility of being made partakers, in a way known to God, of the Paschal mystery.' Every man who is ignorant of the Gospel of Christ and of his Church, but seeks the truth and does the will of God in accordance with his understanding of it, can be saved. It may be supposed that such persons would have desired Baptism explicitly if they had known its necessity.\" As for unbaptized infants, the Church is unsure of their fate; \"the Church can only entrust them to the mercy of God\".\nUnited Protestants.\nIn United Protestant Churches, such as the United Church of Canada, Church of North India, Church of Pakistan, Church of South India, Protestant Church in the Netherlands, Uniting Church in Australia and United Church of Christ in Japan, baptism is a sacrament.\nEastern Orthodoxy.\nIn Eastern Orthodoxy, baptism is considered a sacrament and mystery which transforms the old and sinful person into a new and pure one, where the old life, the sins, any mistakes made are gone and a clean slate is given. In Greek and Russian Orthodox traditions, it is taught that through Baptism a person is united to the Body of Christ by becoming an official member of the Orthodox Church. During the service, the Orthodox priest blesses the water to be used. The catechumen (the one baptised) is fully immersed in the water three times in the name of the Trinity. This is considered to be a death of the \"old man\" by participation in the crucifixion and burial of Christ, and a rebirth into new life in Christ by participation in his resurrection. Properly a new name is given, which becomes the person's name.\nBabies of Orthodox families are normally baptized shortly after birth. Older converts to Orthodoxy are usually formally baptized into the Orthodox Church, though exceptions are sometimes made. Those who have left Orthodoxy and adopted a new religion, if they return to their Orthodox roots, are usually received back into the church through Chrismation.\nProperly and generally, the Mystery of Baptism is administered by bishops and other priests; however, in emergencies any Orthodox Christian can baptize. In such cases, should the person survive the emergency, it is likely that the person will be properly baptized by a priest at some later date. This is not considered to be a second baptism, nor is it imagined that the person is not already Orthodox, but rather it is a fulfillment of the proper form.\nThe service of Baptism in Greek Orthodox (and other Eastern Orthodox) churches has remained largely unchanged for over 1500 years. This fact is witnessed to by St. Cyril of Jerusalem (d. 386), who, in his \"Discourse on the Sacrament of Baptism\", describes the service in much the same way as is currently in use.\nJehovah's Witnesses.\nThe Christian Congregation of Jehovah's Witnesses believes that baptism should be performed by complete immersion (submersion) in water and only when an individual is old enough to understand its significance. They believe that water baptism is an outward symbol that a person has made an unconditional dedication through Jesus Christ to do the will of God. Only after baptism, is a person considered a full-fledged Witness, and an official member of the Christian Congregation. They consider baptism to constitute ordination as a minister.\nProspective candidates for baptism must express their desire to be baptized well in advance of a planned baptismal event, to allow for congregation elders to assess their suitability (regarding true repentance and conversion). Elders approve candidates for baptism if the candidates are considered to understand what is expected of members of the religion and to demonstrate sincere dedication to the faith.\nMost baptisms among Jehovah's Witnesses are performed at scheduled assemblies and conventions by elders and ministerial servants, in special pools, or sometimes oceans, rivers, or lakes, depending on circumstances, and rarely occur at local Kingdom Halls. Prior to baptism, at the conclusion of a pre-baptism talk, candidates must affirm two questions:\nOnly baptized males (elders or ministerial servants) may baptize new members. Baptizers and candidates wear swimsuits or other informal clothing for baptism, but are directed to avoid clothing that is considered undignified or too revealing. Generally, candidates are individually immersed by a single baptizer, unless a candidate has special circumstances such as a physical disability. In circumstances of extended isolation, a qualified candidate's dedication and stated intention to become baptized may serve to identify him as a member of Jehovah's Witnesses, even if immersion itself must be delayed. In rare instances, unbaptized males who had stated such an intention have reciprocally baptized each other, with both baptisms accepted as valid. Individuals who had been baptized in the 1930s and 1940s by female Witnesses due to extenuating circumstances, such as in concentration camps, were later re-baptized but still recognized their original baptism dates.\nChurch of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nIn The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), baptism is recognized as the first of several ordinances (rituals) of the gospel. In Mormonism, baptism has the main purpose of remitting the sins of the participant. It is followed by confirmation, which inducts the person into membership in the church and constitutes a baptism with the Holy Spirit. Latter-day Saints believe that baptism must be by full immersion, and by a precise ritualized ordinance: if some part of the participant is not fully immersed, or the ordinance was not recited verbatim, the ritual must be repeated. It typically occurs in a baptismal font.\nIn addition, members of the LDS Church do not believe a baptism is valid unless it is performed by a Latter-day Saint one who has proper authority (a priest or elder). Authority is passed down through a form of apostolic succession. All new converts to the faith must be baptized or re-baptized. Baptism is seen as symbolic both of Jesus' death, burial and resurrection and is also symbolic of the baptized individual discarding their \"natural\" self and donning a new identity as a disciple of Jesus.\nAccording to Latter-day Saint theology, faith and repentance are prerequisites to baptism. The ritual does not cleanse the participant of original sin, as Latter-day Saints do not believe the doctrine of original sin. Mormonism rejects infant baptism and baptism must occur after the age of accountability, defined in Latter-day Saint scripture as eight years old.\nLatter-day Saint theology also teaches baptism for the dead in which deceased ancestors are baptized vicariously by the living, and believe that their practice is what Paul wrote of in Corinthians 15:29. This occurs in Latter-day Saint temples.\nNon-practitioners.\nQuakers.\nQuakers (members of the Religious Society of Friends) do not believe in the baptism of either children or adults with water, rejecting all forms of outward sacraments in their religious life. Robert Barclay's \"Apology for the True Christian Divinity\" (a historic explanation of Quaker theology from the 17th century), explains Quakers' opposition to baptism with water thus:\nBarclay argued that water baptism was only something that happened until the time of Christ, but that now, people are baptised inwardly by the spirit of Christ, and hence there is no need for the external sacrament of water baptism, which Quakers argue is meaningless.\nSalvation Army.\nThe Salvation Army does not practice water baptism, or indeed other outward sacraments. William Booth and Catherine Booth, the founders of the Salvation Army, believed that many Christians had come to rely on the outward signs of spiritual grace rather than on grace itself. They believed what was important was spiritual grace itself. However, although the Salvation Army does not practice baptism, they are not opposed to baptism within other Christian denominations.\nHyperdispensationalism.\nThere are some Christians termed \"Hyperdispensationalists\" (Mid-Acts dispensationalism) who accept only Paul's Epistles as directly applicable for the church today. They do not accept water baptism as a practice for the church since Paul who was God's apostle to the nations was not sent to baptize. Ultradispensationalists (Acts 28 dispensationalism) who do not accept the practice of the Lord's supper, do not practice baptism because these are not found in the Prison Epistles. Both sects believe water baptism was a valid practice for covenant Israel. Hyperdispensationalists also teach that Peter's gospel message was not the same as Paul's. Hyperdispensationalists assert:\nWater baptism found early in the Book of Acts is, according to this view, now supplanted by the one baptism foretold by John the Baptist. Others make a distinction between John's prophesied baptism by Christ with the Holy Spirit and the Holy Spirit's baptism of the believer into the body of Christ; the latter being the one baptism for today. The one baptism for today, it is asserted, is the \"baptism of the Holy Spirit\" of the believer into the Body of Christ church.\nMany in this group also argue that John's promised baptism by fire is pending, referring to the destruction of the world by fire.\nOther Hyperdispensationalists believe that baptism was necessary until mid-Acts.\nDebaptism.\nMost Christian churches see baptism as a once-in-a-lifetime event that can be neither repeated nor undone. They hold that those who have been baptized remain baptized, even if they renounce the Christian faith by adopting a non-Christian religion or by rejecting religion entirely. But some other organizations and individuals are practicing debaptism.\nComparative summary.\nComparative Summary of Baptisms of Denominations of Christian Influence. (This section does not give a complete listing of denominations, and therefore, it only mentions a fraction of the churches practicing \"believer's baptism\".)\nOther initiation ceremonies.\nMany cultures practice or have practiced initiation rites, with or without the use of water, including the ancient Egyptian, the Hebraic/Jewish, the Babylonian, the Mayan, and the Norse cultures. The modern Japanese practice of Miyamairi is such as ceremony that does not use water. In some, such evidence may be archaeological and descriptive in nature, rather than a modern practice.\nMystery religion initiation rites.\nIn the 20th century, it was common for scholars to draw parallels between rites from mystery religions and baptism in Christianity. Apuleius, a 2nd-century Roman writer, described an initiation into the mysteries of Isis. The initiation was preceded by a normal bathing in the public baths and a ceremonial sprinkling by the priest of Isis, after which the candidate was given secret instructions in the temple of the goddess. The candidate then fasted for ten days from meat and wine, after which he was dressed in linen and led at night into the innermost part of the sanctuary, where the actual initiation, the details of which were secret, took place. On the next two days, dressed in the robes of his consecration, he participated in feasting. Apuleius describes also an initiation into the cult of Osiris and yet a third initiation, of the same pattern as the initiation into the cult of Isis, without mention of a preliminary bathing. The water-less initiations of Lucius, the character in Apuleius's story who had been turned into an ass and changed back by Isis into human form, into the successive degrees of the rites of the goddess was accomplished only after a significant period of study to demonstrate his loyalty and trustworthiness, akin to catechumenal practices preceding baptism in Christianity.\nSince the 1950s, scholars have dismissed the alleged connection between mystery rites and baptism. Jan Bremmer has written on the putative connection between rites from mystery religions and baptism;\nThere are thus some verbal parallels between early Christianity and the Mysteries, but the situation is rather different as regards early Christian ritual practice. Much ink was spilled around 1900 arguing that the rituals of baptism and of the Last Supper derived from the ancient Mysteries, but Nock and others after him have easily shown that these attempts grossly misinterpreted the sources. Baptism is clearly rooted in Jewish purificatory rituals, and cult meals are so widespread in antiquity that any specific derivation is arbitrary. It is truly surprising to see how long the attempts to find some pagan background to these two Christian sacraments have persevered. Secularising ideologies clearly played an important part in these interpretations but, nevertheless, they have helped to clarify the relations between nascent Christianity and its surroundings.\nGnostic Catholicism and Thelema.\nThe Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica, or Gnostic Catholic Church (the ecclesiastical arm of Ordo Templi Orientis), offers its Rite of Baptism to any person at least 11\u00a0years old. The ceremony is performed before a Gnostic Mass and represents a symbolic birth into the Thelemic community.\nBaptism of objects.\nThe word \"baptism\" or \"christening\" is sometimes used to describe the inauguration of certain objects for use.\nBoats and ships.\n\"Baptism of Ships\": at least since the time of the Crusades, rituals have contained a blessing for ships. The priest begs God to bless the vessel and protect those who sail in. The ship is usually sprinkled with holy water.\nChurch bells.\nThe name \"Baptism of Bells\" has been given to the blessing of (musical, especially church) bells, at least in France, since the 11th century. It is derived from the washing of the bell with holy water by the bishop, before he anoints it with the oil of the infirm without and with chrism within; a fuming censer is placed under it and the bishop prays that these sacramentals of the Church may, at the sound of the bell, put the demons to flight, protect from storms, and call the faithful to prayer.\nDolls.\n\"Baptism of Dolls\": the custom of 'dolly dunking' was once a common practice in parts of the United Kingdom, particularly in Cornwall where it has been revived in recent years.\nYazidi baptism.\nThe Yazidi baptism is called \"Mor kirin\" (literally: \"to seal\"). Traditionally, Yazidi children are baptised at birth with water from the \"Kaniya Sip\u00ee\" (\"White Spring\") at Lalish.\nMandaean baptism.\nMandaeans revere John the Baptist and practice frequent baptism (masbuta) as a ritual of purification, not of initiation. They are possibly the earliest people to practice baptism. Mandaeans undergo baptism on Sundays (\"Habshaba\"), wearing a white sacral robe (Rasta) and consists of a triple full immersion in water, a triple \"signing\" of the forehead with water and a triple drinking of water. The priest (Rabbi) then removes a ring made of myrtle worn by the baptized and places it on his/her forehead. This is then followed by a handshake (kushta-\"hand of truth\") with the priest. Living water is a requirement for baptism, therefore can only take place in rivers. All rivers are named \"Yardena\" (Jordan) and are believed to be nourished by the \"World of Light\". By the river bank, a Mandaean's forehead is anointed with sesame oil and partakes in a communion of bread and water. Baptism for Mandaeans allows for salvation by connecting with the \"World of Light\" and for forgiveness of sins."}
{"id": "4300", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4300", "title": "Bocce", "text": " (, or , ), sometimes anglicized as bocce ball, bocci or boccie, is a ball sport belonging to the boules family, closely related to British bowls and French , with a common ancestry from ancient games played in the Roman Empire. Developed into its present form in Italy, bocce is played around Europe and also in other areas with Italian immigrants, including Australia, North America, and South America, principally Argentina and Rio Grande do Sul. Initially played only by the Italian immigrants, the game has slowly become more popular with their descendants and more broadly.\nHistory.\nBocce is closely related to British bowls and French ', all having developed from games played in the Roman Empire. It was developed into its present form in Italy (where it is called ', the plural of the Italian word ' which means 'to bowl' in the sport sense), it is played around Europe and also in regions to which Italians have migrated, such as Australia, North America, and South America (where it is known as ', or ' ('Criollo balls') in Venezuela, ' in Brazil). The popularity of the game spread first amongst descendants of Italian migrants but has slowly spread into the wider community. The accessibility of bocce to people of all ages and abilities has seen it grow in popularity among Special Olympics programmes globally and it is now the third most played sport among Special Olympics athletes.\nGeographical spread.\nThe sport is also very popular on the eastern side of the Adriatic, especially in Croatia, Serbia, Montenegro, and Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the sport is known in Serbo-Croatian as ' ('playing '') or ' (colloquially also '). In Slovenia the sport is known as ' or colloquially 'playing '', or ' (from Italian ' and Venetian \"\", meaning 'balls').\nRules and play.\nBocce is traditionally played on natural soil and asphalt courts up to in length and wide. While the court walls are traditionally made of wood or stone, many social leagues and Special Olympics programs now use inflatable 'Packabocce' PVC courts due to their portability and ease of storage. Bocce balls can be made of wood (traditional), metal, baked clay, or various kinds of plastic. Unlike lawn bowls, bocce balls are spherical and have no inbuilt bias.\nA game can be conducted between two players, or two teams of two, three, or four. A match is started by a randomly chosen side being given the opportunity to throw a smaller ball, the jack (called a ' ('little bocce') or ' ('bullet' or 'little ball') in Italian, depending on local custom), from one end of the court into a zone in length, ending from the far end of the court. If the first team misses twice, the other team is awarded the opportunity to place the jack anywhere they choose within the prescribed zone. Casual play is common in reasonably flat areas of parks and yards lacking a Bocce court, but players should agree to the minimum and maximum distance the jack may be thrown before play begins.\nThe side that first attempted to place the jack is given the opportunity to bowl first. Once the first bowl has taken place, the other side has the opportunity to bowl. From then on, the side which does \"not\" have the ball closest to the jack has a chance to bowl, up until one side or the other has used their four balls. At that point, the other side bowls its remaining balls. The object of the game is for a team to get as many of its balls as possible closer to the target ball (jack, boccino, pallino) than the opposing team. The team with the closest ball to the jack is the only team that can score points in any frame. The scoring team receives one point for each of their balls that is closer to the jack than the closest ball of the other team. The length of a game varies by region but is typically from 7 to 13 points.\nPlayers are permitted to throw the ball in the air using an underarm action. This is generally used to knock either the jack or another ball away to attain a more favorable position. Tactics can get quite complex when players have sufficient control over the ball to throw or roll it accurately.\nVariants.\nBocce volo.\nA variation called ' uses a metal ball, which is thrown overhand (palm down), after a run-up to the throwing line. In that latter respect, it is similar to the French boules game ' also known as '. A French variant of the game is called ', and (lacking the run-up) is more similar in some respects to traditional \".\nBoccia.\nAnother development, for persons with disabilities, is called \". It is a shorter-range game, played with leather balls on an indoor, smooth surface. Boccia was first introduced to the Paralympics at the 1984 New York/Stoke Mandeville Summer Games, and is one of the only two Paralympic sports that do not have an Olympic counterpart (the other being goalball)."}
{"id": "4301", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4301", "title": "Beatmatching", "text": "Beatmatching or pitch cue is a disc jockey technique of pitch shifting or timestretching an upcoming track to match its tempo to that of the currently playing track, and to adjust them such that the beats (and, usually, the bars) are synchronised \u2014 e.g. the kicks and snares in two house records hit at the same time when both records are played simultaneously. Beatmatching is a component of beatmixing which employs beatmatching combined with equalization, attention to phrasing and track selection in an attempt to make a single mix that flows together and has a good structure.\nThe technique was developed to keep the people from leaving the dancefloor at the end of the song. These days it is considered basic among disc jockeys (DJs) in electronic dance music genres, and it is standard practice in clubs to keep the constant beat through the night, even if DJs change in the middle.\nBeatmatching is no longer considered a novelty, and new digital software has made the technique much easier to master.\nTechnique.\nThe beatmatching technique consists of the following steps:\nOne of the key things to consider when beatmatching is the tempo of both songs, and the musical theory behind the songs. Attempting to beatmatch songs with completely different beats per minute (BPM) will result in one of the songs sounding too fast or too slow.\nWhen beatmatching, a popular technique is to vary the equalization of both tracks. For example, when the kicks are occurring on the same beat, a more seamless transition can occur if the lower frequencies are taken out of one of the songs, and the lower frequencies of the other song is boosted. Doing so creates a smoother transition. \nPitch and tempo.\nThe pitch and tempo of a track are normally linked together: spin a disc 5% faster and both pitch and tempo will be 5% higher. However, some modern DJ software can change pitch and tempo independently using time-stretching and pitch-shifting, allowing harmonic mixing. There is also a feature in modern DJ software which may be called \"master tempo\" or \"key adjust\" which changes the tempo while keeping the original pitch.\nHistory.\nBeatmatching was invented by Francis Grasso in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Initially he was counting the tempo with a metronome and looking for records with the same tempo. Later a mixer was built for him by Alex Rosner which let him listen to any channel in the headphones independently of what was playing on the speakers; this became the defining feature of DJ mixers. That and turntables with pitch control enabled him to mix tracks with different tempo by changing the pitch of the \"cued\" (redirected to headphones) track to match its tempo with the track being played by ear. Essentially, the technique he originated hasn't changed since.\nThese days beat-matching is considered central to DJing, and features making it possible are a requirement for DJ-oriented players. In 1978, the Technics SL-1200MK2 turntable was released, whose comfortable and precise sliding pitch control and high torque direct drive motor made beat-matching easier and it became the standard among DJs. With the advent of the compact disc, DJ-oriented Compact Disc players with pitch control and other features enabling beat-matching (and sometimes scratching), dubbed CDJs, were introduced by various companies. More recently, software with similar capabilities has been developed to allow manipulation of digital audio files stored on computers using turntables with special vinyl records (e.g. Final Scratch, M-Audio Torq, Serato Scratch Live) or computer interface (e.g. Traktor DJ Studio, Mixxx, Virtual DJ). Other software including algorithmic beat-matching is Ableton Live, which allows for realtime music manipulation and deconstruction, or Mixmeister, a DJ Mixset creation tool. Freeware software such as Rapid Evolution can detect the beats per minute and determine the percent BPM difference between songs. \nThe change from pure hardware to software is on the rise, and big DJs are introducing new equipment to their kits such as the laptop, and dropping the difficulty of carrying hundreds of CDs with them. The creation of the mp3-player allowed DJs to have an alternative tool for DJIng. Limitations with mp3-player DJing equipment has meant that only second generation equipment such as the IDJ2 or the Cortex Dmix-300 have the pitch control that alters tempo and allows for beat-matching on a digital music player. However, recent additions to the Pioneer CDJ family, such as the CDJ-2000, allow mp3-player and other digital storage devices (such as external hard drives, SD cards and USB memory sticks) to be connected to the CDJ device via USB. This allows the DJ to make use of the beat-matching capabilities of the CDJ unit whilst playing digital music files from the mp3-player or other storage device.\nMost modern DJ hardware and software now offers a \"Sync\" feature which automatically adjusts the tempo between tracks being mixed so the DJ no longer needs to spend time and effort matching beats. This has caused some controversy in the DJ industry since almost anyone can beat-match thanks to the new function."}
{"id": "4303", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4303", "title": "Brighton University", "text": ""}
{"id": "4306", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4306", "title": "Beltane", "text": "Beltane () is the Gaelic May Day festival. Most commonly it is held on 1 May, or about halfway between the spring equinox and summer solstice. Historically, it was widely observed throughout Ireland, Scotland, and the Isle of Man. In Irish the name for the festival day is (), in Scottish Gaelic () and in Manx Gaelic /. It is one of the four Gaelic seasonal festivals\u2014along with Samhain, Imbolc and Lughnasadh\u2014and is similar to the Welsh .\nBeltane is mentioned in some of the earliest Irish literature and is associated with important events in Irish mythology. Also known as (\"first of summer\"), it marked the beginning of summer and it was when cattle were driven out to the summer pastures. Rituals were performed to protect the cattle, crops and people, and to encourage growth. Special bonfires were kindled, and their flames, smoke and ashes were deemed to have protective powers. The people and their cattle would walk around or between bonfires, and sometimes leap over the flames or embers. All household fires would be doused and then re-lit from the Beltane bonfire. These gatherings would be accompanied by a feast, and some of the food and drink would be offered to the . Doors, windows, byres and livestock would be decorated with yellow May flowers, perhaps because they evoked fire. In parts of Ireland, people would make a May Bush: typically a thorn bush or branch decorated with flowers, ribbons, bright shells and rushlights. Holy wells were also visited, while Beltane dew was thought to bring beauty and maintain youthfulness. Many of these customs were part of May Day or Midsummer festivals in other parts of Great Britain and Europe.\nBeltane celebrations had largely died out by the mid-20th century, although some of its customs continued and in some places it has been revived as a cultural event. Since the late 20th century, Celtic neopagans and Wiccans have observed Beltane or a related festival as a religious holiday. Neopagans in the Southern Hemisphere celebrate Beltane on or around 1 November.\nHistoric Beltane customs.\nBeltane was one of four Gaelic seasonal festivals: Samhain (~1 November), Imbolc (~1 February), Beltane (~1 May), and Lughnasadh (~1 August). Beltane marked the beginning of the pastoral summer season, when livestock were driven out to the summer pastures. Rituals were held at that time to protect them from harm, both natural and supernatural, and this mainly involved the \"symbolic use of fire\". There were also rituals to protect crops, dairy products and people, and to encourage growth. The (often referred to as spirits or fairies) were thought to be especially active at Beltane (as at Samhain) and the goal of many Beltane rituals was to appease them. Most scholars see the as remnants of the pagan gods and nature spirits. Beltane was a \"spring time festival of optimism\" during which \"fertility ritual again was important, perhaps connecting with the waxing power of the sun\".\nBefore the modern era.\nBeltane (the beginning of summer) and Samhain (the beginning of winter) are thought to have been the most important of the four Gaelic festivals. Sir James George Frazer wrote in \"The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion\" that the times of Beltane and Samhain are of little importance to European crop-growers, but of great importance to herdsmen. Thus, he suggests that halving the year at 1 May and 1 November dates from a time when the Celts were mainly a pastoral people, dependent on their herds.\nThe earliest mention of Beltane is in Old Irish literature from Gaelic Ireland. According to the early medieval texts (written by Cormac mac Cuilenn\u00e1in) and , Beltane was held on 1 May and marked the beginning of summer. The texts say that, to protect cattle from disease, the druids would make two fires \"with great incantations\" and drive the cattle between them.\nAccording to 17th-century historian Geoffrey Keating, there was a great gathering at the hill of Uisneach each Beltane in medieval Ireland, where a sacrifice was made to a god named Beil. Keating wrote that two bonfires would be lit in every district of Ireland, and cattle would be driven between them to protect them from disease. There is no reference to such a gathering in the annals, but the medieval \"Dindsenchas\" includes a tale of a hero lighting a holy fire on Uisneach that blazed for seven years. Ronald Hutton writes that this may \"preserve a tradition of Beltane ceremonies there\", but adds \"Keating or his source may simply have conflated this legend with the information in \"Sanas Chormaic\" to produce a piece of pseudo-history.\" Nevertheless, excavations at Uisneach in the 20th century found evidence of large fires and charred bones, showing it to have been ritually significant.\nBeltane is also mentioned in medieval Scottish literature. An early reference is found in the poem 'Peblis to the Play', contained in the Maitland Manuscripts of 15th- and 16th-century Scots poetry, which describes the celebration in the town of Peebles.\nModern era.\nFrom the late 18th century to the mid 20th century, many accounts of Beltane customs were recorded by folklorists and other writers. For example John Jamieson, in his \"Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language\" (1808) describes some of the Beltane customs which persisted in the 18th and early 19th centuries in parts of Scotland, which he noted were beginning to die out. In the 19th century, folklorist Alexander Carmichael (1832\u20131912), collected the Gaellic song \"Am Beannachadh Bealltain\" (\"The Beltane Blessing\") in his \"Carmina Gadelica\", which he heard from a crofter in South Uist. The first two verses were sung as follows:\n&lt;poem&gt;Beannaich, a Thrianailt fhioir nach gann, (Bless, O Threefold true and bountiful,)\nMi fein, mo cheile agus mo chlann, (Myself, my spouse and my children,)\nMo chlann mhaoth's am mathair chaomh 'n an ceann, (My tender children and their beloved mother at their head,)\nAir chlar chubhr nan raon, air airidh chaon nam beann, (On the fragrant plain, at the gay mountain sheiling,)\nAir chlar chubhr nan raon, air airidh chaon nam beam. (On the fragrant plain, at the gay mountain sheiling.)\nGach ni na m' fhardaich, no ta 'na m' shealbh, (Everything within my dwelling or in my possession,)\nGach buar is barr, gach tan is tealbh, (All kine and crops, all flocks and corn,)\nBho Oidhche Shamhna chon Oidhche Bheallt, (From Hallow Eve to Beltane Eve,)\nPiseach maith, agus beannachd mallt, (With goodly progress and gentle blessing,)\nBho mhuir, gu muir, agus bun gach allt, (From sea to sea, and every river mouth,)\nBho thonn gu tonn, agus bonn gach steallt. (From wave to wave, and base of waterfall.)&lt;/poem&gt;\nBonfires.\nBonfires continued to be a key part of the festival in the modern era. All hearth fires and candles would be doused before the bonfire was lit, generally on a mountain or hill. Ronald Hutton writes that \"To increase the potency of the holy flames, in Britain at least they were often kindled by the most primitive of all means, of friction between wood.\" In the 19th century, for example, John Ramsay described Scottish Highlanders kindling a need-fire or force-fire at Beltane. Such a fire was deemed sacred. In the 19th century, the ritual of driving cattle between two fires\u2014as described in \"Sanas Cormaic\" almost 1000 years before\u2014was still practised across most of Ireland and in parts of Scotland. Sometimes the cattle would be driven \"around\" a bonfire or be made to leap over flames or embers. The people themselves would do likewise. In the Isle of Man, people ensured that the smoke blew over them and their cattle. When the bonfire had died down, people would daub themselves with its ashes and sprinkle it over their crops and livestock. Burning torches from the bonfire would be taken home, where they would be carried around the house or boundary of the farmstead and would be used to re-light the hearth. From these rituals, it is clear that the fire was seen as having protective powers. Similar rituals were part of May Day, Midsummer or Easter customs in other parts of the British Isles and mainland Europe. According to Frazer, the fire rituals are a kind of imitative or sympathetic magic. According to one theory, they were meant to mimic the Sun and to \"ensure a needful supply of sunshine for men, animals, and plants\". According to another, they were meant to symbolically \"burn up and destroy all harmful influences\".\nFood was also cooked at the bonfire and there were rituals involving it. Alexander Carmichael wrote that there was a feast featuring lamb, and that formerly this lamb was sacrificed. In 1769, Thomas Pennant wrote that, in Perthshire, a caudle made from eggs, butter, oatmeal and milk was cooked on the bonfire. Some of the mixture was poured on the ground as a libation. Everyone present would then take an oatmeal cake, called the \"bannoch Bealltainn\" or \"Beltane bannock\". A bit of it was offered to the spirits to protect their livestock (one bit to protect the horses, one bit to protect the sheep, and so forth) and a bit was offered to each of the animals that might harm their livestock (one to the fox, one to the eagle, and so forth). Afterwards, they would drink the caudle.\nAccording to 18th century writers, in parts of Scotland there was another ritual involving the oatmeal cake. The cake would be cut and one of the slices marked with charcoal. The slices would then be put in a bonnet and everyone would take one out while blindfolded. According to one writer, whoever got the marked piece would have to leap through the fire three times. According to another, those present would pretend to throw them into the fire and, for some time afterwards, they would speak of them as if they were dead. This \"may embody a memory of actual human sacrifice\", or it may have always been symbolic. A similar ritual (i.e. of pretending to burn someone in the fire) was practised at spring and summer bonfire festivals in other parts of Europe.\nFlowers and May Bushes.\nYellow flowers such as primrose, rowan, hawthorn, gorse, hazel, and marsh marigold were placed at doorways and windows in 19th century Ireland, Scotland and Mann. Sometimes loose flowers were strewn at the doors and windows and sometimes they were made into bouquets, garlands or crosses and fastened to them. They would also be fastened to cows and equipment for milking and butter making. It is likely that such flowers were used because they evoked fire. Similar May Day customs are found across Europe.\nThe May Bush and May Bough was popular in parts of Ireland until the late 19th century. This was a small tree or branch\u2014typically hawthorn, rowan, holly or sycamore\u2014decorated with bright flowers, ribbons, painted shells, and so forth. The tree would either be decorated where it stood, or branches would be decorated and placed inside or outside the house. It may also be decorated with candles or rushlights. Sometimes a May Bush would be paraded through the town. In parts of southern Ireland, gold and silver hurling balls known as May Balls would be hung on these May Bushes and handed out to children or given to the winners of a hurling match. In Dublin and Belfast, May Bushes were brought into town from the countryside and decorated by the whole neighbourhood. Each neighbourhood vied for the most handsome tree and, sometimes, residents of one would try to steal the May Bush of another. This led to the May Bush being outlawed in Victorian times. In some places, it was customary to dance around the May Bush, and at the end of the festivities it may be burnt in the bonfire.\nThorn trees were seen as special trees and were associated with the \"aos s\u00ed\". The custom of decorating a May Bush or May Tree was found in many parts of Europe. Frazer believes that such customs are a relic of tree worship and writes: \"The intention of these customs is to bring home to the village, and to each house, the blessings which the tree-spirit has in its power to bestow.\" Emyr Estyn Evans suggests that the May Bush custom may have come to Ireland from England, because it seemed to be found in areas with strong English influence and because the Irish saw it as unlucky to damage certain thorn trees. However, \"lucky\" and \"unlucky\" trees varied by region, and it has been suggested that Beltane was the only time when cutting thorn trees was allowed. The practice of bedecking a May Bush with flowers, ribbons, garlands and bright shells is found among the Gaelic diaspora, most notably in Newfoundland, and in some Easter traditions on the East Coast of the United States.\nOther customs.\nHoly wells were often visited at Beltane, and at the other Gaelic festivals of Imbolc and Lughnasadh. Visitors to holy wells would pray for health while walking sunwise (moving from east to west) around the well. They would then leave offerings; typically coins or clooties (see clootie well). The first water drawn from a well on Beltane was seen as being especially potent, as was Beltane morning dew. At dawn on Beltane, maidens would roll in the dew or wash their faces with it. It would also be collected in a jar, left in the sunlight, and then filtered. The dew was thought to increase sexual attractiveness, maintain youthfulness, and help with skin ailments.\nPeople also took steps specifically to ward off or appease the \"aos s\u00ed\". Food was left or milk poured at the doorstep or places associated with the , such as 'fairy trees', as an offering. In Ireland, cattle would be brought to 'fairy forts', where a small amount of their blood would be collected. The owners would then pour it into the earth with prayers for the herd's safety. Sometimes the blood would be left to dry and then be burnt. It was thought that dairy products were especially at risk from harmful spirits. To protect farm produce and encourage fertility, farmers would lead a procession around the boundaries of their farm. They would \"carry with them seeds of grain, implements of husbandry, the first well water, and the herb vervain (or rowan as a substitute). The procession generally stopped at the four cardinal points of the compass, beginning in the east, and rituals were performed in each of the four directions\".\nThe festival persisted widely up until the 1950s, and in some places the celebration of Beltane continues today.\nRevival.\nAs a festival, Beltane had largely died out by the mid-20th century, although some of its customs continued and in some places it has been revived as a cultural event. In Ireland, Beltane fires were common until the mid-20th century, but the custom seems to have lasted to the present day only in County Limerick (especially in Limerick itself) and in Arklow, County Wicklow. However, the custom has been revived in some parts of the country. Some cultural groups have sought to revive the custom at Uisneach and perhaps at the Hill of Tara. The lighting of a community Beltane fire from which each hearth fire is then relit is observed today in some parts of the Gaelic diaspora, though in most of these cases it is a cultural revival rather than an unbroken survival of the ancient tradition. In some areas of Newfoundland, the custom of decorating the May Bush is also still extant. The town of Peebles in the Scottish Borders holds a traditional week-long Beltane Fair every year in June, when a local girl is crowned Beltane Queen on the steps of the parish church. Like other Borders festivals, it incorporates a Common Riding.\nSince 1988, a Beltane Fire Festival has been held every year during the night of 30 April on Calton Hill in Edinburgh, Scotland. While inspired by traditional Beltane, this festival is a modern arts and cultural event which incorporates myth and drama from a variety of world cultures and diverse literary sources. Two central figures of the Bel Fire procession and performance are the May Queen and the Green Man.\nNeo-Paganism.\nBeltane and Beltane-based festivals are held by some Neopagans. As there are many kinds of Neopaganism, their Beltane celebrations can be very different despite the shared name. Some try to emulate the historic festival as much as possible. Other Neopagans base their celebrations on many sources, the Gaelic festival being only one of them.\nNeopagans usually celebrate Beltane on 30 April \u2013 1 May in the Northern Hemisphere and 31 October \u2013 1 November in the Southern Hemisphere, beginning and ending at sunset. Some Neopagans celebrate it at the astronomical midpoint between the spring equinox and summer solstice (or the full moon nearest this point). In the Northern Hemisphere, this midpoint is when the ecliptic longitude of the Sun reaches 45 degrees. In 2014, this was on 5 May.\nCeltic Reconstructionist.\nCeltic Reconstructionists strive to reconstruct the pre-Christian religions of the Celts. Their religious practices are based on research and historical accounts, but may be modified slightly to suit modern life. They avoid modern syncretism and eclecticism (i.e. combining practises from unrelated cultures).\nCeltic Reconstructionists usually celebrate when the local hawthorn trees are in bloom. Many observe the traditional bonfire rites, to whatever extent this is feasible where they live. This may involve passing themselves and their pets or livestock between two bonfires, and bringing home a candle lit from the bonfire. If they are unable to make a bonfire or attend a bonfire ceremony, torches or candles may be used instead. They may decorate their homes with a May Bush, branches from blooming thorn trees, or equal-armed rowan crosses. Holy wells may be visited and offerings made to the spirits or deities of the wells. Traditional festival foods may also be prepared.\nWicca.\nWiccans use the name \"Beltane\" or \"Beltain\" for their May Day celebrations. It is one of the yearly Sabbats of the Wheel of the Year, following Ostara and preceding Midsummer. Unlike Celtic Reconstructionism, Wicca is syncretic and melds practices from many different cultures. In general, the Wiccan Beltane is more akin to the Germanic/English May Day festival, both in its significance (focusing on fertility) and its rituals (such as maypole dancing). Some Wiccans enact a ritual union of the May Lord and May Lady.\nName.\nIn Irish, the festival is usually called ('day of Beltane') while the month of May is (\"month of Beltane\"). In Scottish Gaelic, the festival is and the month is or . Sometimes the older Scottish Gaelic spelling is used. The word comes from ('first of summer'), an old alternative name for the festival. The term (Scottish) or (Irish), 'the bright or yellow day of Beltane', means the first of May. In Ireland it is referred to in a common folk tale as ; the first day of the week (Monday/) is added to emphasise the first day of summer.\nThe name is anglicized as Beltane, Beltain, Beltaine, Beltine and Beltany.\nEtymology.\nTwo modern etymologies have been proposed. Beltaine could derive from a Common Celtic , meaning 'bright fire'. The element might be cognate with the English word \"bale\" (as in ) meaning 'white' or 'shining'; compare Old English , and Lithuanian/Latvian /, found in the name of the Baltic; in Slavic languages or also means 'white', as in ('White Rus\u2032' or Belarus) or ('White Sea'). Alternatively, Beltaine might stem from a Common Celtic form reconstructed as , which would be cognate with the name of the Lithuanian goddess of death , both from an earlier *\"g\u02b7el-ti\u014dn-\", formed with the Proto-Indo-European root *\"\" ('suffering, death'). The absence of syncope (Irish sound laws rather predict a **\"Beltne\" form) is explained by the popular belief that Beltaine was a compound of the word for 'fire', \"tene\".\nIn \u00d3 Duinn\u00edn's Irish dictionary (1904), Beltane is referred to as which it explains is short for meaning 'first (of) summer'. The dictionary also states that is May Day and is the month of May.\nToponymy.\nThere are a number of place names in Ireland containing the word , indicating places where Bealtaine festivities were once held. It is often anglicised as \"Beltany\". There are three Beltanys in County Donegal, including the Beltany stone circle, and two in County Tyrone. In County Armagh there is a place called Tamnaghvelton/ ('the Beltane field'). Lisbalting/ ('the Beltane ringfort') is in County Tipperary, while Glasheennabaultina/ ('the Beltane stream') is the name of a stream joining the River Galey in County Limerick."}
{"id": "4312", "revid": "82818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4312", "title": "Bethlehem", "text": "Bethlehem (; , \"House of Meat\"; \"\", , \"House of Bread\"; ; ; initially named after Canaanite fertility god Lehem) is a city in the central West Bank, Palestine, about south of Jerusalem. Its population is approximately 25,000, and it is the capital of the Bethlehem Governorate. The economy is primarily tourist-driven, peaking during the Christmas season, when Christians make pilgrimage to the Church of the Nativity. The important holy site of Rachel's Tomb is at the northern entrance of Bethlehem, though not freely accessible to the city's own inhabitants and in general Palestinians living in the occupied West Bank due to the Israeli West Bank barrier.\nThe earliest known mention of Bethlehem was in the Amarna correspondence of 1350\u20131330 BCE when the town was inhabited by the Canaanites. The Hebrew Bible, which says that the city of Bethlehem was built up as a fortified city by Rehoboam, identifies it as the city David was from and where he was crowned as the king of Israel. The Gospels of Matthew and Luke identify Bethlehem as the birthplace of Jesus. Bethlehem was destroyed by the Emperor Hadrian during the second-century Bar Kokhba revolt; its rebuilding was promoted by Empress Helena, mother of Constantine the Great, who commissioned the building of its great Church of the Nativity in 327 CE. The church was badly damaged by the Samaritans, who sacked it during a revolt in 529, but was rebuilt a century later by Emperor Justinian I.\nBethlehem became part of Jund Filastin following the Muslim conquest in 637. Muslim rule continued in Bethlehem until its conquest in 1099 by a crusading army, who replaced the town's Greek Orthodox clergy with a Latin one. In the mid-13th century, the Mamluks demolished the city's walls, which were subsequently rebuilt under the Ottomans in the early 16th century. Control of Bethlehem passed from the Ottomans to the British at the end of World War I. Bethlehem came under Jordanian rule during the 1948 Arab-Israeli War and was later captured by Israel in the 1967 Six-Day War. Since the 1995 Oslo Accords, Bethlehem has been administered by the Palestinian Authority.\nFollowing an influx of refugees as a result of Israeli advances in the 1967 war, Bethlehem has a Muslim majority, but is still home to a significant Palestinian Christian community. It is now encircled and encroached upon by dozens of Israeli settlements and the Israeli West Bank barrier, which separates both Muslim and Christian communities from their land and livelihoods, and sees a steady exodus from both communities.\nHistory.\nCanaanite period.\nThe earliest reference to Bethlehem appears in the Amarna correspondence (c. 1400\u00a0BCE). In one of his six letters to Pharaoh, Abdi-Heba, the Egyptian-appointed governor of Jerusalem, appeals for aid in retaking \"Bit-La\u1e2bmi\" in the wake of disturbances by Apiru mercenaries: \"Now even a town near Jerusalem, Bit-Lahmi by name, a village which once belonged to the king, has fallen to the enemy ... Let the king hear the words of your servant Abdi-Heba, and send archers to restore the imperial lands of the king!\"\nIt is thought that the similarity of this name to its modern forms indicates that it was originally a settlement of Canaanites who shared a Semitic cultural and linguistic heritage with the later arrivals. \"La\u1e2bmu\" was the Akkadian god of fertility, worshipped by the Canaanites as \"Le\u1e25em\". Some time in the third millennium BCE, Canaanites erected a temple on the hill now known as the Hill of the Nativity, probably dedicated to Lehem. The temple, and subsequently the town that formed around it, would then have been known as \"Beyt Le\u1e25em\", \"House (Temple) of Lehem\". The Philistines later established a garrison there.\nBiblical scholar William F. Albright noted that the pronunciation of the name remained essentially the same for 3,500 years, but has meant different things: \"'Temple of the God Lakhmu' in Canaanite, 'House of Bread' in Hebrew and Aramaic, 'House of Meat' in Arabic.\"\nA burial ground discovered in spring 2013, and surveyed in 2015 by a joint Italian-Palestinian team found that the necropolis covered 3 hectares (more than 7 acres) and originally contained more than 100 tombs in use between roughly 2200 B.C. and 650 B.C. The archaeologists were able to identify at least 30 tombs.\nIsraelite and Judean period.\nArchaeological confirmation of Bethlehem as a city in the Kingdom of Judah was uncovered in 2012 at the archaeological dig at the City of David in the form of a \"bulla\" (seal impression in dried clay) in ancient Hebrew script that reads \"From the town of Bethlehem to the King,\" indicating that it was used to seal the string closing a shipment of grain, wine, or other goods sent as a tax payment in the 8th or 7th century BCE.\nBiblical scholars believe Bethlehem, located in the \"hill country\" of Judah, may be the same as the Biblical Ephrath, which means \"fertile\", as there is a reference to it in the Book of Micah as Bethlehem Ephratah. The Bible also calls it Beth-Lehem Judah, and the New Testament describes it as the \"City of David\". It is first mentioned in the Tanakh and the Bible as the place where the matriarch Rachel died and was buried \"by the wayside\" (Gen. 48:7). Rachel's Tomb, the traditional grave site, stands at the entrance to Bethlehem. According to the Book of Ruth, the valley to the east is where Ruth of Moab gleaned the fields and returned to town with Naomi. It was the home of Jesse, father of King David of Israel, and the site of David's anointment by the prophet Samuel. It was from the well of Bethlehem that three of his warriors brought him water when he was hiding in the cave of Adullam.\nWriting in the 4th century, the Pilgrim of Bordeaux reported that the sepulchers of David, Ezekiel, Asaph, Job, Jesse, and Solomon were located near Bethlehem. There has been no corroboration of this.\nClassical period.\nThe Gospel of Matthew Matthew 1:18-2:23 and the Gospel of Luke Luke 2:1-39 represent Jesus as having been born in Bethlehem. Modern scholars, however, regard the two accounts as contradictory and the Gospel of Mark, the earliest gospel, mentions nothing about Jesus having been born in Bethlehem, saying only that he came from Nazareth. Nonetheless, the tradition that Jesus was born in Bethlehem was prominent in the early church. In around 155, the apologist Justin Martyr recommended that those who doubted Jesus was really born in Bethlehem could go there and visit the very cave where he was supposed to have been born. The same cave is also referenced by the apocryphal Gospel of James and the fourth-century church historian Eusebius. After the Bar Kokhba revolt ( 132\u2013136 CE) was crushed, the Roman emperor Hadrian converted the Christian site above the Grotto into a shrine dedicated to the Greek god Adonis, to honour his favourite, the Greek youth Antinous.\nIn around 395 CE, the Church Father Jerome wrote in a letter: \"Bethlehem... belonging now to us... was overshadowed by a grove of Tammuz, that is to say, Adonis, and in the cave where once the infant Christ cried, the lover of Venus was lamented.\" Many scholars have taken this letter as evidence that the cave of the nativity over which the Church of the Nativity was later built had at one point been a shrine to the ancient Near Eastern fertility god Tammuz. Eusebius, however, mentions nothing about the cave having been associated with Tammuz and there are no other Patristic sources that suggest Tammuz had a shrine in Bethlehem. Peter Welten has argued that the cave was never dedicated to Tammuz and that Jerome misinterpreted Christian mourning over the Massacre of the Innocents as a pagan ritual over Tammuz's death. Joan E. Taylor has countered this contention by arguing that Jerome, as an educated man, could not have been so na\u00efve as to mistake Christian mourning over the Massacre of the Innocents as a pagan ritual for Tammuz.\nIn 326\u2013328, the empress Helena, consort of the emperor Constantius Chlorus, and mother of the emperor Constantine the Great, made a pilgrimage to Syra-Palaestina, in the course of which she visited the ruins of Bethlehem. The Church of the Nativity was built at her initiative over the cave where Jesus was purported to have been born. During the Samaritan revolt of 529, Bethlehem was sacked and its walls and the Church of the Nativity destroyed; they were rebuilt on the orders of the Emperor Justinian I. In 614, the Persian Sassanid Empire, supported by Jewish rebels, invaded Palestina Prima and captured Bethlehem. A story recounted in later sources holds that they refrained from destroying the church on seeing the magi depicted in Persian clothing in a mosaic.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn 637, shortly after Jerusalem was captured by the Muslim armies, 'Umar ibn al-Khatt\u0101b, the second Caliph, promised that the Church of the Nativity would be preserved for Christian use. A mosque dedicated to Umar was built upon the place in the city where he prayed, next to the church. Bethlehem then passed through the control of the Islamic caliphates of the Umayyads in the 8th century, then the Abbasids in the 9th century. A Persian geographer recorded in the mid-9th century that a well preserved and much venerated church existed in the town. In 985, the Arab geographer al-Muqaddasi visited Bethlehem, and referred to its church as the \"Basilica of Constantine, the equal of which does not exist anywhere in the country-round.\" In 1009, during the reign of the sixth Fatimid Caliph, al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah, the Church of the Nativity was ordered to be demolished, but was spared by local Muslims, because they had been permitted to worship in the structure's southern transept.\nIn 1099, Bethlehem was captured by the Crusaders, who fortified it and built a new monastery and cloister on the north side of the Church of the Nativity. The Greek Orthodox clergy were removed from their sees and replaced with Latin clerics. Up until that point the official Christian presence in the region was Greek Orthodox. On Christmas Day 1100, Baldwin I, first king of the Frankish Kingdom of Jerusalem, was crowned in Bethlehem, and that year a Latin episcopate was also established in the town.\nIn 1187, Saladin, the Sultan of Egypt and Syria who led the Muslim Ayyubids, captured Bethlehem from the Crusaders. The Latin clerics were forced to leave, allowing the Greek Orthodox clergy to return. Saladin agreed to the return of two Latin priests and two deacons in 1192. However, Bethlehem suffered from the loss of the pilgrim trade, as there was a sharp decrease of European pilgrims. William IV, Count of Nevers had promised the Christian bishops of Bethlehem that if Bethlehem should fall under Muslim control, he would welcome them in the small town of Clamecy in present-day Burgundy, France. As a result, the Bishop of Bethlehem duly took up residence in the hospital of Panthenor, Clamecy, in 1223. Clamecy remained the continuous 'in partibus infidelium' seat of the Bishopric of Bethlehem for almost 600 years, until the French Revolution in 1789.\nBethlehem, along with Jerusalem, Nazareth, and Sidon, was briefly ceded to the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem by a treaty between Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II and Ayyubid Sultan al-Kamil in 1229, in return for a ten-year truce between the Ayyubids and the Crusaders. The treaty expired in 1239, and Bethlehem was recaptured by the Muslims in 1244. In 1250, with the coming to power of the Mamluks under Rukn al-Din Baibars, tolerance of Christianity declined. Members of the clergy left the city, and in 1263 the town walls were demolished. The Latin clergy returned to Bethlehem the following century, establishing themselves in the monastery adjoining the Basilica of the Nativity. The Greek Orthodox were given control of the basilica and shared control of the Milk Grotto with the Latins and the Armenians.\nOttoman era.\nFrom 1517, during the years of Ottoman control, custody of the Basilica was bitterly disputed between the Catholic and Greek Orthodox churches. By the end of the 16th century, Bethlehem had become one of the largest villages in the District of Jerusalem, and was subdivided into seven quarters. The Basbus family served as the heads of Bethlehem among other leaders during this period. The Ottoman tax record and census from 1596 indicates that Bethlehem had a population of 1,435, making it the 13th largest village in Palestine at the time. Its total revenue amounted to 30,000 akce.\nBethlehem paid taxes on wheat, barley and grapes. The Muslims and Christians were organized into separate communities, each having its own leader. Five leaders represented the village in the mid-16th century, three of whom were Muslims. Ottoman tax records suggest that the Christian population was slightly more prosperous or grew more grain than grapes (the former being a more valuable commodity).\nFrom 1831 to 1841, Palestine was under the rule of the Muhammad Ali Dynasty of Egypt. During this period, the town suffered an earthquake as well as the destruction of the Muslim quarter in 1834 by Egyptian troops, apparently as a reprisal for the murder of a favored loyalist of Ibrahim Pasha. In 1841, Bethlehem came under Ottoman rule once again and remained so until the end of World War I. Under the Ottomans, Bethlehem's inhabitants faced unemployment, compulsory military service, and heavy taxes, resulting in mass emigration, particularly to South America. An American missionary in the 1850s reported a population of under 4,000, nearly all of whom belonged to the Greek Church. He also noted that a lack of water crippled the town's growth.\nSocin found from an official Ottoman village list from about 1870 that Bethlehem had a population of 179 Muslims in 59 houses, 979 \"Latins\" in 256 houses, 824 \"Greeks\" in 213 houses, and 41 Armenians in 11 houses, a total of 539 houses. The population count only included men. Hartmann found that Bethlehem had 520 houses.\nModern era.\nBethlehem was administered by the British Mandate from 1920 to 1948. In the United Nations General Assembly's 1947 resolution to partition Palestine, Bethlehem was included in the international enclave of Jerusalem to be administered by the United Nations. Jordan captured the city during the 1948 Arab-Israeli War. Many refugees from areas captured by Israeli forces in 1947\u201348 fled to the Bethlehem area, primarily settling in what became the official refugee camps of 'Azza (Beit Jibrin) and 'Aida in the north and Dheisheh in the south. The influx of refugees significantly transformed Bethlehem's Christian majority into a Muslim one.\nJordan retained control of the city until the Six-Day War in 1967, when Bethlehem was captured by Israel, along with the rest of the West Bank. Following the Six-Day War, Israel took control of the city.\nDuring the early months of First Intifada, on 5th May 1989, Milad Anton Shahin, aged 12, was shot dead by Israeli soldiers. Replying to a Member of Knesset in August 1990 Defence Minister Yitzak Rabin stated that a group of reservists in an observation post had come under attack by stone throwers. The commander of the post, a senior non-commissioned officer, fired two plastic bullets in deviation of operational rules. No evidence was found that this caused the boy's death. The officer was found guilty of illegal use of a weapon and sentenced to 5 months imprisonment, two of them actually in prison doing public service. He was also demoted. .\nOn December 21, 1995, Israeli troops withdrew from Bethlehem, and three days later the city came under the administration and military control of the Palestinian National Authority in accordance with the Interim Agreement on the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. During the Second Palestinian Intifada in 2000\u20132005, Bethlehem's infrastructure and tourism industry were damaged. In 2002, it was a primary combat zone in Operation Defensive Shield, a major military counteroffensive by the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF). The IDF besieged the Church of the Nativity, where dozens of Palestinian militants had sought refuge. The siege lasted 39 days. Several militants were killed. It ended with an agreement to exile 13 of the militants to foreign countries.\nToday, the city is surrounded by two bypass roads for Israeli settlers, leaving the inhabitants squeezed between thirty-seven Jewish enclaves, where a quarter of all West Bank settlers, roughly 170,000, live; the gap between the two roads is closed by the 8-metre high Israeli West Bank barrier, which cuts Bethlehem off from its sister city Jerusalem.\nChristian families that have lived in Bethlehem for hundreds of years are being forced to leave as land in Bethlehem is seized, and homes bulldozed, for construction of thousands of new Israeli homes. Land seizures for Israeli settlements have also prevented construction of a new hospital for the inhabitants of Bethlehem, as well as the barrier separating dozens of Palestinian families from their farmland and Christian communities from their places of worship.\nGeography.\nBethlehem is located at an elevation of about above sea level, higher than nearby Jerusalem. Bethlehem is situated on the southern portion in the Judean Mountains.\nThe city is located northeast of Gaza City and the Mediterranean Sea, west of Amman, Jordan, southeast of Tel Aviv, Israel and south of Jerusalem. Nearby cities and towns include Beit Safafa and Jerusalem to the north, Beit Jala to the northwest, Husan to the west, al-Khadr and Artas to the southwest, and Beit Sahour to the east. Beit Jala and the latter form an agglomeration with Bethlehem. The Aida and Azza refugee camps are located within the city limits.\nIn the center of Bethlehem is its old city. The old city consists of eight quarters, laid out in a mosaic style, forming the area around the Manger Square. The quarters include the Christian an-Najajreh, al-Farahiyeh, al-Anatreh, al-Tarajmeh, al-Qawawsa and Hreizat quarters and al-Fawaghreh \u2014 the only Muslim quarter. Most of the Christian quarters are named after the Arab Ghassanid clans that settled there. Al-Qawawsa Quarter was formed by Arab Christian emigrants from the nearby town of Tuqu' in the 18th century. There is also a Syriac quarter outside of the old city, whose inhabitants originate from Midyat and Ma'asarte in Turkey. The total population of the old city is about 5,000.\nClimate.\nBethlehem has a Mediterranean climate, with hot and dry summers and mild, wetter winters. Winter temperatures (mid-December to mid-March) can be cool and rainy. January is the coldest month, with temperatures ranging from 1\u00a0to\u00a013\u00a0degree Celsius (33\u201355\u00a0\u00b0F). From May through September, the weather is warm and sunny. August is the hottest month, with a high of 30 degrees Celsius (86\u00a0\u00b0F). Bethlehem receives an average of of rainfall annually, 70% between November and January.\nBethlehem's average annual relative humidity is 60% and reaches its highest rates between January and February. Humidity levels are at their lowest in May. Night dew may occur in up to 180 days per year. The city is influenced by the Mediterranean Sea breeze that occurs around mid-day. However, Bethlehem is affected also by annual waves of hot, dry, sandy and dust \"Khamaseen\" winds from the Arabian Desert, during April, May and mid-June.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nAccording to Ottoman tax records, Christians made up roughly 60% of the population in the early 16th century, while the Christian and Muslim population became equal by the mid-16th century. However, there were no Muslim inhabitants counted by the end of the century, with a recorded population of 287 adult male tax-payers. Christians, like all non-Muslims throughout the Ottoman Empire, were required to pay the jizya tax. In 1867, an American visitor describes the town as having a population of 3,000 to 4,000; of whom about 100 were Protestants, 300 were Muslims and \"the remainder belonging to the Latin and Greek Churches with a few Armenians.\" Another report from the same year puts the Christian population at 3,000, with an additional 50 Muslims. An 1885 source put the population at approximately 6,000 of \"principally Christians, Latins and Greeks\" with no Jewish inhabitants.\nIn 1948, the religious makeup of the city was 85% Christian, mostly of the Greek Orthodox and Roman Catholic denominations, and 13% Muslim. In the 1967 census taken by Israel authorities, the town of Bethlehem proper numbered 14,439 inhabitants, its 7,790 Muslim inhabitants represented 53.9% of the population, while the Christians of various denominations numbered 6,231 or 46.1%.\nIn the PCBS's 1997 census, the city had a population of 21,670, including a total of 6,570 refugees, accounting for 30.3% of the city's population. In 1997, the age distribution of Bethlehem's inhabitants was 27.4% under the age of 10, 20% from 10 to 19, 17.3% from 20 to 29, 17.7% from 30 to 44, 12.1% from 45 to 64 and 5.3% above the age of 65. There were 11,079 males and 10,594 females. In the 2007 PCBS census, Bethlehem had a population of 25,266, of which 12,753 were males and 12,513 were females. There were 6,709 housing units, of which 5,211 were households. The average household consisted of 4.8 family members.\nChristian population.\nAfter the Muslim conquest of the Levant in the 630s, the local Christians were Arabized even though large numbers were ethnically Arabs of the Ghassanid clans. Bethlehem's two largest Arab Christian clans trace their ancestry to the Ghassanids, including al-Farahiyyah and an-Najajreh. The former have descended from the Ghassanids who migrated from Yemen and from the Wadi Musa area in present-day Jordan and an-Najajreh descend from Najran. Another Bethlehem clan, al-Anatreh, also trace their ancestry to the Ghassanids.\nThe percentage of Christians in the town has been in a steady decline since the mid-twentieth century. In 1947, Christians made up 85% of the population, but by 1998, the figure had declined to 40%. In 2005, the mayor of Bethlehem, Victor Batarseh, explained that \"due to the stress, either physical or psychological, and the bad economic situation, many people are emigrating, either Christians or Muslims, but it is more apparent among Christians, because they already are a minority.\" The Palestinian Authority is officially committed to equality for Christians, although there have been incidents of violence against them by the Preventive Security Service and militant factions. In 2006, the Palestinian Centre for Research and Cultural Dialogue conducted a poll among the city's Christians according to which 90% said they had had Muslim friends, 73.3% agreed that the PNA treated Christian heritage in the city with respect and 78% attributed the exodus of Christians to the Israeli blockade. The only mosque in the Old City is the Mosque of Omar, located in the Manger Square. By 2016, the Christian population of Bethlehem had declined to only 16%.\nA study by Pew Research Center concluded that the decline in the Arab Christian population of the area was partially a result of a lower birth rate among Christians than among Muslims, but also partially due to the fact that Christians were more likely to emigrate from the region than any other religious group. Amon Ramnon, a researcher at the Jerusalem Institute for Policy Research, stated that the reason why more Christians were emigrating than Muslims is because it is easier for Arab Christians to integrate into western communities than for Arab Muslims, since many of them attend church-affiliated schools, where they are taught European languages. A higher percentage of Christians in the region are urban-dwellers, which also makes it easier for them to emigrate and assimilate into western populations. A statistical analysis of the Christian exodus cited lack of economic and educational opportunity, especially due to the Christians' middle-class status and higher education. Since the Second Intifada, 10% of the Christian population have left the city. However, it is likely that there are many other factors, most of which are shared with the Palestinian population as a whole.\nEconomy.\nShopping is a major attraction, especially during the Christmas season. The city's main streets and old markets are lined with shops selling Palestinian handicrafts, Middle Eastern spices, jewelry and oriental sweets such as baklawa. Olive wood carvings are the item most purchased by tourists visiting Bethlehem. Religious handicrafts include ornaments handmade from mother-of-pearl, as well as olive wood statues, boxes, and crosses. Other industries include stone and marble-cutting, textiles, furniture and furnishings. Bethlehem factories also produce paints, plastics, synthetic rubber, pharmaceuticals, construction materials and food products, mainly pasta and confectionery.\nCremisan Wine, founded in 1885, is a winery run by monks in the Monastery of Cremisan. The grapes are grown mainly in the al-Khader district. In 2007, the monastery's wine production was around 700,000\u00a0liters per year.\nIn 2008, Bethlehem hosted the largest economic conference to date in the Palestinian territories. It was initiated by Palestinian Prime Minister and former Finance Minister Salam Fayyad to convince more than a thousand businessmen, bankers and government officials from throughout the Middle East to invest in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. A total of 1.4\u00a0billion US dollars was secured for business investments in the Palestinian territories.\nTourism.\nTourism is Bethlehem's main industry. Unlike other Palestinian localities prior to 2000, the majority of the employed residents did not have jobs in Israel. More than 20% of the working population is employed in the industry. Tourism accounts for approximately 65% of the city's economy and 11% of the Palestinian National Authority. The city has more than two million visitors every year. Tourism in Bethlehem ground to a halt for over a decade after the Second Intifada, but gradually began to pick back up in the early 2010s.\nThe Church of the Nativity is one of Bethlehem's major tourist attractions and a magnet for Christian pilgrims. It stands in the center of the city \u2014 a part of the Manger Square \u2014 over a grotto or cave called the Holy Crypt, where Jesus is believed to have been born. Nearby is the Milk Grotto where the Holy Family took refuge on their Flight to Egypt and next door is the cave where St. Jerome spent thirty years creating the Vulgate, the dominant Latin version of the Bible until the Reformation.\nThere are over thirty hotels in Bethlehem. Jacir Palace, built in 1910 near the church, is one of Bethlehem's most successful hotels and its oldest. It was closed down in 2000 due to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but reopened in 2005 as the Jacir Palace InterContinental at Bethlehem.\nReligious significance and commemoration.\nBirthplace of Jesus.\nIn the New Testament, the Gospel of Luke says that Jesus' parents traveled from Nazareth to Bethlehem, where Jesus was born. The Gospel of Matthew mentions Bethlehem as the place of birth, and adds that King Herod was told that a 'King of the Jews' had been born in the town, prompting Herod to order the killing of all the boys who were two years old or under in the town and surrounding area. Joseph, warned of Herod's impending action by an angel of the Lord, decided to flee to Egypt with his family and then later settled in Nazareth after Herod's death.\nEarly Christian traditions describe Jesus as being born in Bethlehem: in one account, a verse in the Book of Micah is interpreted as a prophecy that the Messiah would be born there. The second century Christian apologist Justin Martyr stated in his \"Dialogue with Trypho\" (written c. 155\u2013161) that the Holy Family had taken refuge in a cave outside of the town and then placed Jesus in a manger. Origen of Alexandria, writing around the year 247, referred to a cave in the town of Bethlehem which local people believed was the birthplace of Jesus. This cave was possibly one which had previously been a site of the cult of Tammuz. The Gospel of Mark and the Gospel of John do not include a nativity narrative, but refer to him only as being from Nazareth. In a 2005 article in \"Archaeology\" magazine, archaeologist Aviram Oshri points to an absence of evidence for the settlement of Bethlehem near Jerusalem at the time when Jesus was born, and postulates that Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Galilee. In a 2011 article in \"Biblical Archaeology Review\" magazine, Jerome Murphy-O'Connor argues for the traditional position that Jesus was born in Bethlehem near Jerusalem.\nChristmas celebrations.\nChristmas rites are held in Bethlehem on three different dates: December 25 is the traditional date by the Roman Catholic and Protestant denominations, but Greek, Coptic and Syrian Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas on January 6 and Armenian Orthodox Christians on January 19. Most Christmas processions pass through Manger Square, the plaza outside the Basilica of the Nativity. Roman Catholic services take place in St. Catherine's Church and Protestants often hold services at Shepherds' Fields.\nOther religious festivals.\nBethlehem celebrates festivals related to saints and prophets associated with Palestinian folklore. One such festival is the annual Feast of Saint George (al-Khadr) on May 5\u20136. During the celebrations, Greek Orthodox Christians from the city march in procession to the nearby town of al-Khader to baptize newborns in the waters around the Monastery of St. George and sacrifice a sheep in ritual. The Feast of St. Elijah is commemorated by a procession to Mar Elias, a Greek Orthodox monastery north of Bethlehem.\nCulture.\nEmbroidery.\nThe women embroiderers of Bethlehem were known for their bridalwear. Bethlehem embroidery was renowned for its \"strong overall effect of colors and metallic brilliance.\" Less formal dresses were made of indigo fabric with a sleeveless coat (\"bisht\") from locally woven wool worn over top. Dresses for special occasions were made of striped silk with winged sleeves with a short \"taqsireh\" jacket known as the Bethlehem jacket. The taqsireh was made of velvet or broadcloth, usually with heavy embroidery.\nBethlehem work was unique in its use of couched gold or silver cord, or silk cord onto the silk, wool, felt or velvet used for the garment, to create stylized floral patterns with free or rounded lines. This technique was used for \"royal\" wedding dresses (\"thob malak\"), taqsirehs and the \"shatwehs\" worn by married women. It has been traced by some to Byzantium, and by others to the formal costumes of the Ottoman Empire's elite. As a Christian village, local women were also exposed to the detailing on church vestments with their heavy embroidery and silver brocade.\nMother-of-pearl carving.\nThe art of mother-of-pearl carving is said to have been a Bethlehem tradition since the 15th century when it was introduced by Franciscan friars from Italy. A constant stream of pilgrims generated a demand for these items, which also provided jobs for women. The industry was noted by Richard Pococke, who visited Bethlehem in 1727.\nCultural centers and museums.\nBethlehem is home to the Palestinian Heritage Center, established in 1991. The center aims to preserve and promote Palestinian embroidery, art and folklore. The International Center of Bethlehem is another cultural center that concentrates primarily on the culture of Bethlehem. It provides language and guide training, woman's studies and arts and crafts displays, and training.\nThe Bethlehem branch of the Edward Said National Conservatory of Music has about 500 students. Its primary goals are to teach children music, train teachers for other schools, sponsor music research, and the study of Palestinian folklore music.\nBethlehem has four museums: The Crib of the Nativity Theatre and Museum offers visitors 31 three-dimensional models depicting the significant stages of the life of Jesus. Its theater presents a 20-minute animated show. The Badd Giacaman Museum, located in the Old City of Bethlehem, dates back to the 18th century and is primarily dedicated to the history and process of olive oil production. Baituna al-Talhami Museum, established in 1972, contains displays of Bethlehem culture. The International Museum of Nativity was built by United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) to exhibit \"high artistic quality in an evocative atmosphere\".\nLocal government.\nBethlehem is the \"muhfaza\" (seat) or district capital of the Bethlehem Governorate.\nBethlehem held its first municipal elections in 1876, after the \"mukhtars\" (\"heads\") of the quarters of Bethlehem's Old City (excluding the Syriac Quarter) made the decision to elect a local council of seven members to represent each clan in the town. A Basic Law was established so that if the victor for mayor was a Catholic, his deputy should be of the Greek Orthodox community.\nThroughout, Bethlehem's rule by the British and Jordan, the Syriac Quarter was allowed to participate in the election, as were the Ta'amrah Bedouins and Palestinian refugees, hence ratifying the number of municipal members in the council to 11. In 1976, an amendment was passed to allow women to vote and become council members and later the voting age was increased from 21 to 25.\nThere are several branches of political parties on the council, including Communist, Islamist, and secular. The leftist factions of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) such as the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and the Palestinian People's Party (PPP) usually dominate the reserved seats. Hamas gained the majority of the open seats in the 2005 Palestinian municipal elections.\nMayors.\nIn the October 2012 municipal elections, Fatah member Vera Baboun won, becoming the first female mayor of Bethlehem.\nEducation.\nAccording to the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS), in 1997, approximately 84% of Bethlehem's population over the age of 10 was literate. Of the city's population, 10,414 were enrolled in schools (4,015 in primary school, 3,578 in secondary and 2,821 in high school). About 14.1% of high school students received diplomas. There were 135 schools in the Bethlehem Governorate in 2006; 100 run the Education Ministry of the Palestinian National Authority, seven by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) and 28 were private.\nBethlehem is home to Bethlehem University, a Catholic Christian co-educational institution of higher learning founded in 1973 in the Lasallian tradition, open to students of all faiths. Bethlehem University is the first university established in the West Bank, and can trace its roots to 1893 when the De La Salle Christian Brothers opened schools throughout Palestine and Egypt.\nTransportation.\nBethlehem has three bus stations owned by private companies which offer service to Jerusalem, Beit Jala, Beit Sahour, Hebron, Nahalin, Battir, al-Khader, al-Ubeidiya and Beit Fajjar. There are two taxi stations that make trips to Beit Sahour, Beit Jala, Jerusalem, Tuqu' and Herodium. There are also two car rental departments: Murad and 'Orabi. Buses and taxis with West Bank licenses are not allowed to enter Israel, including Jerusalem, without a permit.\nThe Israeli construction of the West Bank barrier has affected Bethlehem politically, socially, and economically. The barrier is located along the northern side of the town's built-up area, within distance of houses in the Aida refugee camp on one side, and the Jerusalem municipality on the other. Most entrances and exits from the Bethlehem agglomeration to the rest of the West Bank are currently subjected to Israeli checkpoints and roadblocks. The level of access varies based on Israeli security directives. Travel for Bethlehem's Palestinian residents from the West Bank into Jerusalem is regulated by a permit-system. Palestinians require a permit to enter the Jewish holy site of Rachel's Tomb. Israeli citizens are barred from entering Bethlehem and the nearby biblical Solomon's Pools.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nBethlehem is twinned with:"}
{"id": "4313", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4313", "title": "Benjamin", "text": "Benjamin () was the last-born of Jacob's thirteen children (12 sons and one daughter), and the second and last son of Rachel in Jewish, Christian and Islamic tradition. He was the progenitor of the Israelite Tribe of Benjamin. In the Hebrew Bible unlike Rachel's first son, Joseph, Benjamin was born in Canaan.\nIn the Samaritan Pentateuch, Benjamin's name appears as \"Binyaamem\" (). In the Quran, Benjamin is referred to as righteous young child, who remained with Jacob when the older brothers plotted against Joseph. Later rabbinic traditions name him as one of four ancient Israelites who died without sin, the other three being Chileab, Jesse and Amram.\nName.\nThe name is first mentioned in letters from King S\u00een-k\u0101\u0161id of Uruk (1801\u20131771 BC), who called himself \u201cKing of Amnanum\u201d and was a member of the Amorite tribal group the \u201cBinu-Jamina\u201d (single name \u201cBinjamin\u201d; Akkadian \"Mar-Jamin\"). The name means \"Sons / Son of the South\" and is linguistically related as a forerunner to the Old Testament name \"Benjamin\".\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, Benjamin's name arose when Jacob deliberately changed the name \"Benoni\", the original name of Benjamin, since Benoni was an allusion to Rachel's dying just after she had given birth, as it means \"son of my pain\". Textual scholars regard these two names as fragments of naming narratives coming from different sources - one being the Jahwist and the other being the Elohist.\nUnusually for one of the 12 tribes of Israel, the Bible does not explain the etymology of Benjamin's name. Medieval commentator Rashi gives two different explanations, based on Midrashic sources. \"Son of the south\", with south derived from the word for the right hand side, referring to the birth of Benjamin in Canaan, as compared with the birth of all the other sons of Jacob in Aram. Modern scholars have proposed that \"son of the south\" / \"right\" is a reference to the tribe being subordinate to the more dominant tribe of Ephraim. Alternatively, Rashi suggests it means \"son of days\", meaning a son born in Jacob's old age. The Samaritan Pentateuch consistently spells his name \"\u05d1\u05df \u05d9\u05de\u05d9\u05dd\", with a terminal mem, (\"Binyamim\"), which could be translated literally as \"spirit man\" but is in line with the interpretation that the name was a reference to the advanced age of Jacob when Benjamin was born.\nAccording to classical rabbinical sources, Benjamin was only born after Rachel had fasted for a long time, as a religious devotion with the hope of a new child as a reward. By then Jacob had become over 100 years old. Benjamin is treated as a young child in most of the Biblical narrative, but at one point is abruptly described as the father of ten sons. Textual scholars believe that this is the result of the genealogical passage, in which his children are named, being from a much later source than the Jahwist and Elohist narratives, which make up most of the Joseph narrative, and which consistently describe Benjamin as a child.\nBy allusion to the biblical Benjamin, in French and Spanish, \"Benjamin\" (\"benjamin\"/\"benjam\u00edn\", respectively) is a common noun meaning the youngest child of a family, especially a particularly favoured one (with a similar connotation to \"baby of the family\").\nIsraelites in Egypt.\nThe Torah's Joseph narrative, at a stage when Joseph is unrecognised by his brothers, describes Joseph as testing whether his brothers have reformed by secretly planting a silver cup in Benjamin's bag. Then, publicly searching the bags for it, and after \"finding\" it in Benjamin's possession, demanding that Benjamin become his slave as a punishment.\nThe narrative goes on to state that when Judah (on behalf of the other brothers) begged Joseph not to enslave Benjamin and instead enslave him, since enslavement of Benjamin would break Jacob's heart. This caused Joseph to recant and reveal his identity. The midrashic book of Jasher argues that prior to revealing his identity, Joseph asked Benjamin to find his missing brother (i.e. Joseph) via astrology, using an astrolabe-like tool. It continues by stating that Benjamin divined that the \"man on the throne\" was Joseph, so Joseph identified himself to Benjamin (but not the other brothers), and revealed his scheme (as in the Torah) to test how fraternal the other brothers were.\nSome classical rabbinical sources argue that Joseph identified himself for other reasons. In these sources, Benjamin swore an oath, on the memory of Joseph, that he was innocent of theft, and, when challenged about how believable the oath would be, explained that remembering Joseph was so important to him that he had named his sons in Joseph's honour. These sources go on to state that Benjamin's oath touched Joseph so deeply that Joseph was no longer able to pretend to be a stranger.\nIn the narrative, just prior to this test, when Joseph had first met all of his brothers (but not identified himself to them), he had held a feast for them; the narrative heavily implies that Benjamin was Joseph's favorite brother, since he is overcome with tears when he first meets Benjamin in particular, and he gives Benjamin five times as much food as he apportions to the others. According to textual scholars, this is really the Jahwist's account of the reunion after Joseph identifies himself, and the account of the threat to enslave Benjamin is just the Elohist's version of the same event, with the Elohist being more terse about Joseph's emotions towards Benjamin, merely mentioning that Benjamin was given five times as many gifts as the others.\nOrigin.\nBiblical scholars believe, due to their geographic overlap and their treatment in older passages, that Ephraim and Manasseh were originally considered one tribe, that of \"Joseph\". According to several biblical scholars, Benjamin was also originally part of this single tribe, but the biblical account of Joseph as his father became lost.\nThe description of Benjamin being born after the arrival in Canaan is thought by some scholars to refer to the tribe of Benjamin coming into existence by branching from the Joseph group after the tribe had settled in Canaan. A number of biblical scholars suspect that the distinction of the \"Joseph tribes\" (including Benjamin) is that they were the only Israelites which went to Egypt and returned, while the main Israelite tribes simply emerged as a subculture from the Canaanites and had remained in Canaan throughout.\nAccording to this view, the story of Jacob's visit to Laban to obtain a wife originated as a metaphor for this migration, with the property and family which were gained from Laban representing the gains of the Joseph tribes by the time they returned from Egypt. According to textual scholars, the Jahwist version of the Laban narrative only mentions the Joseph tribes, and Rachel, and does not mention the other tribal matriarchs whatsoever.\nBenjamin's sons.\nAccording to Genesis 46:21, Benjamin had ten sons: Bela, Becher, Ashbel, Gera, Naaman, Ehi, Rosh, Muppim, Huppim, and Ard. The name of his wife/wives are not given, but the Book of Jubilees calls his wife Ijasaka and the Book of Jasher mentions two wives, Mechalia the daughter of Aram and Aribath the daughter of Shomron. The classical rabbinical tradition adds that each son's name honors Joseph: \nThere is a disparity between the list given in Genesis 46 and that in Numbers 26, where the sons of Benjamin are listed along with the tribes they are the progenitors of.\nBecher, Gera, Ehi, and Rosh are omitted from the second list. Ard and Naaman, who are the sons of Benjamin according to Numbers 26, are listed as the sons of Belah and are the progenitors of the Ardites and the Naamites respectively.\nIn Islam.\nThough not named in the Quran, Benjamin (Arabic: \u0628\u0646\u064a\u0627\u0645\u064a\u0646 Binyam\u012bn) is referred to as the righteous youngest son of Ya'q\u016bb, in the narrative of Yusif in Islamic tradition. Apart from that, however, Islamic tradition does not provide much detail regarding Benjamin's life, and refers to him as being born from Jacob's wife Rah\u012bl. As with Jewish tradition, it also further links a connection between the names of Benjamin's children and Joseph."}
{"id": "4314", "revid": "327592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4314", "title": "Black Sabbath", "text": "Black Sabbath were an English rock band formed in Birmingham in 1968 by guitarist Tony Iommi, drummer Bill Ward, bassist Geezer Butler and vocalist Ozzy Osbourne. They are often cited as pioneers of heavy metal music. The band helped define the genre with releases such as \"Black Sabbath\" (1970), \"Paranoid\" (1970), and \"Master of Reality\" (1971). The band had multiple line-up changes following Osbourne's departure in 1979, with Iommi being the only constant member throughout its history.\nAfter previous iterations of the group called the Polka Tulk Blues Band and Earth, the band settled on the name Black Sabbath in 1969. They distinguished themselves through occult themes with horror-inspired lyrics and down-tuned guitars. Signing to Philips Records in November 1969, they released their first single, \"Evil Woman\" in January 1970. Their debut album, \"Black Sabbath\", was released the following month. Though it received a negative critical response, the album was a commercial success, leading to a follow-up record, \"Paranoid\", later in 1970. The band's popularity grew, and by 1973's \"Sabbath Bloody Sabbath\", critics were starting to respond favourably.\nOsbourne's excessive substance abuse led to his firing in 1979. He was replaced by former Rainbow vocalist Ronnie James Dio. Following two albums with Dio, Black Sabbath endured many personnel changes in the 1980s and 1990s that included vocalists Ian Gillan, Glenn Hughes, Ray Gillen and Tony Martin, as well as several drummers and bassists. Martin, who replaced Gillen in 1987, was the second longest serving vocalist and recorded three albums with Black Sabbath before his dismissal in 1991. That same year, Iommi and Butler were rejoined by Dio and drummer Vinny Appice to record \"Dehumanizer\" (1992). After two more studio albums with Martin, who replaced Dio in 1993, the band's original line-up reunited in 1997 and released a live album \"Reunion\" the following year; they continued to tour occasionally until 2005. Other than various back catalogue reissues and compilation albums, as well as the \"Mob Rules\"-era lineup reunited as Heaven &amp; Hell, there was no further activity under the Black Sabbath name for six years. They reunited in 2011 and released their final studio album and nineteenth overall, \"13\" (2013), which features all of the original members except Ward. During their farewell tour, the band played their in their home city of Birmingham on 4 February 2017.\nBlack Sabbath have sold over 70 million records worldwide as of 2013, making them one of the most commercially successful heavy metal bands. They were ranked by MTV as the \"Greatest Metal Band\" of all time, and placed second in VH1's \"100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock\" list. \"Rolling Stone\" magazine ranked them number 85 on their \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time\". Black Sabbath were inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2005 and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2006. They have also won two Grammy Awards for Best Metal Performance, and in 2019 the band were presented a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.\nHistory.\n1968\u20131969: Formation and early days.\nFollowing the break-up of their previous band Mythology in 1968, guitarist Tony Iommi and drummer Bill Ward sought to form a heavy blues rock band in Aston, Birmingham. They enlisted bassist Geezer Butler and vocalist Ozzy Osbourne, who had played together in a band called Rare Breed, Osbourne having placed an advertisement in a local music shop: \"OZZY ZIG Needs Gig \u2013 has own PA\". The new group was initially named the Polka Tulk Blues Band, the name taken either from a brand of talcum powder or an Indian/Pakistani clothing shop; the exact origin is confused. The Polka Tulk Blues Band included slide guitarist Jimmy Phillips, a childhood friend of Osbourne's, and saxophonist Alan \"Aker\" Clarke. After shortening the name to Polka Tulk, the band again changed their name to Earth (which Osbourne hated) and continued as a four-piece without Phillips and Clarke. Iommi became concerned that Phillips and Clarke lacked the necessary dedication and were not taking the band seriously. Rather than asking them to leave, they instead decided to break up and then quietly reformed the band as a four-piece. While the band was performing under the Earth title, they recorded several demos written by Norman Haines such as \"The Rebel\", \"Song for Jim\", and \"When I Came Down\". The demo titled \"Song for Jim\" was in reference to Jim Simpson. Simpson was a manager for the bands Bakerloo Blues Line and Tea &amp; Symphony, as well as being trumpet player for the group Locomotive. Simpson had recently started a new club named Henry's Blueshouse at The Crown Hotel in Birmingham and offered to let Earth play there after they agreed to waive the usual support band fee in return for free t-shirts. The audience response was positive and Simpson agreed to manage Earth.\nIn December 1968, Iommi abruptly left Earth to join Jethro Tull. Although his stint with the band would be short-lived, Iommi made an appearance with Jethro Tull on \"The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus\" TV show. Unsatisfied with the direction of Jethro Tull, Iommi returned to Earth by the end of the month. \"It just wasn't right, so I left\", Iommi said. \"At first I thought Tull were great, but I didn't much go for having a leader in the band, which was Ian Anderson's way. When I came back from Tull, I came back with a new attitude altogether. They taught me that to get on, you got to work for it.\"\nWhile playing shows in England in 1969, the band discovered they were being mistaken for another English group named Earth. They decided to change their name again. A cinema across the street from the band's rehearsal room was showing the 1963 horror film \"Black Sabbath\" starring Boris Karloff and directed by Mario Bava. While watching people line up to see the film, Butler noted that it was \"strange that people spend so much money to see scary movies\". Following that, Osbourne and Butler wrote the lyrics for a song called \"Black Sabbath\", which was inspired by the work of horror and adventure-story writer Dennis Wheatley, along with a vision that Butler had of a black silhouetted figure standing at the foot of his bed. Making use of the musical tritone, also known as \"the Devil's Interval\", the song's ominous sound and dark lyrics pushed the band in a darker direction, a stark contrast to the popular music of the late 1960s, which was dominated by flower power, folk music, and hippie culture. Judas Priest frontman Rob Halford has called the track \"probably the most evil song ever written\". Inspired by the new sound, the band changed their name to Black Sabbath in August 1969, and made the decision to focus on writing similar material, in an attempt to create the musical equivalent of horror films.\n1969\u20131971: \"Black Sabbath\" and \"Paranoid\".\nThe band's first show as Black Sabbath took place on 30 August 1969, in Workington, England. They were signed to Philips Records in November 1969, and released their first single, \"Evil Woman\" (a cover of a song by the band Crow), recorded at Trident Studios, through Philips subsidiary Fontana Records in January 1970. Later releases were handled by Philips' newly formed progressive rock label, Vertigo Records.\nBlack Sabbath's first major exposure came when the band appeared on John Peel's \"Top Gear\" radio show in 1969, performing \"Black Sabbath\", \"N.I.B.\", \"Behind the Wall of Sleep\", and \"Sleeping Village\" to a national audience in Great Britain shortly before recording of their first album commenced. Although the \"Evil Woman\" single failed to chart, the band were afforded two days of studio time in November to record their debut album with producer Rodger Bain. Iommi recalls recording live: \"We thought 'We have two days to do it and one of the days is mixing.' So we played live. Ozzy was singing at the same time, we just put him in a separate booth and off we went. We never had a second run of most of the stuff.\"\n\"Black Sabbath\" was released on Friday the 13th, February 1970, and reached number 8 in the UK Albums Chart. Following its U.S. and Canadian release in May 1970 by Warner Bros. Records, the album reached number 23 on the \"Billboard\" 200, where it remained for over a year. The album was given negative reviews by many critics. Lester Bangs dismissed it in a \"Rolling Stone\" review as \"discordant jams with bass and guitar reeling like velocitised speedfreaks all over each other's musical perimeters, yet never quite finding synch\". It sold in substantial numbers despite being panned, giving the band their first mainstream exposure. It has since been certified platinum in both U.S. by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) and in the UK by British Phonographic Industry (BPI), and is now generally accepted as the first heavy metal album.\nThe band returned to the studio in June 1970, just four months after \"Black Sabbath\" was released. The new album was initially set to be named \"War Pigs\" after the song \"War Pigs\", which was critical of the Vietnam War; however, Warner changed the title of the album to \"Paranoid\". The album's lead-off single, \"Paranoid\", was written in the studio at the last minute. Ward explains: \"We didn't have enough songs for the album, and Tony just played the [Paranoid] guitar lick and that was it. It took twenty, twenty-five minutes from top to bottom.\" The single was released in September 1970 and reached number four on the UK Singles Chart, remaining Black Sabbath's only top ten hit. The album followed in the UK in October 1970, where, pushed by the success of the \"Paranoid\" single, it made number one in the charts.\nThe U.S. release was held off until January 1971, as the \"Black Sabbath\" album was still on the charts at the time of \"Paranoid\"s UK release. Black Sabbath subsequently toured the United States for the first time and played their first U.S. show at a club called Ungano's at 210 West 70th Street in New York City. The album reached No. 12 in the U.S. in March 1971, and would go on to sell four million copies in the U.S., with virtually no radio airplay. Like \"Black Sabbath\", the album was panned by rock critics of the era, but modern-day reviewers such as AllMusic's Steve Huey cite \"Paranoid\" as \"one of the greatest and most influential heavy metal albums of all time\", which \"defined the sound and style of heavy metal more than any other record in rock history\". The album was ranked at No. 131 on \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. \"Paranoid\"s chart success allowed the band to tour the U.S. for the first time in October 1970, which spawned the release of the album's second single \"Iron Man\". Although the single failed to reach the top 40, \"Iron Man\" remains one of Black Sabbath's most popular songs, as well as the band's highest charting U.S. single until 1998's \"Psycho Man\".\n1971\u20131973: \"Master of Reality\" and \"Volume 4\".\nIn February 1971, after a one-off performance at the Myponga Pop Festival in Australia, Black Sabbath returned to the studio to begin work on their third album. Following the chart success of \"Paranoid\", the band were afforded more studio time, along with a \"briefcase full of cash\" to buy drugs. \"We were getting into coke, big time\", Ward explained. \"Uppers, downers, Quaaludes, whatever you like. It got to the stage where you come up with ideas and forget them, because you were just so out of it.\"\nProduction completed in April 1971, in July the band released \"Master of Reality\", just six months after the U.S. release of \"Paranoid\". The album reached the top ten in the U.S. and the United Kingdom, and was certified gold in less than two months, eventually receiving platinum certification in the 1980s and Double Platinum in the early 21st century. It contained Sabbath's first acoustic songs, alongside fan favourites such as \"Children of the Grave\" and \"Sweet Leaf\". Critical response of the era was generally unfavourable, with Lester Bangs delivering an ambivalent review of \"Master of Reality\" in \"Rolling Stone\", describing the closing \"Children of the Grave\" as \"na\u00efve, simplistic, repetitive, absolute doggerel \u2013 but in the tradition [of rock'n'roll]... The only criterion is excitement, and Black Sabbath's got it\". (In 2003, \"Rolling Stone\" would place the album at number 300 on their 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list.)\nFollowing the \"Master of Reality\" world tour in 1972, Sabbath took its first break in three years. As Ward explained: \"The band started to become very fatigued and very tired. We'd been on the road non-stop, year in and year out, constantly touring and recording. I think \"Master of Reality\" was kind of like the end of an era, the first three albums, and we decided to take our time with the next album.\"\nIn June 1972, the band reconvened in Los Angeles to begin work on their next album at the Record Plant. With more time in the studio, the album saw the band experimenting with new textures, such as strings, piano, orchestration and multi-part songs. Recording was plagued with problems, many as a result of substance abuse issues. Struggling to record the song \"Cornucopia\" after \"sitting in the middle of the room, just doing drugs\", Ward was nearly fired. \"I hated the song, there were some patterns that were just... horrible,\" the drummer said. \"I nailed it in the end, but the reaction I got was the cold shoulder from everybody. It was like 'Well, just go home, you're not being of any use right now.' I felt like I'd blown it, I was about to get fired\". Butler thought that the end product \"was very badly produced, as far as I was concerned. Our then-manager insisted on producing it, so he could claim production costs.\"\nThe album was originally titled \"Snowblind\" after the song of the same name, which deals with cocaine abuse. The record company changed the title at the last minute to \"Black Sabbath Vol. 4\". Ward observed, \"There was no Volume 1, 2 or 3, so it's a pretty stupid title really\". \"Vol. 4\" was released in September 1972 and, while critics were dismissive, it achieved gold status in less than a month, and was the band's fourth consecutive release to sell a million in the U.S. \"Tomorrow's Dream\" was released as a single \u2013 the band's first since \"Paranoid\" \u2013 but failed to chart.\nFollowing an extensive tour of the U.S., in 1973 the band travelled again to Australia, followed by a tour for the first time to New Zealand, before moving onto mainland Europe. \"The band were definitely in their heyday,\" recalled Ward, \"in the sense that nobody had burnt out quite yet.\"\n1973\u20131976: \"Sabbath Bloody Sabbath\" and \"Sabotage\".\nFollowing the \"Volume 4\" world tour, Black Sabbath returned to Los Angeles to begin work on their next release. Pleased with the \"Volume 4\" album, the band sought to recreate the recording atmosphere, and returned to the Record Plant studio in Los Angeles. With new musical innovations of the era, the band were surprised to find that the room they had used previously at the Record Plant was replaced by a \"giant synthesiser\". The band rented a house in Bel Air and began writing in the summer of 1973, but in part because of substance issues and fatigue, they were unable to complete any songs. \"Ideas weren't coming out the way they were on \"Volume 4\" and we really got discontent\" Iommi said. \"Everybody was sitting there waiting for me to come up with something. I just couldn't think of anything. And if I didn't come up with anything, nobody would do anything.\"\nAfter a month in Los Angeles with no results, the band opted to return to England. They rented Clearwell Castle in The Forest of Dean. \"We rehearsed in the dungeons and it was really creepy but it had some atmosphere, it conjured up things, and stuff started coming out again.\" While working in the dungeon, Iommi stumbled onto the main riff of \"Sabbath Bloody Sabbath\", which set the tone for the new material. Recorded at Morgan Studios in London by Mike Butcher and building off the stylistic changes introduced on \"Volume 4\", new songs incorporated synthesisers, strings, and complex arrangements. Yes keyboardist Rick Wakeman was brought in as a session player, appearing on \"Sabbra Cadabra\".\nIn November 1973, Black Sabbath began to receive positive reviews in the mainstream press after the release of \"Sabbath Bloody Sabbath\", with Gordon Fletcher of \"Rolling Stone\" calling the album \"an extraordinarily gripping affair\", and \"nothing less than a complete success.\" Later reviewers such as AllMusic's Eduardo Rivadavia cite the album as a \"masterpiece, essential to any heavy metal collection\", while also displaying \"a newfound sense of finesse and maturity.\" The album marked the band's fifth consecutive platinum selling album in the U.S., reaching number four on the United Kingdom charts, and number eleven in the U.S.\nThe band began a world tour in January 1974, which culminated at the California Jam festival in Ontario, California, on 6 April 1974. Attracting over 200,000 fans, Black Sabbath appeared alongside popular 1970s rock and pop bands Deep Purple, Eagles, Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer, Rare Earth, Seals &amp; Crofts, Black Oak Arkansas, and Earth, Wind &amp; Fire. Portions of the show were telecast on ABC Television in the U.S., exposing the band to a wider American audience. In the same year, the band shifted management, signing with notorious English manager Don Arden. The move caused a contractual dispute with Black Sabbath's former management, and while on stage in the U.S., Osbourne was handed a subpoena that led to two years of litigation.\nBlack Sabbath began work on their sixth album in February 1975, again in England at Morgan Studios in Willesden, this time with a decisive vision to differ the sound from \"Sabbath, Bloody Sabbath\". \"We could've continued and gone on and on, getting more technical, using orchestras and everything else which we didn't particularly want to. We took a look at ourselves, and we wanted to do a rock album \u2013 \"Sabbath, Bloody Sabbath\" wasn't a rock album, really.\" Produced by Black Sabbath and Mike Butcher, \"Sabotage\" was released in July 1975. As with its precursor, the album initially saw favourable reviews, with \"Rolling Stone\" stating \"\"Sabotage\" is not only Black Sabbath's best record since \"Paranoid\", it might be their best ever\", although later reviewers such as AllMusic noted that \"the magical chemistry that made such albums as \"Paranoid\" and \"Volume 4\" so special was beginning to disintegrate\".\n\"Sabotage\" reached the top 20 in both the U.S. and the United Kingdom, but was the band's first release not to achieve Platinum status in the U.S., only achieving Gold certification. Although the album's only single \"Am I Going Insane (Radio)\" failed to chart, \"Sabotage\" features fan favourites such as \"Hole in the Sky\", and \"Symptom of the Universe\". Black Sabbath toured in support of \"Sabotage\" with openers Kiss, but were forced to cut the tour short in November 1975, following a motorcycle accident in which Osbourne ruptured a muscle in his back. In December 1975, the band's record companies released a greatest hits album without input from the band, titled \"We Sold Our Soul for Rock 'n' Roll\". The album charted throughout 1976, eventually selling two million copies in the U.S.\n1976\u20131979: \"Technical Ecstasy\", \"Never Say Die!\", and Osbourne's departure.\nBlack Sabbath began work for their next album at Criteria Studios in Miami, Florida, in June 1976. To expand their sound, the band added keyboard player Gerald Woodroffe, who also had appeared to a lesser extent on \"Sabotage\". During the recording of \"Technical Ecstasy\", Osbourne admits that he began losing interest in Black Sabbath and began to consider the possibility of working with other musicians. Recording of \"Technical Ecstasy\" was difficult; by the time the album was completed Osbourne was admitted to Stafford County Asylum in Britain. It was released on 25 September 1976 to mixed reviews, and (for the first time) later music critics gave the album less favourable retrospective reviews; two decades after its release AllMusic gave the album two stars, and noted that the band was \"unravelling at an alarming rate\". The album featured less of the doomy, ominous sound of previous efforts, and incorporated more synthesisers and uptempo rock songs. \"Technical Ecstasy\" failed to reach the top 50 in the U.S., and was the band's second consecutive release not to achieve platinum status, although it was later certified gold in 1997. The album included \"Dirty Women\", which remains a live staple, as well as Ward's first lead vocal on the song \"It's Alright\". Touring in support of \"Technical Ecstasy\" began in November 1976, with openers Boston and Ted Nugent in the U.S., and completed in Europe with AC/DC in April 1977.\nIn late 1977, while in rehearsal for their next album, and just days before the band was set to enter the studio, Osbourne abruptly quit the band. Iommi called vocalist Dave Walker, a longtime friend of the band, who had previously been a member of Fleetwood Mac and Savoy Brown, and informed him that Osbourne had left the band. Walker, who was at that time fronting a band called Mistress, flew to Birmingham from California in late 1977 to write material and rehearse with Black Sabbath. On 8 January 1978, Black Sabbath made their only live performance with Walker on vocals, playing an early version of the song \"Junior's Eyes\" on the BBC Television programme \"Look! Hear!\" Walker later recalled that while in Birmingham he had bumped into Osbourne in a pub and came to the conclusion that Osbourne was not fully committed to leaving Black Sabbath. \"The last Sabbath albums were just very depressing for me\", Osbourne said. \"I was doing it for the sake of what we could get out of the record company, just to get fat on beer and put a record out.\" Walker has said that he wrote a lot of lyrics during his brief time in the band but none of them were ever used. If any recordings of this version of the band other than the \"Look! Hear!\" footage still exist, Walker says that he is not aware of them.\nOsbourne initially set out to form a solo project featuring former Dirty Tricks members John Frazer-Binnie, Terry Horbury, and Andy Bierne. As the new band were in rehearsals in January 1978, Osbourne had a change of heart and rejoined Black Sabbath. \"Three days before we were due to go into the studio, Ozzy wanted to come back to the band\", Iommi explained. \"He wouldn't sing any of the stuff we'd written with the other guy (Walker), so it made it very difficult. We went into the studio with basically no songs. We'd write in the morning so we could rehearse and record at night. It was so difficult, like a conveyor belt, because you couldn't get time to reflect on stuff. 'Is this right? Is this working properly?' It was very difficult for me to come up with the ideas and putting them together that quick.\"\nThe band spent five months at Sounds Interchange Studios in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, writing and recording what would become \"Never Say Die!\". \"It took quite a long time\", Iommi said. \"We were getting really drugged out, doing a lot of dope. We'd go down to the sessions, and have to pack up because we were too stoned, we'd have to stop. Nobody could get anything right, we were all over the place, everybody's playing a different thing. We'd go back and sleep it off, and try again the next day.\" The album was released in September 1978, reaching number twelve in the United Kingdom, and number 69 in the U.S. Press response was unfavourable and did not improve over time with Eduardo Rivadavia of AllMusic stating two decades after its release that the album's \"unfocused songs perfectly reflected the band's tense personnel problems and drug abuse.\" The album featured the singles \"Never Say Die\" and \"Hard Road\", both of which cracked the top 40 in the United Kingdom. The band also made their second appearance on the BBC's \"Top of the Pops\", performing \"Never Say Die\". It took nearly 20 years for the album to be certified Gold in the U.S.\nTouring in support of \"Never Say Die!\" began in May 1978 with openers Van Halen. Reviewers called Black Sabbath's performance \"tired and uninspired\", a stark contrast to the \"youthful\" performance of Van Halen, who were touring the world for the first time. The band filmed a performance at the Hammersmith Odeon in June 1978, which was later released on DVD as \"Never Say Die\". The final show of the tour, and Osbourne's last appearance with the band (until later reunions) was in Albuquerque, New Mexico on 11 December.\nFollowing the tour, Black Sabbath returned to Los Angeles and again rented a house in Bel Air, where they spent nearly a year working on new material for the next album. The entire band were abusing both alcohol and other drugs, but Iommi says Osbourne \"was on a totally different level altogether\". The band would come up with new song ideas but Osbourne showed little interest and would refuse to sing them. Pressure from the record label and frustrations with Osbourne's lack of input coming to a head, Iommi made the decision to fire Osbourne in 1979. Iommi believed the only options available were to fire Osbourne or break the band up completely. \"At that time, Ozzy had come to an end\", Iommi said. \"We were all doing a lot of drugs, a lot of coke, a lot of everything, and Ozzy was getting drunk so much at the time. We were supposed to be rehearsing and nothing was happening. It was like 'Rehearse today? No, we'll do it tomorrow.' It really got so bad that we didn't do anything. It just fizzled out.\" Drummer Ward, who was close with Osbourne, was chosen by Tony to break the news to the singer on 27 April 1979. \"I hope I was professional, I might not have been, actually. When I'm drunk I am horrible, I am horrid\", Ward said. \"Alcohol was definitely one of the most damaging things to Black Sabbath. We were destined to destroy each other. The band were toxic, very toxic.\"\n1979\u20131982: Dio joins, \"Heaven and Hell\", and \"Mob Rules\".\nSharon Arden (later Sharon Osbourne), daughter of Black Sabbath manager Don Arden, suggested former Rainbow vocalist Ronnie James Dio to replace Ozzy Osbourne in 1979. Don Arden was at this point still trying to convince Osbourne to rejoin the band, as he viewed the original line-up as the most profitable. Dio officially joined in June, and the band began writing their next album. With a notably different vocal style from Osbourne's, Dio's addition to the band marked a change in Black Sabbath's sound. \"They were totally different altogether\", Iommi explains. \"Not only voice-wise, but attitude-wise. Ozzy was a great showman, but when Dio came in, it was a different attitude, a different voice and a different musical approach, as far as vocals. Dio would sing \"across\" the riff, whereas Ozzy would follow the riff, like in \"Iron Man\". Ronnie came in and gave us another angle on writing.\"\nGeezer Butler temporarily left the band in September 1979 for personal reasons. According to Dio, the band initially hired Craig Gruber (with whom Dio had previously played while in Elf) on bass to assist with writing the new album. Gruber was soon replaced by Geoff Nicholls of Quartz. The new line-up returned to Criteria Studios in November to begin recording work, with Butler returning to the band in January 1980, and Nicholls moving to keyboards. Produced by Martin Birch, \"Heaven and Hell\" was released on 25 April 1980, to critical acclaim. Over a decade after its release AllMusic said the album was \"one of Sabbath's finest records, the band sounds reborn and re-energised throughout\". \"Heaven and Hell\" peaked at number 9 in the United Kingdom, and number 28 in the U.S., the band's highest charting album since \"Sabotage\". The album eventually sold a million copies in the U.S., and the band embarked on an extensive world tour, making their first live appearance with Dio in Germany on 17 April 1980.\nBlack Sabbath toured the U.S. throughout 1980 with Blue \u00d6yster Cult on the \"Black and Blue\" tour, with a show at Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, New York filmed and released theatrically in 1981 as \"Black and Blue\". On 26 July 1980, the band played to 75,000 fans at a sold-out Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum with Journey, Cheap Trick, and Molly Hatchet. The next day, the band appeared at the 1980 Day on the Green at Oakland Coliseum. While on tour, Black Sabbath's former label in England issued a live album culled from a seven-year-old performance, titled \"Live at Last\" without any input from the band. The album reached number five on the British charts, and saw the re-release of \"Paranoid\" as a single, which reached the top 20.\nOn 18 August 1980, after a show in Minneapolis, Ward quit the band. \"It was intolerable for me to get on the stage without Ozzy. And I drank 24 hours a day, my alcoholism accelerated\". Geezer Butler stated that after Ward's final show, the drummer came in drunk, stating that \"He might as well be a Martian\". Ward then got angry, packed his things and got on a bus to leave. Following Ward's sudden departure, the group hired drummer Vinny Appice. Further trouble for the band came during their 9 October 1980 concert at the Milwaukee Arena, which degenerated into a riot causing $10,000 in damages to the arena and resulted in 160 arrests. According to the Associated Press, \"the crowd of mostly adolescent males first became rowdy in a performance by the Blue Oyster Cult\" and then grew restless while waiting an hour for Black Sabbath to begin playing. A member of the audience threw a beer bottle that struck bassist Butler and effectively ended the show. \"The band then abruptly halted its performance and began leaving\" as the crowd rioted.\nThe band completed the \"Heaven and Hell\" world tour in February 1981, and returned to the studio to begin work on their next album. Black Sabbath's second studio album produced by Martin Birch and featuring Ronnie James Dio as vocalist \"Mob Rules\" was released in October 1981, to be well received by fans, but less so by the critics. \"Rolling Stone\" reviewer J. D. Considine gave the album one star, claiming \"\"Mob Rules\" finds the band as dull-witted and flatulent as ever\". Like most of the band's earlier work, time helped to improve the opinions of the music press, a decade after its release, AllMusic's Eduardo Rivadavia called \"Mob Rules\" \"a magnificent record\". The album was certified gold, and reached the top 20 on the UK charts. The album's title track \"The Mob Rules\", which was recorded at John Lennon's old house in England, also featured in the 1981 animated film \"Heavy Metal\", although the film version is an alternate take, and differs from the album version.\nUnhappy with the quality of 1980's \"Live at Last\", the band recorded another live album\u2014titled \"Live Evil\"\u2014during the \"Mob Rules\" world tour, across the United States in Dallas, San Antonio, and Seattle, in 1982. During the mixing process for the album, Iommi and Butler had a falling out with Dio. Misinformed by their then-current mixing engineer, Iommi and Butler accused Dio of sneaking into the studio at night to raise the volume of his vocals. In addition, Dio was not satisfied with the pictures of him in the artwork. Butler also accused Dio and Appice of working on a solo album during the album's mixing without telling the other members of Black Sabbath. \"Ronnie wanted more say in things,\" Iommi said. \"And Geezer would get upset with him and that is where the rot set in. \"Live Evil\" is when it all fell apart. Ronnie wanted to do more of his own thing, and the engineer we were using at the time in the studio didn't know what to do, because Ronnie was telling him one thing and we were telling him another. At the end of the day, we just said, 'That's it, the band is over'\". \"When it comes time for the vocal, nobody tells me what to do. Nobody! Because they're not as good as me, so I do what I want to do,\" Dio later said. \"I refuse to listen to \"Live Evil\", because there are too many problems. If you look at the credits, the vocals and drums are listed off to the side. Open up the album and see how many pictures there are of Tony, and how many there are of me and Vinny\".\nRonnie James Dio left Black Sabbath in November 1982 to start his own band, and took drummer Vinny Appice with him. \"Live Evil\" was released in January 1983, but was overshadowed by Ozzy Osbourne's platinum selling album \"Speak of the Devil\".\n1982\u20131984: Gillan as singer and \"Born Again\".\nThe remaining original members, Iommi and Butler, began auditioning singers for the band's next release. Deep Purple and Whitesnake's David Coverdale, Samson's Nicky Moore and Lone Star's John Sloman were all considered and Iommi states in his autobiography that Michael Bolton auditioned. The band settled on former Deep Purple vocalist Ian Gillan to replace Dio in December 1982. The project was initially not to be called Black Sabbath, but pressure from the record label forced the group to retain the name. The band entered The Manor Studios in Shipton-on-Cherwell, Oxfordshire, in June 1983 with a returned and newly sober Bill Ward on drums. \"That was the very first album that I ever did clean and sober,\" Ward recalled. \"I only got drunk \"after\" I finished all my work on the album \u2013 which wasn't a very good idea... Sixty to seventy per cent of my energy was taken up on learning how to get through the day without taking a drink and learning how to do things without drinking, and thirty per cent of me was involved in the album.\"\n\"Born Again\" (7 August 1983) was panned on release by critics. Despite this negative reception, it reached number four in the UK, and number 39 in the U.S. Even three decades after its release, AllMusic's Eduardo Rivadavia called the album \"dreadful\", noting that \"Gillan's bluesy style and humorous lyrics were completely incompatible with the lords of doom and gloom\".\nUnable to tour because of the pressures of the road, Ward quit the band. \"I fell apart with the idea of touring,\" he later explained. \"I got so much fear behind touring, I didn't talk about the fear, I drank behind the fear instead and that was a big mistake.\" He was replaced by former Electric Light Orchestra drummer Bev Bevan for the \"Born Again\" '83\u2013'84 world tour, (often unofficially referred to as the 'Feighn Death Sabbath '83\u2013'84' World Tour) which began in Europe with Diamond Head, and later in the U.S. with Quiet Riot and Night Ranger. The band headlined the 1983 Reading Festival in England, adding Deep Purple's \"Smoke on the Water\" to their encore.\nThe tour in support of \"Born Again\" included a giant set of the Stonehenge monument. In a move later parodied in the mockumentary \"This Is Spinal Tap\", the band made a mistake in ordering the set piece. Butler explained:\n1984\u20131987: Hiatus, Hughes as singer, \"Seventh Star\", and Gillen as singer.\nFollowing the completion of the \"Born Again\" tour in March 1984, vocalist Ian Gillan left Black Sabbath to re-join Deep Purple, which was reforming after a long hiatus. Bevan left at the same time, and Gillan remarked that he and Bevan were made to feel like \"hired help\" by Iommi. The band then recruited an unknown Los Angeles vocalist named David Donato and Ward once again rejoined the band. The new line-up wrote and rehearsed throughout 1984, and eventually recorded a demo with producer Bob Ezrin in October. Unhappy with the results, the band parted ways with Donato shortly after. Disillusioned with the band's revolving line-up, Ward left shortly after stating \"This isn't Black Sabbath\". Butler would quit Sabbath next in November 1984 to form a solo band. \"When Ian Gillan took over that was the end of it for me,\" he said. \"I thought it was just a joke and I just totally left. When we got together with Gillan it was not supposed to be a Black Sabbath album. After we had done the album we gave it to Warner Bros. and they said they were going to put it out as a Black Sabbath album and we didn't have a leg to stand on. I got really disillusioned with it and Gillan was really pissed off about it. That lasted one album and one tour and then that was it.\"\nOne vocalist whose status is disputed, both inside and outside Sabbath, is Christian evangelist and former Joshua frontman Jeff Fenholt. Fenholt insists he was a singer in Sabbath between January and May 1985. Iommi has never confirmed this. Fenholt gives a detailed account in Garry Sharpe-Young's book \"Sabbath Bloody Sabbath: The Battle for Black Sabbath\".\nFollowing both Ward's and Butler's exits, sole remaining original member Iommi put Sabbath on hiatus, and began work on a solo album with long-time Sabbath keyboardist Geoff Nicholls. While working on new material, the original Sabbath line-up agreed to a spot at Bob Geldof's Live Aid, performing at the Philadelphia show on 13 July 1985. This event \u2013 which also featured reunions of The Who and Led Zeppelin \u2013 marked the first time the original line-up had appeared on stage since 1978. \"We were all drunk when we did Live Aid,\" recalled Geezer Butler, \"but we'd all got drunk separately.\"\nReturning to his solo work, Iommi enlisted bassist Dave Spitz (ex-Great White), drummer Eric Singer and initially intended to use multiple singers, including Rob Halford of Judas Priest, former Deep Purple and Trapeze vocalist Glenn Hughes, and former Sabbath vocalist Ronnie James Dio. This plan didn't work as he forecasted. \"We were going to use different vocalists on the album, guest vocalists, but it was so difficult getting it together and getting releases from their record companies. Glenn Hughes came along to sing on one track and we decided to use him on the whole album.\"\nThe band spent the remainder of the year in the studio, recording what would become \"Seventh Star\" (1986). Warner Bros. refused to release the album as a Tony Iommi solo release, instead insisting on using the name Black Sabbath. Pressured by the band's manager, Don Arden, the two compromised and released the album as \"Black Sabbath featuring Tony Iommi\" in January 1986. \"It opened up a whole can of worms,\" Iommi explained. \"If we could have done it as a solo album, it would have been accepted a lot more.\" \"Seventh Star\" sounded little like a Sabbath album, incorporating instead elements popularised by the 1980s Sunset Strip hard rock scene. It was panned by the critics of the era, although later reviewers such as AllMusic gave album verdicts, calling the album \"often misunderstood and underrated\".\nThe new line-up rehearsed for six weeks preparing for a full world tour, although the band were eventually forced to use the Sabbath name. \"I was into the 'Tony Iommi project', but I wasn't into the Black Sabbath moniker,\" Hughes said. \"The idea of being in Black Sabbath didn't appeal to me \"whatsoever\". Glenn Hughes singing in Black Sabbath is like James Brown singing in Metallica. It wasn't gonna work.\" Just four days before the start of the tour, Hughes got into a bar fight with the band's production manager John Downing which splintered the singer's orbital bone. The injury interfered with Hughes' ability to sing, and the band brought in vocalist Ray Gillen to continue the tour with W.A.S.P. and Anthrax, although nearly half of the U.S. dates would be cancelled because of poor ticket sales.\nBlack Sabbath began work on new material in October 1986 at Air Studios in Montserrat with producer Jeff Glixman. The recording was fraught with problems from the beginning, as Glixman left after the initial sessions to be replaced by producer Vic Coppersmith-Heaven. Bassist Dave Spitz quit over \"personal issues\", and former Rainbow and Ozzy Osbourne bassist Bob Daisley was brought in. Daisley re-recorded all of the bass tracks, and wrote the album's lyrics, but before the album was complete, he left to join Gary Moore's backing band, taking drummer Eric Singer with him. After problems with second producer Coppersmith-Heaven, the band returned to Morgan Studios in England in January 1987 to work with new producer Chris Tsangarides. While working in the United Kingdom, new vocalist Ray Gillen abruptly left Black Sabbath to form Blue Murder with guitarist John Sykes (ex-Tygers of Pan Tang, Thin Lizzy, Whitesnake).\n1987\u20131990: Martin joins, \"The Eternal Idol\", \"Headless Cross\", and \"Tyr\".\nThe band enlisted heavy metal vocalist Tony Martin to re-record Gillen's tracks, and former Electric Light Orchestra drummer Bev Bevan to complete a few percussion overdubs. Before the release of the new album Black Sabbath accepted an offer to play six shows at Sun City, South Africa during the apartheid era. The band drew criticism from activists and artists involved with Artists United Against Apartheid, who had been boycotting South Africa since 1985. Drummer Bev Bevan refused to play the shows, and was replaced by Terry Chimes, formerly of the Clash.\nAfter nearly a year in production, \"The Eternal Idol\" was released on 8 December 1987 and ignored by contemporary reviewers. On-line internet era reviews were mixed. AllMusic said that \"Martin's powerful voice added new fire\" to the band, and the album contained \"some of Iommi's heaviest riffs in years.\" \"Blender\" gave the album two stars, claiming the album was \"Black Sabbath in name only\". The album would stall at No. 66 in the United Kingdom, while peaking at 168 in the U.S. The band toured in support of \"Eternal Idol\" in Germany, Italy and for the first time, Greece. In part due to a backlash from promoters over the South Africa incident, other European shows were cancelled. Bassist Dave Spitz left the band shortly before the tour, and was replaced by Jo Burt, formerly of Virginia Wolf.\nFollowing the poor commercial performance of \"The Eternal Idol\", Black Sabbath were dropped by both Vertigo Records and Warner Bros. Records, and signed with I.R.S. Records. The band took time off in 1988, returning in August to begin work on their next album. As a result of the recording troubles with \"Eternal Idol\", Tony Iommi opted to produce the band's next album himself. \"It was a completely new start\", Iommi said. \"I had to rethink the whole thing, and decided that we needed to build up some credibility again\". Iommi enlisted former Rainbow drummer Cozy Powell, long-time keyboardist Nicholls and session bassist Laurence Cottle, and rented a \"very cheap studio in England\".\nBlack Sabbath released \"Headless Cross\" in April 1989, and it was also ignored by contemporary reviewers, although AllMusic contributor Eduardo Rivadavia gave the album four stars and called it \"the finest non-Ozzy or Dio Black Sabbath album\". Anchored by the number 62 charting single \"Headless Cross\", the album reached number 31 on the UK charts, and number 115 in the U.S. Queen guitarist Brian May, a good friend of Iommi's, played a guest solo on the song \"When Death Calls\". Following the album's release the band added touring bassist Neil Murray, formerly of Colosseum II, National Health, Whitesnake, Gary Moore's backing band, and Vow Wow.\nThe unsuccessful \"Headless Cross\" U.S. tour began in May 1989 with openers Kingdom Come and Silent Rage, but because of poor ticket sales, the tour was cancelled after just eight shows. The European leg of the tour began in September, where the band were enjoying chart success. After a string of Japanese shows the band embarked on a 23 date Russian tour with Girlschool. Black Sabbath was one of the first bands to tour Russia, after Mikhail Gorbachev opened the country to western acts for the first time in 1989.\nThe band returned to the studio in February 1990 to record \"Tyr\", the follow-up to \"Headless Cross\". While not technically a concept album, some of the album's lyrical themes are loosely based on Norse mythology. \"Tyr\" was released on 6 August 1990, reaching number 24 on the UK albums chart, but was the first Black Sabbath release not to break the \"Billboard\" 200 in the U.S. The album would receive mixed internet-era reviews, with AllMusic noting that the band \"mix myth with metal in a crushing display of musical synthesis\", while \"Blender\" gave the album just one star, claiming that \"Iommi continues to besmirch the Sabbath name with this unremarkable collection\". The band toured in support of \"Tyr\" with Circus of Power in Europe, but the final seven United Kingdom dates were cancelled because of poor ticket sales. For the first time in their career, the band's touring cycle did not include U.S. dates.\n1990\u20131992: Dio rejoins and \"Dehumanizer\".\nWhile on his \"Lock Up the Wolves\" U.S. tour in August 1990, former Sabbath vocalist Ronnie James Dio was joined onstage at the Roy Wilkins Auditorium by Geezer Butler to perform \"Neon Knights\". Following the show, the two expressed interest in rejoining Sabbath. Butler convinced Iommi, who in turn broke up the current lineup, dismissing vocalist Tony Martin and bassist Neil Murray. \"I do regret that in a lot of ways,\" Iommi said. \"We were at a good point then. We decided to [reunite with Dio] and I don't even know why, really. There's the financial aspect, but that wasn't it. I seemed to think maybe we could recapture something we had.\"\nDio and Butler joined Iommi and Cozy Powell in autumn 1990 to begin the next Sabbath release. While rehearsing in November, Powell suffered a broken hip when his horse died and fell on the drummer's legs. Unable to complete the album, Powell was replaced by former drummer Vinny Appice, reuniting the \"Mob Rules\" lineup, and the band entered the studio with producer Reinhold Mack. The year-long recording was plagued with problems, primarily stemming from writing tension between Iommi and Dio. Songs were rewritten multiple times. \"It was just hard work,\" Iommi said. \"We took too long on it, that album cost us a million dollars, which is bloody ridiculous.\" Dio recalled the album as difficult, but worth the effort: \"It was something we had to really wring out of ourselves, but I think that's why it works. Sometimes you need that kind of tension, or else you end up making the Christmas album\".\nThe resulting \"Dehumanizer\" was released on 22 June 1992. In the U.S., the album was released on 30 June 1992 by Reprise Records, as Dio and his namesake band were still under contract to the label at the time. While the album received mixed , it was the band's biggest commercial success in a decade. Anchored by the top 40 rock radio single \"TV Crimes\", the album peaked at number 44 on the \"Billboard 200.\" The album also featured \"Time Machine\", a version of which had been recorded for the 1992 film \"Wayne's World\". Additionally, the perception among fans of a return of some semblance of the \"real\" Sabbath provided the band with much needed momentum.\nSabbath began touring in support of \"Dehumanizer\" in July 1992 with Testament, Danzig, Prong, and Exodus. While on tour, former vocalist Ozzy Osbourne announced his first retirement, and invited Sabbath to open for his solo band at the final two shows of his \"No More Tours\" tour in Costa Mesa, California. The band agreed, aside from Dio, who told Iommi, \"I'm not doing that. I'm not supporting a clown.\" Dio spoke of the situation years later:\nDio quit Sabbath following a show in Oakland, California on 13 November 1992, one night before the band were set to appear at Osbourne's retirement show. Judas Priest vocalist Rob Halford stepped in at the last minute, performing two nights with the band. Iommi and Butler joined Osbourne and former drummer Ward on stage for the first time since 1985's Live Aid concert, performing a brief set of Sabbath songs. This set the stage for a longer-term reunion of the original lineup, though that plan proved short-lived. \"Ozzy, Geezer, Tony and Bill announced the reunion of Black Sabbath \u2013 again,\" remarked Dio. \"And I thought that it was a great idea. But I guess Ozzy didn't think it was such a great idea\u2026 I'm never surprised when it comes to whatever happens with them. Never at all. They are very predictable. They don't talk.\"\n1992\u20131997: Martin rejoins, \"Cross Purposes\", and \"Forbidden\".\nDrummer Vinny Appice left the band following the reunion show to rejoin Ronnie James Dio's solo band, later appearing on Dio's \"Strange Highways\" and \"Angry Machines\". Iommi and Butler enlisted former Rainbow drummer Bobby Rondinelli, and reinstated former vocalist Tony Martin. The band returned to the studio to work on new material, although the project was not originally intended to be released under the Black Sabbath name. As Geezer Butler explains:\nUnder pressure from their record label, the band released their seventeenth studio album, \"Cross Purposes\", on 8 February 1994, under the Black Sabbath name. The album received mixed reviews, with \"Blender\" giving the album two stars, calling Soundgarden's 1994 album \"Superunknown\" \"a far better Sabbath album than this by-the-numbers potboiler\". AllMusic's Bradley Torreano called \"Cross Purposes\" \"the first album since \"Born Again\" that actually sounds like a real Sabbath record\". The album just missed the Top 40 in the UK reaching number 41, and also reached 122 on the \"Billboard\" 200 in the U.S. \"Cross Purposes\" contained the song \"Evil Eye\", which was co-written by Van Halen guitarist Eddie Van Halen, although uncredited because of record label restrictions. Touring in support of \"Cross Purposes\" began in February with Morbid Angel and Mot\u00f6rhead in the U.S. The band filmed a live performance at the Hammersmith Apollo on 13 April 1994, which was released on VHS accompanied by a CD, titled \"Cross Purposes Live\". After the European tour with Cathedral and Godspeed in June 1994, drummer Bobby Rondinelli quit the band and was replaced by original Black Sabbath drummer Ward for five shows in South America.\nFollowing the touring cycle for \"Cross Purposes\", bassist Geezer Butler quit the band for the second time. \"I finally got totally disillusioned with the last Sabbath album, and I much preferred the stuff I was writing to the stuff Sabbath were doing\". Butler formed a solo project called GZR, and released \"Plastic Planet\" in 1995. The album contained the song \"Giving Up the Ghost\", which was critical of Tony Iommi for carrying on with the Black Sabbath name, with the lyrics: \"You plagiarised and parodied / the magic of our meaning / a legend in your own mind / left all your friends behind / you can't admit that you're wrong / the spirit is dead and gone\" (\"I heard it's something about me...\" said Iommi. \"I had the album given to me a while back. I played it once, then somebody else had it, so I haven't really paid any attention to the lyrics... It's nice to see him doing his own thing \u2013 getting things off his chest. I don't want to get into a rift with Geezer. He's still a friend.\"\nFollowing Butler's departure, newly returned drummer Ward once again left the band. Iommi reinstated former members Neil Murray on bass and Cozy Powell on drums, effectively reuniting the 1990 \"Tyr\" line-up. The band enlisted Body Count guitarist Ernie C to produce the new album, which was recorded in London in autumn of 1994. The album featured a guest vocal on \"Illusion of Power\" by Body Count vocalist Ice-T. The resulting \"Forbidden\" was released on 8 June 1995, but failed to chart in the U.S. The album was widely panned by critics; AllMusic's Bradley Torreano said \"with boring songs, awful production, and uninspired performances, this is easily avoidable for all but the most enthusiastic fan\"; while \"Blender\" magazine called \"Forbidden\" \"an embarrassment... the band's worst album\".\nBlack Sabbath embarked on a world tour in July 1995 with openers Mot\u00f6rhead and Tiamat, but two months into the tour, drummer Cozy Powell left the band, citing health issues, and was replaced by former drummer Bobby Rondinelli. \"The members I had in the last lineup \u2013 Bobby Rondinelli, Neil Murray \u2013 they're great, great characters...\" Iommi told Sabbath fanzine \"Southern Cross\". \"That, for me, was an ideal lineup. I wasn't sure vocally what we should do, but Neil Murray and Bobby Rondinelli I really got on well with.\"\nAfter completing Asian dates in December 1995, Tony Iommi put the band on hiatus, and began work on a solo album with former Black Sabbath vocalist Glenn Hughes, and former Judas Priest drummer Dave Holland. The album was not officially released following its completion, although a widely traded bootleg called \"Eighth Star\" surfaced soon after. The album was officially released in 2004 as \"The 1996 DEP Sessions\", with Holland's drums re-recorded by session drummer Jimmy Copley.\nIn 1997, Tony Iommi disbanded the current line-up to officially reunite with Ozzy Osbourne and the original Black Sabbath line-up. Vocalist Tony Martin claimed that an original line-up reunion had been in the works since the band's brief reunion at Ozzy Osbourne's 1992 Costa Mesa show, and that the band released subsequent albums to fulfill their record contract with I.R.S. Records. Martin later recalled \"Forbidden\" (1995) as a \"filler album that got the band out of the label deal, rid of the singer, and into the reunion. However I wasn't privy to that information at the time\". I.R.S. Records released a compilation album in 1996 to fulfill the band's contract, titled \"The Sabbath Stones\", which featured songs from \"Born Again\" (1983) to \"Forbidden\" (1995).\n1997\u20132006: Osbourne rejoins and \"Reunion\".\nIn the summer of 1997, Iommi, Butler and Osbourne reunited to coheadline the Ozzfest tour alongside Osbourne's solo band. The line-up featured Osbourne's drummer Mike Bordin filling in for Ward. \"It started off with me going off to join Ozzy for a couple of numbers,\" explained Iommi, \"and then it got into Sabbath doing a short set, involving Geezer. And then it grew as it went on\u2026 We were concerned in case Bill couldn't make it \u2013 couldn't do it \u2013 because it was a lot of dates, and important dates\u2026 The only rehearsal that we had to do was for the drummer. But I think if Bill had come in, it would have took a lot more time. We would have had to focus a lot more on him.\"\nIn December 1997, the group was joined by Ward, marking the first reunion of the original quartet since Osbourne's 1992 \"retirement show\". This lineup recorded two shows at the Birmingham NEC, released as the double album \"Reunion\" on 20 October 1998. The album reached number eleven on the \"Billboard\" 200, went platinum in the U.S. and spawned the single \"Iron Man\", which won Sabbath their first Grammy Award in 2000 for Best Metal Performance, 30 years after the song was originally released. \"Reunion\" featured two new studio tracks, \"Psycho Man\" and \"Selling My Soul\", both of which cracked the top 20 of the \"Billboard Mainstream Rock Tracks\" chart.\nShortly before a European tour in the summer of 1998, Ward suffered a heart attack and was temporarily replaced by former drummer Vinny Appice. Ward returned for a U.S. tour with openers Pantera, which began in January 1999 and continued through the summer, headlining the annual Ozzfest tour. Following these appearances, the band was put on hiatus while members worked on solo material. Iommi released his first official solo album, \"Iommi\", in 2000, while Osbourne continued work on \"Down to Earth\" (2001).\nSabbath returned to the studio to work on new material with all four original members and producer Rick Rubin in the spring of 2001, but the sessions were halted when Osbourne was called away to finish tracks for his solo album in the summer. \"It just came to an end\u2026\" Iommi said. \"It's a shame because [the songs] were really Iommi commented on the difficulty getting all the members together to work:\nIn March 2002, Osbourne's Emmy-winning reality show \"The Osbournes\" debuted on MTV, and quickly became a worldwide hit. The show introduced Osbourne to a broader audience and to capitalise, the band's back catalogue label, Sanctuary Records released a double live album \"Past Lives\" (2002), which featured concert material recorded in the 1970s, including the \"Live at Last\" (1980) album. The band remained on hiatus until the summer of 2004 when they returned to headline Ozzfest 2004 and 2005. In November 2005, Black Sabbath were inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame, and in March 2006, after eleven years of eligibility\u2014Osbourne famously refused the Hall's \"meaningless\" initial nomination in 1999\u2014the band were inducted into the U.S. Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. At the awards ceremony Metallica played two Sabbath songs, \"Hole in the Sky\" and \"Iron Man\" in tribute.\n2006\u20132010: \"The Dio Years\" and Heaven &amp; Hell.\nWhile Ozzy Osbourne was working on new solo album material in 2006, Rhino Records released \"\", a compilation of songs culled from the four Black Sabbath releases featuring Ronnie James Dio. For the release, Iommi, Butler, Dio, and Appice reunited to write and record three new songs as Black Sabbath. \"The Dio Years\" was released on 3 April 2007, reaching number 54 on the \"Billboard\" 200, while the single \"The Devil Cried\" reached number 37 on the \"Mainstream Rock Tracks\" chart. Pleased with the results, Iommi and Dio decided to reunite the Dio era line-up for a world tour. While the line-up of Osbourne, Butler, Iommi, and Ward was still officially called Black Sabbath, the new line-up opted to call themselves Heaven &amp; Hell, after the album of the same title, to avoid confusion. When asked about the name of the group, Iommi stated \"it really is Black Sabbath, whatever we do... so everyone knows what they're getting [and] so people won't expect to hear 'Iron Man' and all those songs. We've done them for so many years, it's nice to do just all the stuff we did with Ronnie again.\"\nWard was initially set to participate, but dropped out before the tour began due to musical differences with \"a couple of the band members\". He was replaced by former drummer Vinny Appice, effectively reuniting the line-up that had featured on the \"Mob Rules\" (1981) and \"Dehumanizer\" (1992) albums.\nHeaven &amp; Hell toured the U.S. with openers Megadeth and Machine Head, and recorded a live album and DVD in New York on 30 March 2007, titled \"Live from Radio City Music Hall\". In November 2007, Dio confirmed that the band had plans to record a new studio album, which was recorded in the following year. In April 2008 the band announced the upcoming release of a new box set and their participation in the Metal Masters Tour, alongside Judas Priest, Mot\u00f6rhead and Testament. The box set, \"The Rules of Hell\", featuring remastered versions of all the Dio fronted Black Sabbath albums, was supported by the Metal Masters Tour. In 2009, the band announced the title of their debut studio album, \"The Devil You Know\", released on 28 April.\nOn 26 May 2009, Osbourne filed suit in a federal court in New York against Iommi alleging that he illegally claimed the band name. Iommi noted that he has been the only constant band member for its full 41-year career and that his bandmates relinquished their rights to the name in the 1980s, therefore claiming more rights to the name of the band. Although in the suit, Osbourne was seeking 50% ownership of the trademark, he said that he hoped the proceedings would lead to equal ownership among the four original members.\nIn March 2010, Black Sabbath announced that along with Metallica they would be releasing a limited edition single together to celebrate Record Store Day. It was released on 17 April 2010. Ronnie James Dio died on 16 May 2010 from stomach cancer. In June 2010, the legal battle between Ozzy Osbourne and Tony Iommi over the trademarking of the Black Sabbath name ended, but the terms of the settlement have not been disclosed.\n2010\u20132014: Second Osbourne reunion and \"13\".\nIn a January 2010 interview while promoting his biography \"I Am Ozzy\", Osbourne stated that although he would not rule it out, he was doubtful there would be a reunion with all four original members of the band. Osbourne stated: \"I'm not gonna say I've written it out forever, but right now I don't think there's any chance. But who knows what the future holds for me? If it's my destiny, fine.\" In July, Butler said that there would be no reunion in 2011, as Osbourne was already committed to touring with his solo band. However, by that August they had already met up to rehearse together, and continued to do so through the autumn.\nOn 11 November 2011, Iommi, Butler, Osbourne, and Ward announced that they were reuniting to record a new album with a full tour in support beginning in 2012. Guitarist Iommi was diagnosed with lymphoma on 9 January 2012, which forced the band to cancel all but two shows (Download Festival, and Lollapalooza Festival) of a previously booked European tour. It was later announced that an intimate show would be played in their hometown Birmingham. It was the first concert since the reunion and the only indoors concerts that year. In February 2012, drummer Ward announced that he would not participate further in the band's reunion until he was offered a \"signable contract\".\nOn 21 May 2012, at the O2 Academy in Birmingham, Black Sabbath played their first concert since 2005, with Tommy Clufetos playing the drums. In June, they performed at Download Festival at Donington Park in Leicestershire, England, followed by the last concert of the short tour at Lollapalooza Festival in Chicago. Later that month, the band started recording an album.\nOn 13 January 2013, the band announced that the album would be released in June under the title \"13\". Brad Wilk of Rage Against the Machine was chosen as the drummer, and Rick Rubin was chosen as the producer. Mixing of the album commenced in February. On 12 April 2013, the band released the album's track listing. The standard version of the album features eight new tracks, and the deluxe version features three bonus tracks.\nThe band's first single from \"13\", \"God Is Dead?\", was released on 19 April 2013. On 20 April 2013, Black Sabbath commenced their first Australia/New Zealand tour in 40 years followed by a North American Tour in Summer 2013. The second single of the album, \"End of the Beginning\", debuted on 15 May in a \"\" episode, where all three members appeared. In June 2013, \"13\" topped both the UK Albums Chart and the U.S. \"Billboard\" 200, becoming their first album to reach number one on the latter chart. In 2014, Black Sabbath received their first Grammy Award since 2000 with \"God Is Dead?\" winning Best Metal Performance.\nIn July 2013, Black Sabbath embarked on a North American Tour (for the first time since July 2001), followed by a Latin American tour in October 2013. In November 2013, the band started their European tour which lasted until December 2013. In March and April 2014, they made 12 stops in North America (mostly in Canada) as the second leg of their North American Tour before embarking in June 2014 on the second leg of their European tour, which ended with a concert at London's Hyde Park.\n2014\u20132017: Cancelled twentieth album, \"The End\", and disbandment.\nOn 29 September 2014, Osbourne told \"Metal Hammer\" that Black Sabbath would begin work on their twentieth studio album in early 2015 with producer Rick Rubin, followed by a final tour in 2016. In an April 2015 interview, however, Osbourne said that these plans \"could change\", and added, \"We all live in different countries and some of them want to work and some of them don't want to, I believe. But we are going to do another tour together.\"\nOn 3 September 2015, it was announced that Black Sabbath would embark on their final tour, titled The End, from January 2016 to February 2017. Numerous dates and locations across the U.S., Canada, Europe, Australia and New Zealand were announced. The final shows of The End tour took place at the Genting Arena in their home city of Birmingham, England on 2 and 4 February 2017. On 26 October 2015, it was announced the band consisting of Osbourne, Iommi and Butler would be returning to the Download Festival on 11 June 2016. Despite earlier reports that they would enter the studio before their farewell tour, Osbourne stated that there would not be another Black Sabbath studio album. However, an 8-track CD entitled \"The End\" was sold at dates on the tour. Along with some live recordings, the CD includes four unused tracks from the \"13\" sessions.\nOn 4 March 2016, Iommi discussed future re-releases of the Tony Martin-era catalogue: \"We've held back on the reissues of those albums because of the current Sabbath thing with Ozzy Osbourne, but they will certainly be happening... I'd like to do a couple of new tracks for those releases with Tony Martin... I'll also be looking at working on \"Cross Purposes\" and \"Forbidden\".\" Martin had suggested that this could coincide with the 30th anniversary of \"The Eternal Idol\", in 2017. In an interview that August, Martin added \"[Iommi] still has his cancer issues of course and that may well stop it all from happening but if he wants to do something I am ready.\" On 10 August 2016, Iommi revealed that his cancer was in remission.\nAsked in November 2016 about his plans after Black Sabbath's final tour, Iommi replied, \"I'll be doing some writing. Maybe I'll be doing something with the guys, maybe in the studio, but no touring.\" The band played their final concert on 4 February 2017 in Birmingham. The final song was streamed live on the band's Facebook page and fireworks went off as the band took their final bow. The band's final tour was not an easy one, as longstanding tensions between Osbourne and Iommi returned to the surface. Iommi stated that he would not rule out the possibility of one-off shows, \"I wouldn't write that off, if one day that came about. That's possible. Or even doing an album, 'cause then, again, you're in one place. But I don't know if that would happen.\" In an April 2017 interview, Butler revealed that Black Sabbath considered making a blues album as the follow-up to \"13\", but added that, \"the tour got in the way.\"\nOn 7 March 2017, Black Sabbath announced their disbandment through posts made on their official social media accounts.\n2017\u2013present: Post-Black Sabbath activities.\nIn a June 2018 interview with ITV News, Osbourne expressed interest in reuniting with Black Sabbath for a performance at the 2022 Commonwealth Games which is due to be held in their home city Birmingham. Iommi said that performing at the event as Black Sabbath would be \"a great thing to do to help represent Birmingham. I'm up for it. Let's see what happens.\" He also did not rule out the possibility for the band to reform only for a one-off performance rather than a full-length tour.\nIn September 2020, Osbourne stated in an interview that he was no longer interested in a reunion: \"Not for me. It's done. The only thing I do regret is not doing the last farewell show in Birmingham with Bill Ward. I felt really bad about that. It would have been so nice. I don't know what the circumstances behind it were, but it would have been nice. I've talked to Tony a few times, but I don't have any of the slightest interest in doing another gig. Maybe Tony's getting bored now.\" Butler also ruled out the possibility of any future Black Sabbath performances in an interview with Eonmusic on 10 November 2020, stating that the band is over: \"There will definitely be no more Sabbath. It's done.\" Iommi however, pondered the possibility of another reunion tour in an interview with the Mercury News, stating that he \"would like to play with the guys again\" and that he misses the audiences and stage. Bill Ward stated in an interview with Eddie Trunk that he no longer has the ability or chops to perform with Black Sabbath in concert, but expressed that he would love to make another album with Osbourne, Butler and Iommi.\nOn 30 September 2020, Black Sabbath announced a new Dr. Martens shoe collection. The partnership with the British footwear company celebrated the 50th anniversaries of the band's \"Black Sabbath\" and \"Paranoid\" albums, with the boots depicting artwork from Black Sabbath's eponymous debut album. On 13 January 2021, the band announced that they would reissue both \"Heaven &amp; Hell\" and \"Mob Rules\" as expanded deluxe editions on 5 March 2021, with unreleased material included.\nMusical style.\nBlack Sabbath were a heavy metal band, whose music has also been described as psychedelic rock, and acid rock. The band have also been cited as a key influence on genres including stoner rock, grunge, doom metal, and sludge metal. Early on, Black Sabbath were influenced by Cream, the Beatles, Fleetwood Mac, Jimi Hendrix, John Mayall &amp; the Bluesbreakers, Blue Cheer, Led Zeppelin, and Jethro Tull.\nAlthough Black Sabbath went through many line-ups and stylistic changes, their core sound focuses on ominous lyrics and doomy music, often making use of the musical tritone, also called the \"devil's interval\". While their Ozzy-era albums such as \"Sabbath Bloody Sabbath\" (1973) had slight compositional similarities to the progressive rock genre that was growing in popularity at the time, standing in stark contrast to popular music of the early 1970s, Black Sabbath's dark sound was dismissed by rock critics of the era. Much like many of their early heavy metal contemporaries, the band received virtually no airplay on rock radio.\nAs the band's primary songwriter, Tony Iommi wrote the majority of Black Sabbath's music, while Osbourne would write vocal melodies, and bassist Geezer Butler would write lyrics. The process was sometimes frustrating for Iommi, who often felt pressured to come up with new material: \"If I didn't come up with anything, nobody would do anything.\" On Iommi's influence, Osbourne later said:\nBeginning with their third album, \"Master of Reality\" (1971), Black Sabbath began to feature tuned-down guitars. In 1965, before forming Black Sabbath, guitarist Tony Iommi suffered an accident while working in a sheet metal factory, losing the tips of two fingers on his right hand. Iommi almost gave up music, but was urged by the factory manager to listen to Django Reinhardt, a jazz guitarist who lost the use of two fingers in a fire. Inspired by Reinhardt, Iommi created two thimbles made of plastic and leather to cap off his missing fingertips. The guitarist began using lighter strings, and detuning his guitar, to better grip the strings with his prosthesis. Early in the band's history Iommi experimented with different dropped tunings, including C tuning, or 3 semitones down, before settling on E/D tuning, or a half-step down from standard tuning.\nLegacy.\nBlack Sabbath has sold over 70 million records worldwide, including a RIAA-certified 15 million in the U.S. They are one of the most influential heavy metal bands of all time. The band helped to create the genre with ground-breaking releases such as \"Paranoid\" (1970), an album that \"Rolling Stone\" magazine said \"changed music forever\", and called the band \"the Beatles of heavy metal\". \"Time\" magazine called \"Paranoid\" \"the birthplace of heavy metal\", placing it in their Top 100 Albums of All Time.\nMTV placed Black Sabbath at number one on their Top Ten Heavy Metal Bands and VH1 placed them at number two on their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock. VH1 ranked Black Sabbath's \"Iron Man\" the number one song on their 40 Greatest Metal Songs countdown. \"Rolling Stone\" magazine ranked the band number 85 in their list of the \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time\". AllMusic's William Ruhlmann said:\nAccording to \"Rolling Stone\" Holly George-Warren, \"Black Sabbath was the heavy metal king of the 1970s.\" Although initially \"despised by rock critics and ignored by radio programmers\", the group sold more than 8 million albums by the end of that decade. \"\"The\" heavy metal band\u2026\" marvelled Ronnie James Dio. \"A band that didn't apologise for coming to town; it just stepped on buildings when it came to town.\"\nInfluence and innovation.\nBlack Sabbath have influenced many acts including Judas Priest, Iron Maiden, Diamond Head, Slayer, Metallica, Nirvana, Korn, Black Flag, Mayhem, Venom, Guns N' Roses, Soundgarden, Body Count, Alice in Chains, Anthrax, Disturbed, Death, Opeth, Pantera, Megadeth, the Smashing Pumpkins, Slipknot, Foo Fighters, Fear Factory, Candlemass, Godsmack, and Van Halen. Two gold selling tribute albums have been released, \"Nativity in Black Volume 1 &amp; 2\", including covers by Sepultura, White Zombie, Type O Negative, Faith No More, Machine Head, Primus, System of a Down, and Monster Magnet.\nMetallica's Lars Ulrich, who, along with bandmate James Hetfield inducted Black Sabbath into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2006, said \"Black Sabbath is and always will be synonymous with heavy metal\", while Hetfield said \"Sabbath got me started on all that evil-sounding shit, and it's stuck with me. Tony Iommi is the king of the heavy riff.\" Guns N' Roses guitarist Slash said of the \"Paranoid\" album: \"There's just something about that whole record that, when you're a kid and you're turned onto it, it's like a whole different world. It just opens up your mind to another dimension...\"Paranoid\" is the whole Sabbath experience; very indicative of what Sabbath meant at the time. Tony's playing style\u2014doesn't matter whether it's off \"Paranoid\" or if it's off \"Heaven and Hell\"\u2014it's very distinctive.\" Anthrax guitarist Scott Ian said \"I always get the question in every interview I do, 'What are your top five metal albums?' I make it easy for myself and always say the first five Sabbath albums.\"\nLamb of God's Chris Adler said: \"If anybody who plays heavy metal says that they weren't influenced by Black Sabbath's music, then I think that they're lying to you. I think all heavy metal music was, in some way, influenced by what Black Sabbath did.\" Judas Priest vocalist Rob Halford commented: \"They were and still are a groundbreaking band..you can put on the first Black Sabbath album and it still sounds as fresh today as it did 30-odd years ago. And that's because great music has a timeless ability: To me, Sabbath are in the same league as the Beatles or Mozart. They're on the leading edge of something extraordinary.\" On Black Sabbath's standing, Rage Against the Machine guitarist Tom Morello states: \"The heaviest, scariest, coolest riffs and the apocalyptic Ozzy wail are without peer. You can hear the despair and menace of the working-class Birmingham streets they came from in every kick-ass, evil groove. Their arrival ground hippy, flower-power psychedelia to a pulp and set the standard for all heavy bands to come.\" Phil Anselmo of Pantera and Down stated that \"Only a fool would leave out what Black Sabbath brought to the heavy metal genre\".\nAccording to Tracii Guns of L.A. Guns and former member of Guns N' Roses, the main riff of \"Paradise City\" by Guns N' Roses, from \"Appetite for Destruction\" (1987), was influenced by the song \"Zero the Hero\" from the \"Born Again\" album. King Diamond guitarist Andy LaRocque affirmed that the clean guitar part of \"Sleepless Nights\" from \"Conspiracy\" (1989) is inspired by Tony Iommi's playing on \"Never Say Die!\".\nIn addition to being pioneers of heavy metal, they also have been credited for laying the foundations for heavy metal subgenres stoner rock, sludge metal, thrash metal, black metal and doom metal as well as for alternative rock subgenre grunge. According to the critic Bob Gulla, the band's sound \"shows up in virtually all of grunge's most popular bands, including Nirvana, Soundgarden, and Alice in Chains\".\nTony Iommi has been credited as the pioneer of lighter gauge guitar strings. The tips of his fingers were severed in a steel factory, and while using thimbles (artificial finger tips) he found that standard guitar strings were too difficult to bend and play. He found that there was only one size of strings available, so after years with Sabbath he had strings custom made.\nCulturally, Black Sabbath have exerted a huge influence in both television and literature and have in many cases become synonymous with heavy metal. In the film \"Almost Famous\", Lester Bangs gives the protagonist an assignment to cover the band (plot point one) with the immortal line: 'Give me 500 words on Black Sabbath'. Contemporary music and arts publication \"Trebuchet Magazine\" has put this to practice by asking all new writers to write a short piece (500 words) on Black Sabbath as a means of proving their creativity and voice on a well documented subject.\nPersonnel.\nOriginal and classic line-up\nReferences.\n(229)https://blogcritics.org/greg-ginn-interview/?amp"}
{"id": "4315", "revid": "1023134449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4315", "title": "Buffalo Bills", "text": "The Buffalo Bills are a professional American football team based in the Buffalo\u2013Niagara Falls metropolitan area. They compete in the National Football League (NFL) as a member club of the league's American Football Conference (AFC) East division. The team plays its home games at Highmark Stadium in Orchard Park, New York. Founded in 1960 as a charter member of the American Football League (AFL), they joined the NFL in 1970 following the AFL\u2013NFL merger. The Bills' name is derived from an All-America Football Conference (AAFC) franchise from Buffalo that was in turn named after western frontiersman Buffalo Bill. Drawing much of its fanbase from Western New York, the Bills are the only NFL team that plays home games in that state. The franchise is owned by Terry and Kim Pegula, who purchased the Bills after the death of original owner Ralph Wilson in 2014.\nThe Bills won consecutive AFL Championships in 1964 and 1965, the only major professional sports championships from a team representing Buffalo. After joining the NFL, they became perennial postseason contenders during the late 1980s and 1990s. Their greatest success occurred between 1990 and 1993 when they appeared in a record four consecutive Super Bowls; an accomplishment often overshadowed by them losing each game. From 2000 to 2016, the Bills endured the longest active playoff drought of the four major North American professional sports, making them the last NFL franchise and the last in the four leagues to qualify for the postseason in the 21st century. They returned to consistent postseason contention by the late 2010s, although the Bills have not returned to the Super Bowl. Alongside the Minnesota Vikings, their four Super Bowl losses are the most among NFL franchises that have not won the championship.\nHistory.\nThe Bills began competitive play in 1960 as a charter member of the American Football League led by head coach Buster Ramsey and joined the NFL as part of the AFL\u2013NFL merger in 1970. The Bills won two consecutive American Football League titles in 1964 and 1965 with quarterback Jack Kemp and coach Lou Saban, but the club has yet to win a league championship since.\nOnce the AFL\u2013NFL merger took effect, the Bills became the second NFL team to represent the city; they followed the Buffalo All-Americans, a charter member of the league. Buffalo had been left out of the league since the All-Americans (by that point renamed the Bisons) folded in 1929; the Bills were no less than the third professional non-NFL team to compete in the city before the merger, following the Indians/Tigers of the early 1940s and an earlier team named the Bills, originally the Bisons, in the late 1940s in the All-America Football Conference (AAFC).\nFollowing the AFL\u2013NFL merger, the Bills were generally mediocre in the 1970s, but featured All-Pro running back O. J. Simpson. After being pushed to the brink of failure in the mid-1980s, the collapse of the United States Football League and a series of highly drafted players such as Jim Kelly (who initially played for the USFL instead of the Bills), Thurman Thomas, Bruce Smith and Darryl Talley allowed the Bills to rebuild into a perennial contender in the late 1980s through the mid-1990s, a period in which the team won four consecutive AFC Championships; the team nevertheless lost all four subsequent Super Bowls, records in both categories that still stand.\nThe rise of the division rival New England Patriots under Bill Belichick and Tom Brady, along with numerous failed attempts at rebuilding in the 2000s and 2010s, helped prevent the Bills from reaching the playoffs in seventeen consecutive seasons between 2000 and 2016, a 17-year drought that was the longest active playoff drought in all major professional sports at the time. On October 8, 2014, Buffalo Sabres owners Terry and Kim Pegula received unanimous approval to acquire the Bills during the NFL owners' meetings, becoming the second ownership group of the team after team founder Ralph Wilson. Under head coach Sean McDermott, the Bills broke the playoff drought, appearing in the playoffs for three of the next four seasons. The team earned its first division championship and playoff wins since 1995 during the 2020 season, aided by Brady's departure to Tampa Bay and out of the AFC East as well as the Bills' own development of a core of talent including Josh Allen, Stefon Diggs, and Tre'Davious White.\nLogos and uniforms.\nFor their first two seasons, the Bills wore uniforms based on those of the Detroit Lions at the time. Ralph Wilson had been a minority owner of the Lions before founding the Bills.\nThe team's original colors were Honolulu blue, silver and white, and the helmets were silver with no striping. There was no logo on the helmet, which displayed the players' numbers on each side.\nIn 1962, the standing red bison was designated as the logo and took its place on a white helmet. In 1962, the team's colors also changed to red, white, and blue. The team switched to blue jerseys with red and white shoulder stripes similar to those worn by the Buffalo Bisons AHL hockey team of the same era. The helmets were white with a red center stripe. The jerseys again saw a change in 1964 when the shoulder stripes were replaced by a distinctive stripe pattern on the sleeves consisting of four stripes, two thicker inner stripes and two thinner outer stripes all bordered by red piping. By 1965, red and blue center stripes were put on the helmets.\nThe Bills introduced blue pants worn with the white jerseys in 1973, the last year of the standing buffalo helmet. The blue pants remained through 1985. The face mask on the helmet was blue from 1974 through 1986 before changing to white.\nThe standing bison logo was replaced by a blue charging one with a red slanting stripe streaming from its horn. The newer emblem, which is still the primary one used by the franchise, was designed by aerospace designer Stevens Wright in 1974.\nIn 1984, the helmet's shell color was changed from white to red, primarily to help Bills quarterback Joe Ferguson distinguish them more readily from three of their division rivals at that time, the Baltimore Colts, the Miami Dolphins, and the New England Patriots, who all also wore white helmets at that point. Ferguson said \"Everyone we played had white helmets at that time. Our new head coach Kay Stephenson just wanted to get more of a contrast on the field that may help spot a receiver down the field.\" (The Patriots have worn silver helmets since 1993, the Colts have since been realigned to the AFC South, and in 2019 the New York Jets have since switched back to green-colored helmets, after playing 20 years with white ones.)\nIn 2002, under the direction of general manager Tom Donahoe, the Bills' uniforms went through radical changes. A darker shade of blue was introduced as the main jersey color, and nickel gray was introduced as an accent color. Both the blue and white jerseys featured red side panels. The white jerseys included a dark blue shoulder yoke and royal blue numbers. The helmet remained primarily red with one navy blue, two nickel, two royal blue, two white stripes, and white face mask. A new logo, a stylized \"B\" consisting of two bullets and a more detailed buffalo head on top, was proposed and had been released (it can be seen on a few baseball caps that were released for sale), but fan backlash led to the team retaining the running bison logo. The helmet logo adopted in 1974\u2014a charging royal blue bison, with a red streak, white horn and eyeball\u2014remained unchanged.\nIn 2005, the Bills revived the standing bison helmet and uniform of the mid-1960s as a throwback uniform.\nThe Bills usually wore the all-blue combination at home and the all-white combination on the road when not wearing the throwback uniforms. They stopped wearing blue-on-white after 2006, while the white-on-blue was not worn after 2007.\nFor the 2011 season, the Bills unveiled a new uniform design, an updated rendition of the 1975\u201383 design. This change includes a return to the white helmets with \"charging buffalo\" logo, and a return to royal blue instead of navy.\nBuffalo sporadically wore white at home in the 1980s, but stopped doing so before their Super Bowl years. On November 6, 2011, against the New York Jets, the Bills wore white at home for the first time since 1986. Since 2011, the Bills have worn white for a home game either with their primary uniform or a throwback set.\nThe Bills' uniform received minor alterations as part of the league's new uniform contract with Nike. The new Nike uniform was unveiled on April 3, 2012.\nOn November 12, 2015, the Bills and the New York Jets became the first two teams to participate in the NFL's Color Rush uniform initiative, with Buffalo wearing an all-red combination for the first time in team history.\nA notable use of the Bills' uniforms outside of football was in the 2018 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships, when the United States men's national junior ice hockey team wore Bills-inspired uniforms in their outdoor game against Team Canada on December 29, 2017.\nOn April 1, 2021, the team announced they will wear white face masks during the upcoming season and beyond. This is due to the popular support for them.\nRivalries.\nThe Bills have rivalries with their three AFC East opponents, and also have had occasional or historical rivalries with other teams such as the Baltimore/Indianapolis Colts (a former divisional rival), Kansas City Chiefs, Houston Oilers/Tennessee Titans, Cleveland Browns, and Dallas Cowboys. They also play an annual preseason game against the Detroit Lions.\nDivisional rivalries.\nMiami Dolphins.\nThis is often considered Buffalo's most famous rivalry. Though the Bills and Dolphins both originated in the American Football League, the Dolphins did not start playing until 1966 as an expansion team while the Bills were one of the original eight teams. The rivalry first gained prominence when the Dolphins won every match-up against the Bills in the 1970s for an NFL-record 20 straight wins against a single opponent (the Bills defeated the Dolphins in their first matchup of the 1980s). Fortunes changed in the following decades with the rise of Jim Kelly as Buffalo's franchise quarterback, and though Kelly and Dolphins quarterback Dan Marino shared a competitive rivalry in the 1980s and 1990s, the Bills became dominant in the 1990s. Things have since cooled down after the retirements of Kelly and Marino and the rise of the New England Patriots, but Miami remains a fierce rival of the Bills, coming in second place in a recent poll of Buffalo's primary rival, and the two teams have typically been close to each other in win-loss records. Miami leads the overall series 61\u201350\u20131 as of 2019, but Buffalo has the advantage in the playoffs at 3\u20131, including a win in the 1992 AFC Championship Game.\nNew England Patriots.\nThe rivalry with the New England Patriots first started when both teams were original franchises in the American Football League prior to the NFL-AFL merger. During the tenure of quarterback Tom Brady in New England, the Patriots dominated the AFC East, including the Bills. The Bills-Patriots rivalry in particular had become lopsided as the Patriots were 32\u20133 against the Bills with Brady starting under center. This has led many fans and players in the 2000s and beyond to replace the Dolphins with the Patriots as Buffalo's most hated rival. The Bills have fared well against Bill Belichick without his former franchise quarterback, however. While Brady was suspended for deflategate, the Bills shut out the Pats 16\u20130. After Brady left for Tampa Bay in 2020, the Bills swept the Patriots, including a 38\u20139 statement win at Gillette Stadium. Overall, largely thanks to Brady, the Patriots lead the series 76\u201345\u20131 as of 2020.\nThe rivalry is also notable in that numerous players, including Drew Bledsoe, Doug Flutie, Lawyer Milloy, Brandon Spikes, Scott Chandler, Chris Hogan, Mike Gillislee and Stephon Gilmore have played for both teams at some point in their careers.\nNew York Jets.\nThe Bills and Jets were both original AFL teams, and both represent the state of New York, though the Jets (since 1984) actually play their games in East Rutherford, New Jersey. While the rivalry represents the differences between New York City and Western New York, it has historically not been as intense as the Bills' rivalries with the Dolphins and Patriots, and the teams' fanbases either have grudging respect or low-key annoyance for each other when the teams are not playing one another. Oftentimes the Bills-Jets rivalry has become characterized by ugly games and shared mediocrity, but it has had a handful of competitive moments. The series heated up recently when former Jets head coach Rex Ryan became the Bills' head coach for two seasons, and has become notable again as Bills quarterback Josh Allen and Jets quarterback Sam Darnold, both drafted in the same year, maintain a friendly rivalry with one another. Buffalo leads the series 65\u201356 as of 2020, including a playoff win in 1981.\nOther rivalries.\nTennessee Titans.\nThe Tennessee Titans (formerly the Houston Oilers) share an extended history with the Bills, both teams being original AFL clubs in 1960 and rivals in that league's East Division before the AFL-NFL merger. Matchups were intense in the 1990s with quarterback Warren Moon leading the Oilers against Jim Kelly's Bills. Memorable playoff moments between the teams include The Comeback, in which the Frank Reich-led Bills overcame a 35\u20133 deficit to stun the Oilers 41\u201338 in 1992, and the Music City Miracle, in which the now-Titans scored on a near-last-minute kickoff return with a controversial forward pass to beat the Bills 22\u201316 in 1999. The Music City Miracle was notable for being Buffalo's last playoff appearance until 2017. The Titans currently lead the series 29\u201319.\nJacksonville Jaguars.\nIn recent years, bitterness has emerged between the Bills and the Jacksonville Jaguars, who had handed Buffalo its first playoff loss in Bills Stadium in 1996. Both teams occupy two of the smallest media markets in the NFL. After years of concurrent bottom feeding in the late 2000s and early 2010s, this rivalry has emerged after former Bills head coach Doug Marrone, who had quit on the team after the 2014 season, was hired as a coaching assistant for Jacksonville and rose to become the Jaguars' head coach. Since then, the series has featured a Bills loss to the Jaguars in London, an ugly, low-scoring playoff game in 2017, trash talk from former Jaguars players such as Jalen Ramsey, and a brawl between the teams in Buffalo in 2018.\nCleveland Browns.\nThough the Bills and Cleveland Browns are in different divisions and did not start playing each other until after 1972, match-ups between the two teams occasionally get heated up due to the proximity and similarity between the cities of Buffalo and Cleveland, though the teams' fanbases otherwise share a mutual respect. As with the Bills\u2013Jets rivalry, the Bills and Browns often share bad luck and have seen their share of ugly games, including a 6\u20133 Browns win in which the winning quarterback only completed 2 of 17 passes. However, there have been other occasions when both teams have been competitive such as in the 1980s and most recently in 2007 and 2014. The rivalry also gained heat when former Bills safety Donte Whitner was with the Browns. The Browns currently lead the series 13\u20139, including a playoff win in 1990, though the Bills have outscored the Browns in the series.\nThe Browns shared a rivalry with the Bills' predecessors in the All-America Football Conference, playing them twice in the AAFC playoffs before becoming one of three AAFC teams to join the NFL. The Bills were not selected to join the NFL and folded with the rest of the AAFC, leaving Buffalo without professional football until the current Bills were formed in 1959.\nKansas City Chiefs.\nThe Bills and the Kansas City Chiefs were also original teams in the AFL and have had a long history against each other, despite never being in the same division. This rivalry heated up recently as the Bills and Chiefs met in consecutive years from 2008 to 2015, and again in 2017. Despite a 2-year hiatus in the rivalry, two high-profile matchups occurred between the Bills and Chiefs in 2020, including the AFC Championship game, which Kansas City won 38\u201324 to advance to its second straight Super Bowl appearance. Buffalo currently leads the series 26\u201323\u20131, which has included four playoff meetings, three of which were AFL/AFC championship games. Prior to the 2020 game, Kansas City won the 1966 AFL Championship game that determined the AFL's (later AFC) representative in the first Super Bowl, going on to face the Green Bay Packers, while Buffalo defeated Kansas City in the 1993 AFC championship game to advance to its fourth straight Super Bowl appearance.\nPlayoffs.\n\"Playoff record: 16 wins, 18 losses.\"\nNotable players.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Buffalo Bills have retired three numbers in franchise history: No. 12 for Jim Kelly, No. 34 for Thurman Thomas and No. 78 for Bruce Smith. Despite the fact that the Bills have only retired three jersey numbers in franchise history, the team has other numbers no longer issued to any player or in reduced circulation.\nSince the earliest days of the team, the number 31 was not supposed to be issued to any other player. The Bills had stationery and various other team merchandise showing a running player wearing that number, and it was not supposed to represent any specific person, but the 'spirit of the team.' In the first three decades of the team's existence, the number 31 was only seen once: in 1969, when reserve running back Preston Ridlehuber damaged his number 36 jersey during a game, equipment manager Tony Marchitte gave him the number 31 jersey to wear while repairing the number 36. The number 31 was not issued again until 1990 when first round draft choice James (J.D.) Williams wore it for his first two seasons; it has since been returned to general circulation, with safety Dean Marlowe wearing the number in 2019.\nNumber 32 had been withdrawn from circulation, but not retired, after O. J. Simpson. Former owner Ralph Wilson insisted on not reissuing the number, even after Simpson's highly publicized murder case and later robbery conviction. The number was placed back into circulation in 2019 with Senorise Perry wearing the number that year.\nNumber 15 was historically only issued sparingly after the retirement of Jack Kemp, but was later returned to general circulation. Receiver John Brown wears the number as of 2019.\nNumber 1 has also only rarely been used, for reasons never explained. While there is no proper explanation, Tommy Hughitt was a player-coach for the early Buffalo teams in the New York Pro Football League and NFL from 1918 to 1924 and was both a major on-field success and a fixture in Buffalo culture after his retirement as a politician and auto salesman. Hugitt was reported to wear number 1 during this time. Kicker Mike Hollis, who played one season for the Bills in 2002, was the most recent to wear the number in the regular season. It went 17 years without being reissued before David Sills was assigned it during the 2019 preseason. Before this, kickers Efren Herrera wore number 1 in 1982 and Benny Ricardo in 1976. Number 1 has only been worn for three seasons during the entire Bills' history, all by kickers for a single season. On April 29. 2021, this number was issued to wide receiver Emmanuel Sanders.\nRadio and television.\nThe Buffalo Bills Radio Network is flagshipped at WGR, AM 550 in Buffalo, owned by Entercom. John Murphy is the team's current play-by-play announcer; he was a color commentator alongside, and eventually succeeded, longtime voice Van Miller after Miller's retirement at the end of the 2003 NFL season. Mark Kelso serves as the color analyst. The Bills radio network has approximately seventeen affiliates in upstate New York and one affiliate, CJCL 590AM (The Fan) in Toronto. As of early 2012, it is composed mostly of WGR, Entercom's sister stations WCMF (96.5 FM) and WROC-AM 950 in Rochester, and a fleet of independent AM and FM stations across upstate New York from Jamestown east to Albany. Previous flagship Citadel Broadcasting was purchased by Cumulus Media, who in turn ceased carrying Bills games at the end of the 2011 season, leaving the network without affiliates in Syracuse, Binghamton, and Erie. (The Syracuse affiliations were later picked up by Galaxy Communications.)\nIn 2018, the team signed an agreement with Nexstar Media Group to carry Bills preseason games across its network of stations in the region. As of 2020, WIVB-TV serves as the flagship station of the network, which includes WJET-TV in Erie, WROC-TV in Rochester, WSYR-TV in Syracuse, WUTR in Utica, WETM-TV in Elmira and WIVT in Binghamton. Steve Tasker does color commentary on these games; the play-by-play position is rotated between Andrew Catalon and Rob Stone. WROC-TV reporter Thad Brown is the sideline reporter. Since 2008, preseason games have been broadcast in high definition.\nBeginning in the 2016 season, as per a new rights deal which covers rights to the team as well as its sister NHL franchise, the Buffalo Sabres, most team-related programming, including studio programming and the coach's show, was re-located to MSG Western New York\u2014a joint venture of MSG and the team ownership. Preseason games will continue to air in simulcast on broadcast television.\nIn the event regular-season games are broadcast by ESPN, in accordance with the league's television policies, a local Buffalo station simulcasts the game. From 2014 to 2017, WKBW-TV held the broadcast rights to that contest, with the station having won back the rights to cable games after WBBZ-TV held the rights for 2012 and 2013.\nTraining camp sites.\nSource:\nMascots, cheerleaders and marching band.\nThe Bills' official mascot is Billy Buffalo, an eight-foot-tall, anthropomorphic blue American bison who wears the jersey \"number\" BB.\nThe Bills currently do not have cheerleaders. The Bills operated a cheerleading squad named the Buffalo Jills from 1967 to 1985; from 1986 to 2013, the Jills operated as an independent organization sponsored by various companies, most recently by Citadel Broadcasting. The Jills suspended operations prior to the 2014 season due to legal actions. The Bills and Jills are currently involved in a legal battle, in which the Jills allege they were employees, not independent contractors, and are seeking back pay. Complicating matters is that Citadel's buyer, Cumulus Media, declared bankruptcy and sought to discharge its remaining Bills-related debts in January 2018.\nThe Bills are one of six teams in the NFL to designate an official marching band or drumline (the others being the Baltimore Ravens, Washington Football Team, New York Jets, Carolina Panthers and Seattle Seahawks). Since the last game of the 2013 season, this position has been served by the Stampede Drumline, known outside of Buffalo as Downbeat Percussion. The Bills have also used the full marching bands from Attica High School, the University of Pittsburgh and Syracuse University at home games in recent years.\nThe Bills have several theme songs associated with them. The most popular is a variation of the Isley Brothers hit \"Shout\", recorded by Scott Kemper, which served as the Bills' official promotional song from 1987 through 1990s. It was officially replaced circa 2000 with \"The Power of the Bills\", although \"Shout\" remains in usage today. It can be heard at every Bills home game following a field goal or touchdown and at the end of the game if the Bills win. The Bills' unofficial fight song, \"Go Bills\", was penned by Bills head coach Marv Levy in the mid-1990s on a friendly wager with his players that he will write the song if the team won a particular game.\nSupporters.\nThe \"Bills Backers\" are the official fan organization of the Buffalo Bills. It has over 200 chapters across North America, Europe and Oceania. Also notable is the \"Bills Mafia'\", a collection of Bills fans organized via Twitter beginning in 2010; the phrase \"Bills Mafia\" had by 2017 grown to unofficially represent the broad community surrounding and encompassing the team as a whole, and players who join the Bills often speak of joining the Bills Mafia. Outsiders often treat the Bills' fan base in derogatory terms, especially since the 2010s, in part because of negative press coverage of select fans' wilder antics. In 2020, the Bills filed to trademark the \"Bills Mafia\" name.\nBills fans are particularly well known for their wearing of Zubaz zebra-printed sportswear; so much is the association between Bills fans and Zubaz that when a revival of the company opened their first brick-and-mortar storefront, it chose Western New York as its first location. They are also well known for jumping off of elevated surfaces (often cars or RVs) into folding tables during the pre-game Tailgate.\nDespite their known boisterous behavior, Bills fans have also been noted for their generosity; after the Bills received help in breaking their 17-year playoff drought on a last-minute Cincinnati Bengals victory, Bills fans crowdfunded the charities of Bengals players Andy Dalton and Tyler Boyd with hundreds of thousands of dollars as a gesture of thanks. Also in 2020, following a November 8 upset win over the Seattle Seahawks led by one of the best career performances by quarterback Josh Allen, news emerged that Allen had elected to take the field after having been given the option to sit out the contest as he had received news of his grandmother's death only the night before. Fans showed support for their team and community by donating nearly $700,000.00 to the Oishei Children's Hospital, an organization supported by Allen throughout his time in Buffalo. Following the Bills' defeat of the Baltimore Ravens in the 2020\u201321 NFL playoffs and an injury to Ravens quarterback Lamar Jackson late in that game, Bills fans crowdfunded his favorite charity, Blessings in a Backpack.\nThe Bills are one of the favorite teams of ESPN announcer Chris Berman, who picked the Bills to reach the Super Bowl nearly every year in the 1990s. Berman often uses the catchphrase \"No one circles the wagons like the Buffalo Bills!\" Berman gave the induction speech for Bills owner Ralph Wilson when Wilson was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2009.\nThe Bills were also the favorite team of late NBC political commentator Tim Russert, a South Buffalo native, who often referred to the Bills on his Sunday morning talk show, \"Meet the Press\". (His son, Luke, is also a notable fan of the team.) CNN's Wolf Blitzer, also a Buffalo native, has proclaimed he is also a fan, as has \"CBS Evening News\" lead anchor and Tonawanda native Jeff Glor and DNC Chairman Tom Perez.\nESPN anchor Kevin Connors is also a noted Bills fan, dating to his time attending Ithaca College. Actor Nick Bakay, a Buffalo native, is also a well-known Bills fan; he has discussed the team in segments of \"NFL Top 10\". Character actor William Fichtner, raised in Cheektowaga, is a fan, and did a commercial for the team in 2014. In 2015, Fichtner also narrated the ESPN \"30 for 30\" documentary on the Bills' four Super Bowl appearances, \"Four Falls of Buffalo\". Former Olympic swimmer Summer Sanders (an in-law to former Bills kicker Todd Schlopy) has professed her fandom of the team. Actor Christopher McDonald, who was raised in Romulus, New York, is a fan of the team.\nPersons notable almost entirely for their Bills fandom include Ken \"Pinto Ron\" Johnson, whose antics while appearing at every Bills home and away game since 1994 earned enough scrutiny that his tailgate parties were banned from stadium property on order of the league; John Lang, an Elvis impersonator who carries a large guitar that he uses as a billboard; Marc Miller, whose professional wrestling promo-style interview with WGRZ prior to Super Bowl XXVII (distinguished by the line \"Dallas is going down, Gary!\" and picked up at the time by \"The George Michael Sports Machine\") was rediscovered in 2019; and Ezra Castro, also known as \"Pancho Billa,\" a resident of the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex who wore a large sombrero and lucha mask in Bills colors. Castro was diagnosed with a spinal tumor that had metastasized in 2017; he was invited on stage during the 2018 NFL Draft to read one of the Bills' selections. Castro died May 14, 2019.\nIn popular culture.\nSeveral former Buffalo Bills players earned a name in politics in the late 20th century after their playing careers had ended, nearly always as members of the Republican Party. The most famous of these was quarterback Jack Kemp, who was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives from Western New York in 1971\u2014two years after his playing career ended and remained there for nearly two decades, serving as the Republican Party nominee for Vice President of the United States under Bob Dole in 1996. Kemp's backup, Ed Rutkowski, served as county executive of Erie County from 1979 to 1987. Former tight end Jay Riemersma, defensive tackle Fred Smerlas and defensive end Phil Hansen have all run for Congress, though all three either lost or withdrew from their respective races. Quarterback Jim Kelly and running back Thurman Thomas have also both been mentioned as potential candidates for political office, although both have declined all requests to date."}
