{"id": "9949", "revid": "1023024173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9949", "title": "Epistle to the Galatians", "text": "The Epistle to the Galatians, often shortened to Galatians, is the ninth book of the New Testament. It is a letter from Paul the Apostle to a number of Early Christian communities in Galatia. Scholars have suggested that this is either the Roman province of Galatia in southern Anatolia, or a large region defined by an ethnic group of Celtic people in central Anatolia.\nPaul is principally concerned with the controversy surrounding gentile Christians and the Mosaic Law during the Apostolic Age. Paul argues that the gentile Galatians do not need to adhere to the tenets of the Mosaic Law, particularly religious male circumcision, by contextualizing the role of the law in light of the revelation of Christ. The Epistle to the Galatians has exerted enormous influence on the history of Christianity, the development of Christian theology, and the study of the Apostle Paul.\nThe central dispute in the letter concerns the question of how Gentiles could convert to Christianity, which shows that this letter was written at a very early stage in church history, when the vast majority of Christians were Jewish or Jewish proselytes, which historians refer to as the Jewish Christians. Another indicator that the letter is early is that there is no hint in the letter of a developed organization within the Christian community at large. This puts it during the lifetime of Paul himself.\nBackground.\nAs with all the Bible, the original of the letter (autograph) is not known to survive. Papyrus 46, the earliest reasonably complete version available to scholars today, dates to approximately AD 200, approximately 150 years after the original was presumably drafted. This papyrus is fragmented in a few areas, causing some of the original text to be missing, \"however, through careful research relating to paper construction, handwriting development, and the established principles of textual criticism, scholars can be rather certain about where these errors and changes appeared and what the original text probably said.\"\nAuthorship and date.\nAuthor.\nIn the past, a small number of scholars have questioned Paul's authorship of Galatians, such as Bruno Bauer, Abraham Loman, C. H. Weisse and Frank R. McGuire. Currently, Biblical scholars agree that Galatians is a true example of Paul's writing. The main arguments in favor of the authenticity of Galatians include its style and themes, which are common to the core letters of the Pauline corpus. George S. Duncan described the authenticity of Paul as its author as \"unquestioned\u2026 In every line it betrays its origin as a genuine letter of Paul.\" Moreover, Paul's possible description of the Council of Jerusalem gives a different point of view from the description in Acts 15:2\u201329, if it is, in fact, describing the Jerusalem Council.\nDate.\nA majority of scholars agree that Galatians was written between the late 40s and early 50s, although some date the original composition to . Jon Jordan notes that an interesting point to be made in the search for the dating of Galatians concerns whether or not it is a response to the Council of Jerusalem or a factor leading up to the Council. He writes, \"did Paul's argument in Galatians flow out of the Jerusalem Council's decision, or did it come before the Jerusalem Council and possibly help shape that very decision?\"\nAudience.\nPaul's letter is addressed \"to the churches of Galatia\", but the location of these churches is a matter of debate. Most scholars agree that it is a geographical reference to the Roman province in central Asia Minor, which had been settled by immigrant Celts in the 270s BC and retained Gaulish features of culture and language in Paul's day. Acts of the Apostles records Paul traveling to the \"region of Galatia and Phrygia\", which lies immediately west of Galatia. A minority of scholars have argued that the \"Galatia\" is an ethnic reference to a Celtic people living in northern Asia Minor.\nThe New Testament indicates that Paul spent time personally in the cities of Galatia (Antioch of Pisidia, Iconium, Lystra and Derbe) during his missionary journeys. They seem to have been composed mainly of Gentile converts. After Paul's departure, the churches were led astray from Paul's trust/faith-centered teachings by individuals proposing \"another gospel\" (which centered on salvation through the Mosaic law, so-called legalism), whom Paul saw as preaching a \"different gospel\" from what Paul had taught. The Galatians appear to have been receptive to the teaching of these newcomers, and the epistle is Paul's response to what he sees as their willingness to turn from his teaching.\nThe identity of these \"opponents\" is disputed. However, the majority of modern scholars view them as Jewish Christians, who taught that in order for converts to belong to the People of God, they must be subject to some or all of the Jewish Law, (i.e. Judaizers). The letter indicates controversy concerning circumcision, Sabbath observance, and the Mosaic Covenant. It would appear, from Paul's response, that they cited the example of Abraham, who was circumcised as a mark of receiving the covenant blessings. They certainly appear to have questioned Paul's authority as an apostle, perhaps appealing to the greater authority of the Jerusalem church governed by James (brother of Jesus).\nNorth Galatian view.\nThe North Galatian view holds that the epistle was written very soon after Paul's second visit to Galatia. In this view, the visit to Jerusalem, mentioned in Galatians 2:1\u201310, is identical with that of Acts 15, which is spoken of as a thing of the past. Consequently, the epistle seems to have been written after the Council of Jerusalem. The similarity between this epistle and the epistle to the Romans has led to the conclusion that they were both written at roughly the same time, during Paul's stay in Macedonia in roughly 56\u201357.\nThis third date takes the word \"quickly\" in Gal. 1:6 literally. John P. Meier suggests that Galatians was \"written in the middle or late 50s, only a few years after the Antiochene incident he narrates\". Eminent Biblical scholar Helmut Koester also subscribes to the \"North Galatian Hypothesis\". Koester points out that the cities of Galatia in the north consist of Ankyra, Pessinus, and Gordium (of the Gordian Knot fame of Alexander the Great).\nSouth Galatian view.\nThe South Galatian view holds that Paul wrote Galatians before the First Jerusalem Council, probably on his way to it, and that it was written to churches he had presumably planted during either his time in Tarsus (he would have traveled a short distance, since Tarsus is in Cilicia) after his first visit to Jerusalem as a Christian, or during his first missionary journey, when he traveled throughout southern Galatia. If it was written to the believers in South Galatia, it would likely have been written in 49.\nEarliest epistle.\nA third theory is that Galatians 2:1\u201310 describes Paul and Barnabas' visit to Jerusalem described in Acts 11:30 and 12:25. This theory holds that the epistle was written before the Council was convened, possibly making it the earliest of Paul's epistles. According to this theory, the revelation mentioned (Gal 2:2) corresponds with the prophecy of Agabus (Acts 11:27\u201328). This view holds that the private speaking about the gospel shared among the Gentiles precludes the Acts 15 visit, but fits perfectly with Acts 11. It further holds that continuing to remember the poor (Gal. 2:10) fits with the purpose of the Acts 11 visit, but not Acts 15.\nIn addition, the exclusion of any mention of the letter of Acts 15 is seen to indicate that such a letter did not yet exist, since Paul would have been likely to use it against the legalism confronted in Galatians. Finally, this view doubts Paul's confrontation of Peter (Gal. 2:11) would have been necessary after the events described in Acts 15. If this view is correct, the epistle should be dated somewhere around 47, depending on other difficult to date events, such as Paul's conversion.\nKirsopp Lake found this view less likely and wondered why it would be necessary for the Jerusalem Council (Acts 15) to take place at all if the issue were settled in Acts 11:30/12:25, as this view holds. Defenders of the view do not think it unlikely an issue of such magnitude would need to be discussed more than once. Renowned New Testament scholar J.B. Lightfoot also objected to this view since it \"clearly implies that his [Paul's] Apostolic office and labours were well known and recognized before this conference.\"\nDefenders of this view, such as Ronald Fung, disagree with both parts of Lightfoot's statement, insisting a) Paul received his \"Apostolic Office\" at his conversion (Gal. 1:15\u201317; Acts 9). Fung holds, then, that Paul's apostolic mission began almost immediately in Damascus (Acts 9:20). While accepting that Paul's apostolic anointing was likely only recognized by the Apostles in Jerusalem during the events described in Galatians 2/Acts 11:30, Fung does not see this as a problem for this theory.\nPaul's opponents.\nScholars have debated whether we can or should attempt to reconstruct both the backgrounds and arguments of the opponents to which Paul would have been responding. Though these opponents have traditionally been designated as Judaizers, this classification has fallen out of favor in contemporary scholarship. Some instead refer to them instead as Agitators. While many scholars have claimed that Paul's opponents were circumcisionist Jewish followers of Jesus, the ability to make such determinations with a reasonable degree of certainty has been called into question. It has often been presumed that they traveled from Jerusalem, but some commentators have raised the question of whether they may have actually been insiders familiar with the dynamics of the community. Furthermore, some commentaries and articles pointed out the inherent problems in mirror-reading, emphasizing that we simply do not have the evidence necessary to reconstruct the arguments of Paul's opponents. It is not sufficient to simply reverse his denials and assertions. This does not result in a coherent argument nor can it possibly reflect the thought processes of his opponents accurately. It is nearly impossible to reconstruct the opponents from Paul's text because their representation is necessarily polemical. All we can say with certainty is that they supported a different position of gentile relations with Jewish folk than Paul did.\nOutline.\nClosing: Cross and New Creation (6:11\u201318).\nThis outline is provided by Douglas J. Moo.\nContents.\nThis epistle addresses the question of whether the Gentiles in Galatia were obligated to follow Mosaic Law to be part of the Christ community. After an introductory address, the apostle discusses the subjects which had occasioned the epistle.\nIn the first two chapters, Paul discusses his life before Christ and his early ministry, including interactions with other apostles in Jerusalem. This is the most extended discussion of Paul's past that we find in the Pauline letters (cf. Philippians 3:1\u20137). Some have read this autobiographical narrative as Paul's defense of his apostolic authority. Others, however, see Paul's telling of the narrative as making an argument to the Galatians about the nature of the gospel and the Galatians' own situation.\nChapter 3 exhorts the Galatian believers to stand fast in the faith as it is in Jesus. Paul engages in an exegetical argument, drawing upon the figure of Abraham and the priority of his faith to the covenant of circumcision. Paul explains that the law was introduced as a temporary measure, one that is no longer efficacious now that the seed of Abraham, Christ, has come. Chapter 4 then concludes with a summary of the topics discussed and with the benediction, followed by 5:1\u20136:10 teaching about the right use of their Christian freedom.\nIn the conclusion of the epistle, Paul wrote, \"See with what large letters I am writing to you with my own hand.\" (Galatians 6:11, ESV) Regarding this conclusion, Lightfoot, in his Commentary on the epistle, says:\nSome commentators have postulated that Paul's large letters are owed to his poor eyesight, his deformed hands, or to other physical, mental, or psychological afflictions. Other commentators have attributed Paul's large letters to his poor education, his attempt to assert his authority, or his effort to emphasize his final words. Classics scholar Steve Reece has compared similar autographic subscriptions in thousands of Greek, Roman, and Jewish letters of this period and observes that large letters are a normal feature when senders of letters, regardless of their education, take the pen from their amanuensis and add a few words of greeting in their own hands.\nGalatians also contains a catalogue of vices and virtues, a popular formulation of ancient Christian ethics.\nProbably the most famous single statement made in the Epistle, by Paul, is in chapter 3, verse 28: \"There is neither Jew nor Gentile, neither slave nor free, nor is there male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus.\" The debate surrounding that verse is legend and the two schools of thought are (1) this only applies to the spiritual standing of people in the eyes of God, it does not implicate social distinctions and gender roles on earth; and (2) this is not just about our spiritual standing but is also about how we relate to each other and treat each other in the here and now.\nPosition (1) emphasises the immediate context of the verse and notes that it is embedded in a discussion about justification: our relationship with God. Position (2) reminds its critics that the \"whole letter context\" is very much about how people got on in the here and now together, and in fact the discussion about justification came out of an actual example of people treating other people differently (2:11ff).\nMajor issues.\nPaul and the law.\nMuch variety exists in discussions of Paul's view of the Law in Galatians. Nicole Chibici-Revneanu noticed a difference in Paul's treatment of the Law in Galatians and Romans. In Galatians the law is described as the \"oppressor\" whereas in Romans Paul describes that the Law was as being just as much in need of the Spirit to set it free from sin as humans do. Peter Oakes argues that Galatians cannot be construed as depicting the law positively because the Law played the role it was meant to play in the scope of human history. Wolfgang Reinbold argues that, contrary to the popular reading of Paul, the Law was possible to keep.\nUnder law &amp; works of law.\nRegarding \"under the law\" (Gal. 3:23; 4:4, 5, 21; 5:18), Todd Wilson argues that \"under the law\" in Galatians was a \"rhetorical abbreviation for \u2018under the curse of the law.'\" Regarding \"works of the law\" (Gal. 2:16), Robert Keith Rapa argues Paul is speaking of viewing Torah-observances as the means of salvation which he is seeking to combat in the Galatian congregation. Jacqueline de Roo noticed a similar phrase in the works found at Qumran and argues that \"works of the law\" is speaking of obedience to the Torah acting as a way of being atoned for. Michael Bachmann argues that this phrase is a mention of certain actions taken by Jewish people to distinguish themselves and perpetuate separation between themselves and gentiles.\nLaw of Christ.\nMuch debate surrounds what Paul means by \"law of Christ\" in Galatians 6:2, a phrase that occurs only once in all of Paul's letters. As Schreiner explains, some scholars think that the \"law of Christ\" is the sum of Jesus's words, functioning as a \"new Torah for believers.\" Others argue that the \"genitive in the \u2018law of Christ '\u2026should be understood as explanatory, i.e. the law which is Christ.'\" Some focus on the relationship between the law of Christ and the Old Testament Decalogue. Still other scholars argue that whereas the \"Mosaic law is abolished,\" the new \"law of Christ fits with the Zion Torah,\" which \"hails from Zion\u2026 and is eschatological.\" Schreiner himself believes that the law of Christ is equivalent to Galatians 5:13\u201314's \"law of love.\" According to Schreiner, when believers love others, \"they behave as Christ did and fulfill his law.\"\nAntioch incident.\nAs Thomas Schreiner explains, there is significant debate over the meaning of Peter's eating with the Gentiles\u2014specifically, why might have the eating been considered wrong? E.P. Sanders argues that though Jews could eat in the same location with Gentiles, Jews did not want to consume food from the same vessels used by Gentiles. As Sanders explains, Galatia's Jews and Gentiles might have had to share the same cup and loaf (i.e. food from the same vessels.) Other scholars such as James Dunn argue that Cephas was \"already observing the basic food laws of the Torah\" and then \"men from James advocated an even stricter observance.\" Schreiner himself argues that Peter \"actually ate unclean food\u2014food prohibited by the OT law\u2014before the men from James came.\" Depending on how one construes \"eating with the Gentiles\" in Galatians 2:12, one may reach different conclusions as to why Paul was so angry with Peter in Antioch.\nPistis tou Christou.\nThere is debate about the meaning of the phrase \u03b4\u03b9\u03b1 \u03c0\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03b5\u03bf\u03c2 \u03a7\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03c2 in Galatians 2:16. Grammatically, this phrase can be interpreted either as an objective genitive \"through faith in Jesus Christ\" or as a subjective genitive \"through the faith of Jesus Christ.\" There are theological ramifications to each position, but given the corpus of the Pauline literature, the majority of scholars have treated as an objective genitive, translating it as \"faith in Jesus Christ.\" Daniel Harrington writes, \"the subjective genitive does not oppose or do away with the concept of faith in Christ. Rather, it reestablishes priorities. One is justified by the faith of Jesus Christ manifested in his obedience to God by his death upon the cross. It is on the basis of that faith that one believes in Christ\".\nSexuality and gender.\n says, \"There is no longer Jew or Greek, there is no longer slave or free, there is no longer male and female; for all of you are one in Christ Jesus.\" According to Norbert Baumert, Galatians 3:28 is Paul's declaration that one can be in relationship with Jesus no matter their gender. Judith Gundry-Volf argues for a more general approach, stating that one's gender does not provide any benefit or burden. Pamela Eisenbaum argues that Paul was exhorting his readers to be mindful in changing conduct in relationships that involved people of different status. Ben Witherington argues that Paul is combatting the position espoused by opponents who were attempting influence Paul's community to return to the patriarchal standards held by the majority culture.\nThere are two different interpretations within the modern scholarship regarding the meaning and function of Paul's statement that \"there is no longer male and female.\" The first interpretation states that Paul's words eliminate the biological differences between males and females and thus calls gender roles into question. Nancy Bedford says that this does not mean that there is no distinction between males and females; instead, it means that there is no room for gender hierarchy in the gospel. The second interpretation states that one must recognize the historical background of Paul's time. Jeremy Prunt argues that although many scholars want to say that this verse signifies changing gender norms, it actually reflects on the patriarchal structure of Paul's time. In Paul's time, females and males were considered one sex, and the female was understood to be the inferior version of the male. It is under this one sex understanding that Paul says that \"there is no longer male and female,\" and it therefore does not show an abolition of the boundary between genders because that boundary did not exist in Paul's time. At the same time, the women in Paul's time would also not necessarily have heard an ideology of gender equality from the message of Galatians 3:28 because of their subordinated status in society at that time. Prunt argues that in Galatians 3:28, Paul's intention was to fixing social conflicts rather than to alter gender norms. By stating the importance of becoming one in Christ, Paul tries to give his society a new identity, which is the identity in Christ, and he believes that this will fix the social conflicts.\nMeaning of \"Israel of God\".\nMany scholars debate the meaning of the phrase \"Israel of God\" in Galatians 6:16, wherein Paul wishes for \"peace and mercy\" to be \"even upon the Israel of God.\" As Schreiner explains, scholars debate over whether \"Israel of God\" refers to ethnically Jewish believers \"within the church of Jesus Christ,\" or to the church of Christ as a whole (Jewish and Gentiles all included). Those who believe that \"Israel of God\" only refers to ethnically Jewish believers, argue that had Paul meant the entire church, he would use the word \"mercy\" before \"peace,\" because Paul \"sees peace as the petition for the church, while mercy is the request for unredeemed Jews.\" Other scholars, such as G.K. Beale, argue that the Old Testament backdrop of Galatians 6:16\u2014e.g. a verse such as Isaiah 54:10 wherein God promises mercy and peace to Israel\u2014suggests that \"the Israel of God\" refers to a portion of the new, eschatological Israel \"composed of Jews and Gentiles.\" Schreiner himself is sympathetic to this view, believing that treating the \"Israel of God\" as the church of Christ fits with the whole of Galatians, since Galatians pronounces \"believers in Christ\" as \"the true sons of Abraham.\"\nSignificance and reception.\nLuther's theology and antisemitism.\nLuther's fundamental belief in justification by faith was formed in large part by his interpretation of Galatians. Masaki claims \"At the heart of Luther's Lectures on Galatians is the doctrine of the proper distinction between law and gospel. While Luther's contemporary opponents failed to see this\u2014whether they were the papists, enthusiasts, Anabaptists, Sacramentarians, or antinomians\u2014law/gospel articulation defined Luther's legacy in the thinking of his colleagues, students, and generations after him. \"This distinction of law and gospel has been imperative to Luther's understanding of Paul's Judaism as well, but modern scholarship has formed a new perspective of the Judaism of Paul's time. \"Luther's treatment of Galatians has affected most interpretations of the letter, at least among Protestants, up to the present time\u2026 Problems with Luther's interpretations and perspectives have become evident in modern times, particularly in his understanding and treatment of Judaism in Paul's day.\"\nThis development led to some schools of thought, such as Canadian religious historian Barrie Wilson who points out in \"How Jesus Became Christian\", how Paul's Letter to the Galatians represents a sweeping rejection of Jewish Law (Torah). In so doing, Paul clearly takes his Christ movement out of the orbit of Judaism and into an entirely different milieu. Paul's stance constitutes a major contrast to the position of James, brother of Jesus, whose group in Jerusalem adhered to the observance of Torah.\nGender, sexuality, and modern scholarship.\nGalatians 3:28 is one of the most controversial and influential verses in Galatians. There are three different pairs that Paul uses to elaborate his ideology. The first one is \"Jew or Greek,\" the second one is \"slave or free,\" and the third one is \"male and female.\" Paul seems to imply that in Jesus Christ there is no longer a distinction between them. However, the meaning of this verse is not expounded upon further by Paul. In modern politics, the debate about the meaning of Galatians 3:28 is significant, as it is used by different people and scholars in order to make normative claims about sexuality, gender, and even marriage. The ongoing nature of this debate reveals that scholars still have not come to a unified conclusion regarding Paul's theology.\nExternal links.\nOnline translations of the Epistle to Galatians:\nRelated articles:"}
{"id": "9950", "revid": "80913", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9950", "title": "Epistle to the Philippians", "text": "The Epistle to the Philippians, commonly referred to as Philippians, is a Pauline epistle of the New Testament of the Christian Bible. The epistle is attributed to Paul the Apostle and Timothy is named with him as co-author or co-sender. The letter is addressed to the Christian church in Philippi. Paul, Timothy, Silas (and perhaps Luke) first visited Philippi in Greece (Macedonia) during Paul's second missionary journey from Antioch, which occurred between approximately 49 and 51 AD. In the account of his visit in the Acts of the Apostles, Paul and Silas are accused of \"disturbing the city\".\nThere is a general consensus that Philippians consists of authentically Pauline material, and that the epistle is a composite of multiple letter fragments from Paul to the church in Philippi. These letters could have been written from Ephesus in 52\u201355 AD or Caesarea Maritima in 57\u201359, but the most likely city of provenance is Rome, around 62 AD, or about 10 years after Paul's first visit to Philippi.\nComposition.\nStarting in the 1960s, a general consensus has emerged among biblical scholars that Philippians was not written as one unified letter, but is rather a compilation of fragments from three separate letters from Paul to the church in Philippi. According to Philip Sellew, Philippians contains the following letter fragments:\nIn support of the idea that Philippians is a composite work, scholars point to the abrupt shifts in tone and topic within the text. There also seem to be chronological inconsistencies from one chapter to the next concerning Paul's associate Epaphroditus:\nThese letter fragments likely would have been edited into a single document by the first collector of the Pauline corpus, although there is no clear consensus among scholars regarding who this initial collector may have been, or when the first collection of Pauline epistles may have been published.\nToday, a number of scholars believe that Philippians is a composite of multiple letter fragments. According to the theologian G. Walter Hansen, \"The traditional view that Philippians was composed as one letter in the form presented in the NT \"[New Testament]\" can no longer claim widespread support.\" Nevertheless, many scholars continue to argue for the unity of Philippians.\nRegardless of the literary unity of the letter, scholars agree that the material that was compiled into the Epistle to the Philippians was originally composed in Greek, sometime during the 50s or early 60s AD.\nPlace of writing.\nIt is uncertain where Paul was when he wrote the letter(s) that make up Philippians. Internal evidence in the letter itself points clearly to it being composed while Paul was in custody, but it is unclear \"which\" period of imprisonment the letter refers to. If the testimony of the Acts of the Apostles is to be trusted, candidates would include the Roman imprisonment at the end of Acts, and the earlier Caesarean imprisonment. Any identification of the place of writing of Philippians is complicated by the fact that some scholars view Acts as being an unreliable source of information about the early Church.\nJim Reiher has suggested that the letters could stem from the second period of Roman imprisonment attested by early church fathers. The main reasons suggested for a later date include:\nContents.\nIn Chapters 1 and 2 of Philippians (Letter B), Paul sends word to the Philippians of his upcoming sentence in Rome and of his optimism in the face of death, along with exhortations to imitate his capacity to rejoice in the Lord despite one's circumstances. Paul assures the Philippians that his imprisonment is actually helping to spread the Christian message, rather than hindering it. He also expresses gratitude for the devotion and heroism of Epaphroditus, who the Philippian church had sent to visit Paul and bring him gifts. Some time during his visit with Paul, Epaphroditus apparently contracted some life-threatening debilitating illness. But he recovers before being sent back to the Philippians.\nIn Chapter 3 (Letter C), Paul warns the Philippians about those Christians who insist that circumcision is necessary for salvation. He testifies that while he once was a devout Pharisee and follower of the Jewish law, he now considers these things to be worthless and worldly compared to the gospel of Jesus.\nIn Chapter 4, Paul urges the Philippians to resolve conflicts within their fellowship. In the latter part of the chapter (Letter A), Paul expresses his gratitude for the gifts that the Philippians had sent him, and assures them that God will reward them for their generosity.\nThroughout the epistle there is a sense of optimism. Paul is hopeful that he will be released, and on this basis he promises to send Timothy to the Philippians for ministry, and also expects to pay them a personal visit.\nChrist poem.\nChapter 2 of the epistle contains a famous poem describing the nature of Christ and his act of redemption:\nDue to its unique poetic style, scholars agree that this passage constitutes an early Christian poem that was composed by someone else prior to Paul's writings, as early as the mid-late 30s AD. While the passage is often called a \"hymn,\" some scholars believe this to be an inappropriate name since it does not have a rhythmic or metrical structure in the original Greek.\nIncarnation Christology.\nThe Christ poem is significant because it strongly suggests that there were very early Christians who understood Jesus to be a pre-existent celestial being, who chose to take on human form, rather than a human who was later exalted to a divine status.\nImportantly, while the author of the poem did believe that Jesus existed in heaven before his physical incarnation, this does not necessarily mean that he was believed to be \"equal\" to God the Father prior to his death and resurrection. This largely depends on how the Greek word \"harpagmon\" (, accusative form of ) is translated in verse 6 (\"Something to be grasped after / exploited\"). If \"harpagmon\" is rendered as \"something to be exploited,\" as it is in many Christian Bible translations, then the implication is that Christ was already equal to God prior to his incarnation. But Bart Ehrman and others have argued that the correct translation is in fact \"something to be grasped after,\" implying that Jesus was \"not\" equal to God before his resurrection. Outside of this passage, \"harpagmon\" and related words were almost always used to refer to something that a person doesn't yet possess but tries to acquire.\nIt is widely agreed by interpreters, however, that the Christ poem depicts Jesus as equal to God \"after\" his resurrection. This is because the last two stanzas quote Isaiah 45:22\u201323: (\"Every knee shall bow, every tongue confess\"), which in the original context clearly refers to God the Father.\nExternal links.\nOnline translations of the Epistle to the Philippians:\nOnline Study of Philippians:\nRelated articles:"}
{"id": "9951", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9951", "title": "Epistle to the Colossians", "text": "The Epistle of Paul to the Colossians (or simply Colossians) is the twelfth book of the New Testament. It was written, according to the text, by Paul the Apostle and Timothy, and addressed to the Church in Colossae, a small Phrygian city near Laodicea and approximately from Ephesus in Asia Minor.\nScholars have increasingly questioned Paul's authorship and attributed the letter to an early follower instead. The authenticity of the letter, however, has been defended with equal strength. If Paul was the author, he probably used an amanuensis, or secretary, in writing the letter (Col 4:18), possibly Timothy.\nComposition.\nDuring the first generation after Jesus, Paul's epistles to various churches helped establish early Christian theology. According to Bruce Metzger, it was written in the 50s while Paul was in prison. Colossians is similar to Ephesians, also written at this time. Some critical scholars have ascribed the epistle to an early follower of Paul, writing as Paul. The epistle's description of Christ as pre-eminent over creation marks it, for some scholars, as representing an advanced christology not present during Paul's lifetime. Defenders of Pauline authorship cite the work's similarities to the letter to Philemon, which is broadly accepted as authentic.\nDate.\nThe letter may have been written by Paul at Rome during his first imprisonment. Other scholars have suggested that it was written from Caesarea or Ephesus. If the letter is not considered to be an authentic part of the Pauline corpus, then it might be dated during the late 1st century, possibly as late as AD 90.\nAuthorship.\nThe letter's authors claim to be Paul and Timothy, but authorship began to be authoritatively questioned during the 19th century. Pauline authorship was held to by many of the early church's prominent theologians, such as Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, Origen of Alexandria and Eusebius.\nHowever, as with several epistles attributed to Paul, critical scholarship disputes this claim. One ground is that the epistle's language doesn't seem to match Paul's, with 48 words appearing in Colossians that are found nowhere else in his writings and 33 of which occur nowhere else in the New Testament. A second ground is that the epistle features a strong use of liturgical-hymnic style which appears nowhere else in Paul's work to the same extent. A third is that the epistle's themes related to Christ, eschatology and the church seem to have no parallel in Paul's undisputed works.\nAdvocates of Pauline authorship defend the differences that there are between elements in this letter and those commonly considered the genuine work of Paul (e.g. 1 Thessalonians). It is argued that these differences can come by human variability, such as by growth in theological knowledge over time, different occasion for writing, as well as use of different secretaries (or amanuenses) in composition. As it is usually pointed out by the same authors who note the differences in language and style, the number of words foreign to the New Testament and Paul is no greater in Colossians than in the undisputed Pauline letters (Galatians, of similar length, has 35 hapax legomena). In regard to the style, as Norman Perrin, who argues for pseudonymity, notes, \"The letter does employ a great deal of traditional material and it can be argued that this accounts for the non-Pauline language and style. If this is the case, the non-Pauline language and style are not indications of pseudonymity.\" Not only that, but it has been noted that Colossians has indisputably Pauline stylistic characteristics, found nowhere else in the New Testament. Advocates of Pauline authorship also argue that the differences between Colossians and the rest of the New Testament are not as great as they are purported to be.\nThe connection between Colossians and to Philemon, an undisputed epistle, (Philemon 2, Colossians 4:17), the greetings of both epistles bear similar names (Philemon 23\u201324, Colossians 4:10\u201314) is used as evidence by those who advocate Pauline authorship.\nAccording to N.T. Wright, Colossians and Ephesians seem \"thoroughly and completely Pauline\".\nContent.\nColossae is in the same region as the seven churches of the Book of Revelation. In Colossians there is mention of local brethren in Colossae, Laodicea, and Hierapolis. Colossae was approximately from Laodicea and from Hierapolis. \nMembers of the congregation at Colossae may have been incorporating pagan elements into their practice, including worship of elemental spirits. The Epistle to the Colossians proclaimed Christ to be the supreme power over the entire universe, and urged Christians to lead godly lives. The letter consists of two parts: first a doctrinal section, then a second regarding conduct. Those who believe that the motivation of the letter was a growing heresy in the church see both sections of the letter as opposing false teachers who have been spreading error in the congregation. Others see both sections of the letter as primarily encouragement and edification for a developing church.\nOutline.\nI. Introduction (1:1\u201314)\nII. The Supremacy of Christ (1:15\u201323)\nIII. Paul's Labor for the Church (1:24\u20132:7)\nIV. Freedom from Human Regulations through Life with Christ (2:8\u201323)\nV. Rules for Holy Living (3:1\u20134:6)\nVI. Final Greetings (4:7\u201318)\nDoctrinal sections.\nThe doctrinal part of the letter is found in the first two chapters. The main theme is developed in chapter 2, with a warning against being drawn away from him in whom dwelt all the fullness of the deity, and who was the head of all spiritual powers. offers firstly a \"general warning\" against accepting a purely human philosophy, and then a \"more specific warning against false teachers\". Christ was the head of the body of which they were members; and if they were truly united to him, what more did they need? \nIn these doctrinal sections, the letter proclaims that Christ existed before all creation (he was not created) and is supreme over all that has been created. All things were created through him and for him, and the universe is sustained by him. God had chosen for his complete being to dwell in Christ. The \"cosmic powers\" revered by the false teachers had been \"discarded\" and \"led captive\" at Christ's death. Christ is the master of all angelic forces and the head of the church. Christ is the only mediator between God and humanity, the unique agent of cosmic reconciliation. It is the Father in Colossians who is said to have delivered us from the domain of darkness and transferred us to the kingdom of His beloved Son. The Son is the agent of reconciliation and salvation not merely of the church, but in some sense redeems the rest of creation as well (\"all things, whether things on earth or things in heaven\").\nColossians praises the spiritual growth of its recipients because of their love for all the set-apart ones in Christ. It calls them to grow in wisdom and knowledge that their love might be principled love and not sentimentality. \"Christ in you is your hope of glory!\".\n\"Christ in you, the hope of Glory\"\nOne of the themes of the doctrinal section of Colossians is promise of union with Christ through the indwelling life of God the Holy Spirit. For example, Colossians 1:27, \"To them God has chosen to make known among the Gentiles the glorious riches of this mystery, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.\" The Apostle Paul wrote to remind them of this promise and guard them against moving their on going trust from Christ to other philosophies and traditions which did not depend on Christ.\nConduct.\nThe practical part of the Epistle, enforces various duties naturally flowing from the doctrines expounded. They are exhorted to mind things that are above Colossians 3:1\u20134, to mortify every evil principle of their nature, and to put on the new man. Many special duties of the Christian life are also insisted upon as the fitting evidence of the Christian character. The letter ends with customary prayer, instruction, and greetings.\nThe prison epistles.\nColossians is often categorized as one of the \"prison epistles\", along with Ephesians, Philippians, and Philemon. Colossians has some close parallels with the letter to Philemon: names of some of the same people (e.g., Timothy, Aristarchus, Archippus, Mark, Epaphras, Luke, Onesimus, and Demas) appear in both epistles, and both are claimed to be written by Paul.\nExternal links.\nOnline translations of the Epistle to the Colossians:"}
{"id": "9952", "revid": "209266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9952", "title": "First Epistle to the Thessalonians", "text": "The First Epistle to the Thessalonians, commonly referred to as First Thessalonians or 1 Thessalonians, is a Pauline epistle of the New Testament of the Christian Bible. The epistle is attributed to Paul the Apostle, and is addressed to the church in Thessalonica, in modern-day Greece. It is likely the first of Paul's letters, probably written by the end of AD 52. However, some scholars believe the Epistle to Galatians may have been written by AD 48.\nComposition.\nMost New Testament scholars believe Paul the Apostle wrote this letter from Corinth, although information appended to this work in many early manuscripts (e.g., Codices Alexandrinus, Mosquensis, and Angelicus) state that Paul wrote it in Athens after Timothy had returned from Macedonia with news of the state of the church in Thessalonica. Paul was known to the Church at Thessalonica, having preached there.\nFor the most part, the letter is personal in nature, with only the final two chapters spent addressing issues of doctrine, almost as an aside. Paul's main purpose in writing is to encourage and reassure the Christians there. Paul urges them to go on working quietly while waiting in hope for the return of Christ.\nDate.\nUnlike all subsequent Pauline epistles, 1 Thessalonians does not focus on justification by faith or questions of Jewish\u2013Gentile relations, themes that are covered in all other letters. Many scholars see this as an indication that this letter was written before the Epistle to the Galatians, where Paul's positions on these matters were formed and elucidated.\nAuthenticity.\nThe majority of New Testament scholars hold 1 Thessalonians to be authentic, although a number of scholars in the mid-19th century contested its authenticity, most notably Clement Schrader and F.C. Baur. 1 Thessalonians matches other accepted Pauline letters, both in style and in content, and its authorship is also affirmed by 2 Thessalonians.\nThessalonians 2:13\u201316 have often been regarded as a post-Pauline interpolation. The following arguments have been based on the content:\nIt is also sometimes suggested that 1 Thes. 5:1\u201311 is a post-Pauline insertion that has many features of Lukan language and theology that serves as an apologetic correction to Paul's imminent expectation of the Second Coming in 1 Thes. 4:13\u201318.\nOther scholars, such as Schmithals, Eckhart, Demke and Munro, have developed complicated theories involving redaction and interpolation in 1 and 2 Thessalonians.\nAudience.\nPaul claimed the title of the \"Apostle to the Gentiles\", and established gentile churches in several important cities in the Roman Empire.\nAccording to Bart D. Ehrman, the Acts of the Apostles tells a different story of Paul's career, which reports that, while there were \"some\" Jews converted during Paul's initial preaching in Thessalonica, the gentiles who were converted were \"a large number\" and the Jews as a body fiercely opposed Paul's work there.\nContents.\nText.\nPaul, speaking for himself, Silas, and Timothy, gives thanks for the news about their faith and love; he reminds them of the kind of life he had lived while he was with them. Paul stresses how honorably he conducted himself, reminding them that he had worked to earn his keep, taking great pains not to burden anyone. He did this, he says, even though he could have used his status as an apostle to impose upon them.\nPaul goes on to explain that the dead will be resurrected prior to those still living, and both groups will greet the Lord in the air."}
{"id": "9953", "revid": "209266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9953", "title": "Epistle to Titus", "text": "The Epistle of Paul to Titus, usually referred to simply as Titus, is one of the three pastoral epistles (along with 1 Timothy and 2 Timothy) in the New Testament, historically attributed to Paul the Apostle. It is addressed to Saint Titus and describes the requirements and duties of elders and bishops.\nRecipient.\nNot mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, Saint Titus was noted in Galatians (cf. Gal. 2:1, 3) where Paul wrote of journeying to Jerusalem with Barnabas, accompanied by Titus. He was then dispatched to Corinth, Greece, where he successfully reconciled the Christian community there with Paul, its founder. Titus was later left on the island of Crete to help organize the Church, and later met back with the Apostle Paul in Nicopolis. He soon went to Dalmatia (now Croatia). According to Eusebius of Caesarea in the \"Ecclesiastical History\", he served as the first bishop of Crete. He was buried in Cortyna (Gortyna), Crete; his head was later removed to Venice during the invasion of Crete by the Saracens in 832 and was enshrined in St Mark's Basilica, Venice, Italy.\nComposition.\nOpposed to Pauline authenticity.\nTitus, along with the two other pastoral epistles (1 Timothy and 2 Timothy), is regarded by some scholars as being pseudepigraphical. On the basis of the language and content of the pastoral epistles, these scholars reject that they were written by Paul and believe that they were written by an anonymous forger after his death. Critics claim the vocabulary and style of the Pauline letters could not have been written by Paul according to available biographical information and reflect the views of the emerging Church rather than the apostle's. These scholars date the epistle from the 80s AD up to the end of the 2nd century. The Church of England's Common Worship Lectionary Scripture Commentary concurs with this view: \"the proportioning of the theological and practical themes is one factor that leads us to think of these writings as coming from the post-Pauline church world of the late first or early second century\".\nTitus has a very close affinity with 1 Timothy, sharing similar phrases and expressions and similar subject matter. This has led many scholars to believe that it was written by the same forger who wrote 1 and 2 Timothy\u2014their author is sometimes referred to as \"the Pastor.\"\nTraditional view: Pauline authenticity.\nThe minority of scholars who believe Paul wrote \"Titus\" date its composition from the circumstance that it was written after Paul's visit to Crete (Titus 1:5). That visit could not be the one referred to in the Acts of the Apostles 27:7, when Paul was on his voyage to Rome as a prisoner, and where he continued a prisoner for two years. Thus traditional exegesis supposes that after his release Paul sailed from Rome into Asia, passing Crete by the way, and that there he left Titus \"to set in order the things that were wanting.\" Thence he would have gone to Ephesus, where he left Timothy, and from Ephesus to Macedonia, where he wrote the \"First Epistle to Timothy\", and thence, according to the subscription of this epistle, to \"Nicopolis of Macedonia\", from which place he wrote to Titus, about 66 or 67.\nRecent scholarship has revived the theory that Paul used an amanuensis, or secretaries, in writing his letters (e.g. Rom 16:22), but possibly Luke for the pastorals This was a common practice in ancient letter writing, even for the biblical writers.\nEpimenides paradox.\nOne of the secular peculiarities of the Epistle to Titus is the reference to the Epimenides paradox: \"One of the Cretans, a prophet of their own, said, 'Cretans are always liars'.\" The statement by a member of a group that all members are liars is a famous logic problem, applicable also to Psalms 116:11.\nFalse teachers.\nIn \"Titus 1:9\" Paul describes some among the Jewish Christians as false teachers. Paul describes the false teachers as rebellious, empty talkers who claim to teach the law \"without understanding\" and deceivers who deliberately lead the faithful astray. Calvin wrote that vain talking (Greek: mataiologia) is contrasted here with useful doctrine, including any trivial and frivolous doctrines that contribute nothing to piety and fear of God.\nExternal links.\nOnline translations of the Epistle to Titus:\nExegetical papers on Titus:"}
{"id": "9954", "revid": "9961226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9954", "title": "Eurovision Song Contest", "text": "The Eurovision Song Contest () is an international song competition organised annually by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) which features participants representing primarily European countries. Each participating country submits an original song to be performed on live television and radio, transmitted to national broadcasters via the EBU's Eurovision and Euroradio networks, with competing countries then casting votes for the other countries' songs to determine a winner.\nBased on the Sanremo Music Festival held in Italy since 1951, Eurovision has been held annually (apart from ) since 1956, making it the longest-running annual international televised music competition and one of the world's longest-running television programmes. Active members of the EBU, as well as invited associate members, are eligible to compete, and , 52 countries have participated at least once. Each participating broadcaster sends one original song of three minutes duration or less to be performed live by a singer or group of up to six people aged 16 or older. Each country awards two sets of 1\u20138, 10 and 12 points to their favourite songs, based on the views of an assembled group of music professionals and the country's viewing public, with the song receiving the most points declared the winner. Other performances feature alongside the competition, including a specially-commissioned opening and interval act and guest performances by musicians and other personalities, with past acts including Cirque du Soleil, Madonna and the first performance of \"Riverdance\". Originally consisting of a single evening event, the contest has expanded as new countries joined, leading to the introduction of relegation procedures in the 1990s, and eventually the creation of semi-finals in the 2000s. , has competed more times than any other country, having participated in all but one edition, while holds the record for the most victories, with seven wins in total.\nTraditionally held in the country which won the preceding year's event, the contest provides an opportunity to promote the host country and city as a tourist destination. Thousands of spectators attend each year, and journalists are present to cover all aspects of the contest, including rehearsals in venue, press conferences with the competing acts, and other related events and performances in the host city. Alongside the generic Eurovision logo, a unique theme and slogan is typically used for each event. The contest has aired in countries across all continents, and has been available online via the official Eurovision website since 2000. Eurovision ranks among the world's most watched non-sporting events every year, with hundreds of millions of viewers globally, and performing at the contest has often provided artists with a local career boost and in some cases long-lasting international success. Several of the best-selling music artists in the world have competed in past editions, including ABBA, Celine Dion, Julio Iglesias and Olivia Newton-John, and some of the world's best-selling singles have received their first international performance on the Eurovision stage.\nThe contest has received criticism for its musical and artistic quality, and for a perceived political aspect to the event. Competing entries have previously been derided for spanning various ethnic and international styles, and in recent years a tendency towards elaborate stage shows has been highlighted as a distraction. Concerns have been raised regarding political friendships and rivalries between countries potentially influencing the results. Controversial moments from past editions include participating countries withdrawing at a late stage, censorship of segments of the broadcast by broadcasters, and political events impacting participation. Eurovision has however gained popularity for its kitsch appeal and emergence as part of LGBT culture, resulting in a large active fan base and influence on popular culture. The popularity of the contest has led to the creation of several similar events, either organised by the EBU or created by external organisations, and several special events have been organised by the EBU to celebrate select anniversaries or as a replacement due to cancellation.\nOrigins and history.\nThe Eurovision Song Contest's founding stemmed from a desire to promote cooperation between European countries in the years following the Second World War through cross-border television broadcasts, which gave rise to the founding of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) in 1950. The word \"Eurovision\" was first used by British journalist George Campey in the \"London Evening Standard\" in 1951, when he referred to a BBC programme being relayed by Dutch television. Following several events broadcast internationally via the Eurovision transmission network in the early 1950s, including the Coronation of Elizabeth II in 1953, an EBU committee, headed by Marcel Bezen\u00e7on, was formed in January 1955 to investigate new initiatives for cooperation between broadcasters, which approved for further study a European song competition from an idea initially proposed by Sergio Pugliese. The EBU's general assembly agreed to the organising of the song contest in October 1955, under the initial title of the \"European Grand Prix\", and accepted a proposal by the Swiss delegation to host the event in Lugano in the spring of 1956. The Italian Sanremo Music Festival, held since 1951, was used as a basis for the initial planning of the contest, with several amendments and additions given its international nature.\nSeven countries participated in the , with each country represented by two songs; the only time in which multiple entries per country were permitted. The winning song was \"Refrain\", representing the host nation Switzerland and performed by Lys Assia. Voting during the first contest was held behind closed doors, with only the winner being announced on stage; the use of a scoreboard and public announcement of the voting, inspired by the BBC's \"Festival of British Popular Songs\", has been used since 1957. The tradition of the winning country hosting the following year's contest, which has since become a standard feature of the event, began in 1958. Technological developments have transformed the contest: colour broadcasts began in ; satellite broadcasts in ; and streaming in . Broadcasts in began in 2005 and in high-definition since 2007.\nBy the 1960s, between 16 and 18 countries were regularly competing each year. Countries from outside the traditional boundaries of Europe began entering the contest, and countries in Western Asia and North Africa started competing in the 1970s and 1980s. Changes in Europe following the end of the Cold War saw an influx of new countries from Central and Eastern Europe applying for the first time. The included a separate pre-qualifying round for seven of these new countries, and from relegation systems were introduced to manage the number of competing entries, with the poorest performing countries barred from entering the following year's contest. From 2004 the contest expanded to become a multi-programme event, with a semi-final at the allowing all interested countries to compete each year; a second semi-final was added to each edition from 2008.\n64 contests have been held , making Eurovision the longest-running annual international televised music competition as determined by \"Guinness World Records\". The contest has been listed as one of the longest-running television programmes in the world and among the world\u2019s most watched non-sporting events. A total of 52 countries have taken part in at least one edition, with a record 43 countries participating in a single contest, first in and subsequently in and . Australia became the first non-EBU member country to compete following an invitation by the EBU ahead of the contest's in 2015; initially announced as a \"one-off\" for the anniversary edition, the country was invited back the following year and has subsequently secured participation rights until 2023.\nEurovision had been held every year until 2020, when was cancelled in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. No competitive event was able to take place due to uncertainty caused by the spread of the virus in Europe and the various restrictions imposed by the governments of the participating countries. In its place a special broadcast, \"\", was produced by the organisers, which honoured the songs and artists that would have competed in 2020, in a non-competitive format.\nNaming.\nOver the years the name used to describe the contest, and used on the official logo for each edition, has evolved. The first contests were produced under the name of in French and as the \"Eurovision Song Contest Grand Prix\" in English, with similar variations used in the languages of each of the broadcasting countries. From 1968, the English name dropped the 'Grand Prix' from the name, with the French name being aligned as the , first used in 1973. The contest's official brand guidance specifies that translations of the name may be used depending on national tradition and brand recognition in the competing countries, but that the official name \"Eurovision Song Contest\" is always preferred; the contest is commonly referred to in English by the abbreviation \"Eurovision\", and in internal documents by the acronym \"ESC\".\nOn only four occasions has the name used for the official logo of the contest not been in English or French: the Italian names and were used when Italy hosted the and respectively; and the Dutch name was used when the Netherlands hosted in and .\nFormat.\nOriginal songs representing participating countries are performed in a live television programme broadcast via the Eurovision and Euroradio networks simultaneously to all countries. A \"country\" as a participant is represented by one television broadcaster from that country, a member of the European Broadcasting Union, and is typically that country's national public broadcasting organisation. The programme is staged by one of the participant countries and is broadcast from an auditorium in the selected host city. Since 2008 each contest is typically formed of three live television shows held over one week: two semi-finals are held on the Tuesday and Thursday, followed by a grand final on the Saturday. All participating countries compete in one of the two semi-finals, except for the host country of that year's contest and the contest's biggest financial contributors known as the \"Big Five\"\u2014, , , and the . The remaining countries are split between the two semi-finals, and the 10 highest-scoring entries in each qualify to produce 26 countries competing in the grand final.\nEach show typically begins with an opening act consisting of music and/or dance performances by invited artists, which contributes to a unique theme and identity created for that year's event; since 2013 the opening of the contest's grand final has included a \"Flag Parade\", with competing artists entering the stage behind their country's flag in a similar manner to the procession of competing athletes at the Olympic Games opening ceremony. Viewers are welcomed by one or more presenters who provide key updates during the show, conduct interviews with competing acts from the green room, and guide the voting procedure in English and French. Competing acts perform sequentially, and after all songs have been performed viewers are invited to vote for their favourite performances\u2014except for the performance of their own country\u2014via telephone, SMS and the official Eurovision app. The public vote comprises 50% of the final result alongside the views of a jury of music industry professionals from each country. An interval act is invariably featured during this voting period, which on several occasions has included a well-known personality from the host country or an internationally recognised figure. The results of the voting are subsequently announced; in the semi-finals the 10 highest-ranked countries are announced in a random order, with the full results undisclosed. In the final the presenters call upon a representative spokesperson for each country in turn who announces their jury's points, while the results of the public vote are subsequently announced by the presenters. The qualifying acts in the semi-finals, and the winning delegation in the final are invited back on stage, and in the grand final a trophy is awarded to the winning performers and songwriters followed by a reprise of the winning song. The full results of the semi-finals are released online following the final, and the participating broadcaster of the winning entry is traditionally given the honour of organising the following year's event.\nEach participating broadcaster has sole discretion over the process they may employ to select their entry for the contest. Typical methods in which participants are selected include a televised national selection process using a public vote; an internal selection by a committee appointed by the broadcaster; and through a mixed format where some decisions are made internally and the public are engaged in others. Among the most successful televised selection shows is Sweden's \"Melodifestivalen\", first established in 1959 and now one of Sweden's most watched TV shows each year.\nParticipation.\nActive Members (as opposed to Associate Members) of the European Broadcasting Union are eligible to participate; Active Members are those who are located in states that fall within the European Broadcasting Area, or are member states of the Council of Europe. Active Members include media organisations whose broadcasts are often made available to at least 98% of households in their own country which are equipped to receive such transmissions. Associate Member broadcasters may be eligible to compete, dependent on approval by the contest's Reference Group.\nThe European Broadcasting Area is defined by the International Telecommunication Union as encompassing the geographical area between the boundary of ITU Region 1 in the west, the meridian 40\u00b0 East of Greenwich in the east, and parallel 30\u00b0 North in the south. Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia and Ukraine, and the territory of Iraq, Jordan and Syria lying outside these limits are included in the European Broadcasting Area.\nEligibility to participate in the contest is therefore not limited to countries in Europe, as several nations geographically outside the boundaries of the continent or which span more than one continent are included in the Broadcasting Area. Nations from these groups have taken part in past editions, including countries in Western Asia such as Israel and Cyprus, countries which span Europe and Asia like Russia and Turkey, and North African countries such as Morocco. Australia became the first country to participate from outside the European Broadcasting Area in 2015, following an invitation by the contest's Reference Group.\nEBU Members who wish to participate must fulfil conditions as laid down in the rules of the contest, a separate copy of which is drafted annually. A maximum of 44 countries can take part in any one contest. Broadcasters must have paid the EBU a participation fee in advance to the deadline specified in the rules for the year in which they wish to participate; this fee is different for each country based on its size and viewership.\nFifty-two countries have participated at least once. These are listed here alongside the year in which they made their debut:\nHosting.\nThe winning country traditionally hosts the following year's event, with only a number of exceptions since . Hosting the contest can be seen as a unique opportunity for promoting the host country as a tourist destination and can provide benefits to the local economy and tourism sectors of the host city. Preparations for each year's contest typically begin at the conclusion of the previous year's contest, with the winning country's head of delegation receiving a welcome package of information related to hosting the contest at the winner's press conference. Eurovision is a non-profit event, and financing is typically achieved through a fee from each participating broadcaster, contributions from the host broadcaster and the host city, and commercial revenues from sponsorships, ticket sales, televoting and merchandise.\nThe host broadcaster will subsequently select a host city, typically a national or regional capital city, which must meet certain criteria set out in the contest's rules. The host venue must be able to accommodate at least 10,000 spectators, a press centre for 1,500 journalists, should be within easy reach of an international airport and with hotel accommodation available for at least 2,000 delegates, journalists and spectators. A variety of different venues have been used for past editions, from small theatres and television studios to large arenas and stadiums. The largest host venue is Parken Stadium in Copenhagen, which was attended by almost 38,000 spectators in . With a population of 1,500 at the time of the , Millstreet, Ireland remains the smallest hosting settlement, although its Green Glens Arena is capable of hosting up to 8,000 spectators.\nEurovision logo and theme.\nUntil 2004 each edition of the contest used its own logo and visual identity as determined by the respective host broadcaster. To create a consistent visual identity a generic logo was introduced ahead of the . This is typically accompanied by unique theme artwork and a slogan designed for each individual contest by the host broadcaster, with the flag of the host country placed prominently in the centre of the Eurovision heart. The original logo was designed by the London-based agency JM International, and received a revamp in 2014 by Cornelis Jacobs of the Amsterdam-based Cityzen Agency for the contest's .\nAn individual slogan and theme has been associated with most editions of the contest since 2002 and utilised by contest producers when constructing the show's visual identity, including the stage design, the opening and interval acts, and the \"postcards\". The short video postcards are interspersed between the entries and were first introduced in 1970, initially as an attempt to \"bulk up\" the contest after a number of countries decided not to compete, but has since become a regular part of the show and usually highlight the host country and introduce the competing acts.\nPreparations.\nPreparations in the host venue typically begin approximately six weeks before the grand final, to accommodate building works and technical rehearsals before the arrival of the competing artists. Delegations will typically arrive in the host city two to three weeks before the live show, and each participating broadcaster nominates a head of delegation, responsible for coordinating the movements of their delegation and being that country's representative to the EBU. Members of each country's delegation include performers, composers, lyricists, members of the press, and\u2014in the years where a live orchestra was present\u2014a conductor. Present if desired is a commentator, who provides commentary of the event for their country's radio and/or television feed in their country's own language in dedicated booths situated around the back of the arena behind the audience.\nEach country conducts two individual rehearsals, the first for 30 minutes and held behind closed doors, and the second for 20 minutes and open to accredited press. Technical rehearsals for the semi-finalists commence the week before the live shows, with countries typically rehearsing in the order in which they will perform during the contest; rehearsals for the host country and the \"Big Five\" automatic finalists are held towards the end of the week. Following rehearsals delegations meet with the show's production team to review footage of the rehearsal and raise any special requirements or changes. \"Meet and greet\" sessions with contest fans and press conferences with accredited press are held during these rehearsal weeks. Each live show is preceded by three dress rehearsals, where the whole show is performed in the same way as it will be presented on TV. The second dress rehearsal, alternatively called the \"jury final\" and held the night before the broadcast, is used as a recorded back-up in case of technological failure, and performances during this show are used by each country's professional jury to determine their votes. The delegations from the qualifying countries in each semi-final attend a qualifiers' press conference after their respective semi-final, and the winning delegation attends a winners' press conference following the grand final.\nA welcome reception is typically held at a venue in the host city on the Sunday preceding the live shows, which includes a red carpet ceremony for all the participating countries and is usually broadcast online. Accredited delegates, press and fans have access to an official nightclub, the \"EuroClub\", and some delegations will hold their own parties. The \"Eurovision Village\" is an official fan zone open to the public free of charge, with live performances by the contest's artists and screenings of the live shows on big screens.\nRules.\nThe contest is organised annually by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU), together with the participating broadcaster of the host country. The event is monitored by an Executive Supervisor appointed by the EBU, and by the Reference Group which represents all participating broadcasters, who are each represented by a nominated Head of Delegation. The current Executive Supervisor is Martin \u00d6sterdahl, who took over the role from Jon Ola Sand in May 2020. A detailed set of rules is written by the EBU for each contest and approved by the Reference Group. These rules have changed over time, and typically outline, among other points, the eligibility of the competing songs, the format of the contest, and the voting system to be used to determine the winner and how the results will be presented.\nSong eligibility and languages.\nAll competing songs must have a duration of three minutes or less. This rule applies only to the version performed during the live shows. In order to be considered eligible, competing songs in a given year's contest must not have been released commercially before the first day of September of the previous year. All competing entries must include vocals and lyrics of some kind and purely instrumental pieces are not allowed. Competing entries may be performed in any language, be that natural or constructed, and participating broadcasters are free to decide the language in which their entry may be performed.\nRules specifying in which language a song may be performed have changed over time. No restrictions were originally enacted when the contest was first founded, however following criticism over the being performed in English, a new rule was introduced for the restricting songs to be performed only in an official language of the country it represented. This rule was first abolished in , and subsequently reinstated for most countries in , with only and permitted freedom of language as their selection processes for that year's contest had already commenced. The language rule was once again abolished ahead of the .\nArtist eligibility and performances.\nThe rules for the first contest specified that only solo performers were permitted to enter; this criteria was changed the following year to permit duos to compete, and groups were subsequently permitted for the first time in . Currently the number of people permitted on stage during competing performances is limited to a maximum of six, and no live animals are allowed. Since all contestants must be aged 16 or over on the day of the live show in which they perform. With this rule's introduction Sandra Kim, the winner in at the age of 13, shall remain the contest's youngest winner in perpetuity. There is no limit on the nationality or country of birth of the competing artists, and participating broadcasters are free to select an artist from any country; several winning artists have subsequently held a different nationality or were born in a different country to that which they represented. No performer may compete for more than one country in a given year.\nThe orchestra was a prominent aspect of the contest from 1956 to 1998. Pre-recorded backing tracks were first allowed for competing acts in 1973, but any pre-recorded instruments were required to seen being \"performed\" on stage; in 1997, all instrumental music was allowed to be pre-recorded, however the host country was still required to provide an orchestra. In 1999 the rules were changed again, making the orchestra an optional requirement; the host broadcaster of , Israel's IBA, subsequently decided not to provide an orchestra, resulting in all entries using backing tracks for the first time. Currently all instrumental music for competing entries must now be pre-recorded, and no live instrumentation is allowed during performances.\nThe main vocals of competing songs must be performed live during the contest. Previously live backing vocals were also required; for the these may optionally be pre-recorded - this change has been implemented on a trial basis in an effort to introduce flexibility following the cancellation of the 2020 edition and to facilitate modernisation. \nRunning order.\nSince the order in which the competing countries perform has been determined by the contest's producers, and submitted to the EBU Executive Supervisor and Reference Group for approval before public announcement. This was changed from a random draw used in previous years in order to provide a better experience for television viewers and ensure all countries stand out by avoiding instances where songs of a similar style or tempo are not performed in sequence.\nSince the creation of a second semi-final in , a semi-final allocation draw is held each year. Countries are placed into pots based on their geographical location and voting history in recent contests, and are assigned to compete in one of the two semi-finals through a random draw. Countries are then randomly assigned to compete in either the first or second half of their respective semi-final, and once all competing songs have been selected the producers then determine the running order for the semi-finals. The automatic qualifiers are assigned at random to a semi-final for the purposes of voting rights.\nSemi-final qualifiers make a draw at random during the winners' press conference to determine whether they will perform during the first or second half of the final; the automatic finalists then randomly draw their competing half in the run-up to the grand final, except for the host country, whose exact performance position is determined in a separate draw. The running order for the final is then decided following the second semi-final by the producers, taking into consideration both the competing songs' musical qualities as well as stage performance, to best work around the set up of any props, lighting requirements and other production considerations.\nVoting.\nIn place since 2016, the current voting system used to determine the results of the contest works on the basis of positional voting. Each country awards two sets of points: one set is based on the votes of each country's professional jury, comprising five music professionals from that country; and a second set is based on the votes of the general public in the competing countries through telephone, SMS or the official Eurovision app. Each set of points consists of 1\u20138, 10 and 12 points to the jury and public's ten favourite songs, with the most preferred song receiving 12 points. This system is a modification of that used since 1975, when the \"12 points\" system was first introduced but with each country providing one set of points. National juries and the public in each country are not allowed to vote for their own country, a rule first introduced in 1957.\nHistorically, each country's points were determined by a jury, consisting at various times of members of the public, music professionals, or both in combination. With advances in telecommunication technology, televoting was first introduced to the contest in on a trial basis, with broadcasters in five countries allowing the viewing public to determine their votes for the first time. From televoting was extended to almost all competing countries, and subsequently became mandatory from . A jury was reintroduced for the grand final in , with each country's points comprising both the votes of the jury and public in an equal split; this mix of jury and public voting was expanded into the semi-finals from 2010.\nShould two or more countries finish with the same number of points, a tie-break procedure is employed to determine the final placings. a combined national televoting and jury result is calculated for each country, and the country which has obtained points from the most countries following this calculation is deemed to have placed higher.\nPresentation of the votes.\nSince 1957 each country's votes have been announced during a special voting segment as part of the contest's broadcast, with a selected spokesperson assigned to announce the results of their country's vote. This spokesperson is typically well known in their country; previous spokespersons have included former Eurovision artists and hosts. Historically the announcements were made through telephone lines from the countries of origin, with satellite links employed for the first time in , allowing the spokespersons to be seen visually by the audience and TV spectators.\nScoring is done by both a national jury and a national televote. Each country's jury votes are consecutively added to the totals scoreboard as they are called upon by the contest presenter(s). The scoreboard was historically placed at the side of the stage and updated manually as each country gave their votes; in a computer graphics scoreboard was introduced. The jury points from 1\u20138 and 10 are displayed on screen and added automatically to the scoreboard, then the country's spokesperson announces which country will receive the 12 points. Once jury points from all countries have been announced, the presenter(s) announce the total public points received for each finalist, with the votes for each country being consolidated and announced as a single value. The public points are revealed in ascending order based on the jury vote, with the country that received the fewest points from the jury being the first to receive their public points. A full breakdown of the results across all shows is published on the official Eurovision website after the final, including each country's televoting ranking and the votes of its jury and individual jury members. Each country's individual televoting points in the final are typically displayed on-screen by that country's broadcaster following the announcement of the winner.\nBroadcasting.\nParticipating broadcasters are required to air live the semi-final in which they compete, or in the case of the automatic finalists the semi-final in which they are required to vote, and the grand final, in its entirety; this includes all competing songs, the voting recap containing short clips of the performances, the voting procedure or semi-final qualification reveal, and the reprise of the winning song in the grand final. Since 1999 broadcasters who wished to do so were given the opportunity to provide advertising during short, non-essential hiatuses in the show's schedule. In exceptional circumstances, such as due to developing emergency situations, participating broadcasters may delay or postpone broadcast of the event. Should a broadcaster fail to air a show as expected in any other scenario they may be subject to sanctions by the EBU. Several broadcasters in countries that are unable to compete have previously aired the contest in their markets.\nAs national broadcasters join and leave the Eurovision feed transmitted by the EBU, the EBU/Eurovision network logo ident (not to be confused with the logo of the song contest itself) is displayed. The accompanying music (used on other Eurovision broadcasts) is the Prelude \"(Marche en rondeau)\" to Marc-Antoine Charpentier's \"Te Deum\". Originally, the same logo was used for both the Eurovision network and the European Broadcasting Union, however, they now have two different logos; the latest Eurovision network logo was introduced in 2012, and when the ident is transmitted at the start and end of programmes it is this Eurovision network logo that appears.\nThe EBU now holds recording of all but two editions of the contest in its archives following a project initiated in 2011 to collate footage and related materials of all editions ahead of the event's 60th anniversary in 2015. The first contest in 1956 was primarily a radio show, and although cameras were present to broadcast the show for the few Europeans who had television sets no video footage of the contest is known to have survived. No known footage of the exists either, with conflicting reports of the fate of any copies that may have survived. Audio recordings of both contests do however exist, and some short pieces of footage from both events have survived.\nExpansion of the contest.\nFrom the original seven countries which entered the first contest in 1956, the number of competing countries has steadily grown over time. 18 countries participated in the contest's 10th edition in 1965, and by 1990 22 countries were regularly competing each year.\nBesides slight modifications to the voting system and other contest rules, no fundamental changes to the contest's format were introduced until the early 1990s, when events in Europe in the late 1980s and early 1990s resulted in a growing interest from new countries in the former Eastern Bloc, particularly following the merger of the Eastern European rival OIRT network with the EBU in 1993.\nPre-selections and relegation.\n29 countries registered to take part in the 1993 contest, a figure the EBU considered unable to fit reasonably into a single TV show. A preselection method was subsequently introduced for the first time in order to reduce the number of competing entries, with seven countries in Central and Eastern Europe participating in \"Kvalifikacija za Millstreet\", held in Ljubljana, Slovenia one month before the event. Following a vote among the seven competing countries, , and were chosen to head to the contest in Millstreet, Ireland, and , , and were forced to wait another year before being allowed to compete. A new relegation system was introduced for entry into the 1994 contest, with the lowest-placed countries being forced to sit out the following year's event to be replaced by countries which had not competed in the previous contest. The bottom seven countries in 1993 were required to miss the following year's contest, and were replaced by the four unsuccessful countries in \"Kvalifikacija za Millstreet\" and new entries from , and .\nThis system was used again in 1994 for qualification for the , but a new system was introduced for the , when an audio-only qualification round held in the months before the contest in Oslo, Norway; this system was primarily introduced in an attempt to appease Germany, one of Eurovision's biggest markets and biggest financial contributors, which would have otherwise been relegated under the previous system. 29 countries competed for 22 places in the main contest alongside the automatically-qualified Norwegian hosts, however Germany would ultimately still miss out, and joined Hungary, Romania, Russia, , , and as one of the seven countries to be absent from the Oslo contest. For the a similar relegation system to that used between 1993 and 1995 was introduced, with each country's average scores in the preceding five contests being used as a measure to determine which countries would be relegated. This was subsequently changed again in 2001, back to the same system used between 1993 and 1995 where only the results from that year's contest would count towards relegation.\nThe \"Big Four\" and \"Big Five\".\nIn 1999 an exemption from relegation was introduced for France, Germany, Spain and the United Kingdom, giving them an automatic right to compete. This group, as the highest-paying EBU members which significantly fund the contest each year, subsequently became known as the \"Big Four\" countries. This group was expanded in 2011 when Italy began competing again, becoming the \"Big Five\". Originally brought in to ensure that the financial contributions of the contest's biggest financial backers would not be missed, since the introduction of the semi-finals in 2004 the \"Big Five\" now instead automatically qualify for the final along with the host country.\nThere remains debate on whether this status prejudices the countries' results, based on reported antipathy over their automatic qualification and the potential disadvantage of having spent less time on stage through not competing in the semi-finals, however this status appears to be more complex given results of the \"Big Five\" countries can vary widely. This status has caused consternation from other competing countries, and was cited, among other aspects, as a reason why had ceased participating after .\nIntroduction of semi-finals.\nAn influx of new countries applying for the resulted in the introduction of a semi-final from 2004, with the contest becoming a two-day event. The top 10 countries in each year's final would qualify automatically to the following year's final, alongside the \"Big Four\", meaning all other countries would compete in the semi-final to compete for 10 qualification spots. The in Istanbul, Turkey saw a record 36 countries competing, with new entries from , , and and the return of previously relegated countries. The format of this semi-final remained similar to the final proper, taking place a few days before the final; following the performances and the voting window, the names of the 10 countries with the highest number of points, which would therefore qualify for the grand final, were announced at the end of the show, revealed in a random order by the contest's presenters.\nThe single semi-final continued to be held between 2005 and 2007; however, with over 40 countries competing in the in Helsinki, Finland, the semi-final had 28 entries competing for 10 spots in the final. Following criticism over the mainly Eastern European qualifiers at the 2007 event and the poor performance of entries from Western European nations, a second semi-final was subsequently introduced for the in Belgrade, Serbia, with all countries now competing in one of the two semi-finals, with only the host country and the \"Big Four\", and subsequently the \"Big Five\" from 2011, qualifying automatically. 10 qualification spots would be available in each of the semi-finals, and a new system to split the competing countries between the two semi-finals was introduced based on their geographic location and previous voting patterns, in an attempt to reduce the impact of bloc voting and to make the outcome less predictable.\nWinners.\n67 songs from 27 countries have won the Eurovision Song Contest . has recorded the most wins, with seven in total, followed by with six, and , , the and the with five each. Of the 52 countries to take part, 25 have yet to win. On only one occasion have multiple winners been declared in a single contest: in , four countries finished the contest with an equal number of votes and due to the lack of a tie-break rule at the time, all four countries were declared winners. A majority of winning songs have been performed in English, particularly since the language rule was abolished in 1999. Since that contest, only five winning songs have been performed either fully or partially in a language other than English.\nTwo countries have won the contest on their first appearance: , by virtue of being declared the winner of the first contest in 1956; and , which won in 2007 in their first participation as an independent country, following entries in previous editions as part of the now-defunct and then . Other countries have had relatively short waits before winning their first contest, with victorious on their second contest appearance in and winning with their third entry in . Conversely, some countries have competed for many years before recording their first win: recorded their first win in , 31 years after their first appearance, while ended a 45-year losing streak in . waited the longest, recording their first win in , 53 years after their first participation. Countries have in the past had to wait many years to win the contest a second time: Switzerland went 32 years between winning in 1956 and ; held a 37-year gap between wins in and ; the Netherlands waited 44 years to win again in 2019, their most recent win having been in ; and won its second contest in , 48 years after their first win in .\nThe United Kingdom holds the record for the highest-number of second-place finishes, having come runner-up in the contest fifteen times. Meanwhile, has come last more than any other country, appearing at the bottom of the scoreboard on eleven occasions, including scoring \"nul points\" four times. A country has recorded back-to-back wins on four occasions: recorded consecutive wins in and 1969; Luxembourg did likewise in and ; Israel won the contest in and ; and Ireland became the first country to win three consecutive titles, winning in , and . Ireland's winning streak in the 1990s includes the , giving them a record four wins in five years.\nThe winning artists and songwriters receive a trophy, which since 2008 has followed a standard design: a handmade piece of sandblasted glass with painted details in the shape of a 1950s-style microphone, designed by Kjell Engman of the Swedish-based glassworks Kosta Boda. The trophy is typically presented by the previous year's winner; others who have handed out the award in the past include representatives from the host broadcaster or the EBU, and politicians; in 2007 the fictional character, Joulupukki (original Santa Claus from Finland), presented the award to the winner Marija \u0160erifovi\u0107.\nEntries and participants.\nThe contest has been used as a launching point for artists who went on to achieve worldwide fame, and several of the world's best-selling artists are counted among past Eurovision Song Contest participants and winning artists. ABBA, the winners for Sweden, have recorded an estimated 380 million albums and singles sales since their contest win brought them to worldwide attention, with their winning song \"Waterloo\" selling over five million records. Celine Dion's win for Switzerland in helped launch her international career, particularly in the anglophone market, and she would go on to sell an estimated 200 million records worldwide. Julio Iglesias was relatively unknown when he represented Spain in and placed fourth, but worldwide success followed his Eurovision appearance, with an estimated 100 million records sold during his career. Australian singer Olivia Newton-John represented the United Kingdom in 1974, placing fourth behind ABBA, but went on to sell an estimated 100 million records, win four Grammy Awards, as well as star in the critically and commercially successful musical film \"Grease\".\nA number of performers have competed in the contest after having already achieved considerable success. These include winning artists Lulu, Toto Cutugno, and Katrina and the Waves, and acts that failed to win such as Nana Mouskouri, Cliff Richard, Baccara, Umberto Tozzi, Plastic Bertrand, t.A.T.u., Las Ketchup, Patricia Kaas, Engelbert Humperdinck, and Bonnie Tyler. Past participants have contributed to other fields in addition to their music careers. The Netherlands' Annie Schmidt, lyricist of the first entry performed at Eurovision, has gained a worldwide reputation for her stories and earned the Hans Christian Andersen Award for children's literature. French \"y\u00e9-y\u00e9 girls\" Francoise Hardy and contest winner France Gall are household names of 1960s pop culture, while Hardy being a pioneer of street style fashion trends and an inspiration for the global youthquake movement. Figures who formerly carved a career in politics and gained international acclaim for humanitarian achievements include contest winner Dana as a two-time Irish presidential candidate and Member of the European Parliament (MEP); Nana Mouskouri as Greek MEP and a UNICEF international goodwill ambassador; contest winner Ruslana as member of Verkhovna Rada, Ukraine's parliament and a figure of the Orange Revolution and Euromaidan protests, who gained global honours for leadership and courage; and North Macedonia's Esma Red\u017eepova as member of political parties and a two-time Nobel Peace Prize nominee.\nCompeting songs have occasionally gone on to become successes for their original performers and other artists, and some of the best-selling singles globally received their first international performances at Eurovision. \"Save Your Kisses for Me\", the winning song in for the United Kingdom's Brotherhood of Man, went on to sell over six million singles, more than any other winning song. \"Nel blu, dipinto di blu\", also known as \"Volare\", Italy's third-placed song in performed by Domenico Modugno, has since been recorded by various artists and achieved combined sales of over 22 million copies worldwide. \"Eres t\u00fa\", performed by Spain's Mocedades and runner-up in , became the first Spanish-language song to reach the top 10 of the \"Billboard Hot 100\" in the United States, and the Grammy-nominated \"Ooh Aah... Just a Little Bit\", which came eighth in for the United Kingdom, sold 790,000 records and achieved success across Europe and the US, reaching #1 on the UK Singles Chart and peaking at #12 on the \"Billboard Hot 100\".\n\"Euphoria\", Loreen's winning song for Sweden in , achieved Europe-wide success, reaching number one in several countries and by 2014 had become the most downloaded Eurovision song to date. The video for \"Occidentali's Karma\" by Francesco Gabbani, which placed sixth for Italy in , became the first Eurovision song to reach more than 200 million views on YouTube, while Mahmood's \"Soldi\", the Italian runner-up in , was the most-streamed Eurovision song on Spotify until it was overtaken by that year's winner for the Netherlands, \"Arcade\" by Duncan Laurence, following viral success on TikTok in late 2020 and early 2021; \"Arcade\" would later become the first Eurovision song since \"Ooh Aah... Just a Little Bit\" and the first Eurovision winning song since \"Save Your Kisses for Me\" to break into the \"Billboard Hot 100\".\nJohnny Logan remains the only artist to have won multiple Eurovision titles as a performer, winning the contest for Ireland in with \"What's Another Year\", written by Shay Healy, and in with the self-penned \"Hold Me Now\". Logan was also the winning songwriter in for the Irish winner, \"Why Me?\" performed by Linda Martin, and has therefore achieved three contest victories as either a performer or writer. Four further songwriters have each written two contest-winning songs: Willy van Hemert, Yves Dessca, Rolf L\u00f8vland, and Brendan Graham. Several other well-known composers and lyricists have competed over the years, including Serge Gainsbourg, Goran Bregovi\u0107, Diane Warren, Andrew Lloyd Webber, Pete Waterman, and Tony Iommi, as well as producers Timbaland and Guy-Manuel de Homem-Christo.\nInterval acts and guest appearances.\nAlongside the song contest and appearances from local and international personalities, performances from non-competing artists and musicians have been included since the first edition, and have become a staple of the live show. These performances have varied widely, previously featuring music, art, dance and circus performances, and past participants are regularly invited to perform, with the reigning champion traditionally returning each year to perform the previous year's winning song.\nThe contest's opening performance and the main interval act, held following the final competing song and before the announcement of the results, has become a memorable part of the contest and has included both internationally known artists and local stars. Contest organisers have previously used these performances as a way to explore their country's culture and history, such as in \"4,000 Years of Greek Song\" at the held in Greece; other performances have been more comedic in nature, featuring parody and humour, as was the case with \"Love Love Peace Peace\" in , a humorous ode to the history and spectacle of the contest itself. \"Riverdance\", which later became one of the most successful dance productions in the world, first began as the interval performance at the 1994 contest in Ireland; the seven-minute performance of traditional Irish music and dance was later expanded into a full stage show that has been seen by over 25 million people worldwide and provided a launchpad for its lead dancers Michael Flatley and Jean Butler.\nAmong other artists who have performed in a non-competitive manner are Danish Europop group Aqua in , Russian pop duo t.A.T.u. in , and American entertainers Justin Timberlake and Madonna in and respectively. Other notable artists, including Cirque du Soleil (), Alexandrov Ensemble (), Vienna Boys' Choir ( and ) and Fire of Anatolia (), also performed on the Eurovision stage, and there have been guest appearances from well-known faces from outside the world of music, including actors, athletes, and serving astronauts and cosmonauts. Guest performances have been used as a channel in response to global events happening concurrently with the contest. The in Israel closed with all competing acts performing a rendition of Israel's winning song \"Hallelujah\" as a tribute to the victims of the ongoing war in the Balkans, and a dance performance entitled \"The Grey People\" in 2016's first semi-final was devoted to the European migrant crisis.\nCriticism and controversy.\nThe contest has been the subject of criticism regarding both its musical content and what has been reported to be a political element to the event, and several controversial moments have been witnessed over the course of its history.\nMusical style and presentation.\nCriticism has been levied against the musical quality of past competing entries, with a perception that certain music styles seen as being presented more often than others in an attempt to appeal to as many potential voters as possible among the international audience. Power ballads, folk rhythms and bubblegum pop have been considered staples of the contest in recent years, leading to allegations that the event has become formulaic. Other traits in past competing entries which have regularly been mocked by media and viewers include an abundance of key changes and lyrics about love and/or peace, as well as the pronunciation of English by non-native users of the language. Given Eurovision is principally a television show, over the years competing performances have attempted to attract the viewers' attention through means other than music, and elaborate lighting displays, pyrotechnics, and extravagant on-stage theatrics and costumes having become a common sight at recent contests; criticism of these tactics have been levied as being a method of distracting the viewer from the weak musical quality of some of the competing entries.\nAlthough many of these traits are ridiculed in the media and elsewhere, for others these traits are celebrated and considered an integral part of what makes the contest appealing. Although many of the competing acts each year will fall into some of the categories above, the contest has seen a diverse range of musical styles in its history, including heavy metal, jazz, country, electronic, R&amp;B and hip hop.\nPolitical controversies.\nAs artists and songs ultimately represent a country, the contest has seen several controversial moments where political tensions between competing countries as a result of frozen conflicts, and in some cases open warfare, are reflected in the performances and voting.\nThe continuing conflict between and has affected the contest on numerous occasions. Conflicts between the two countries at Eurovision escalated quickly since both countries began competing in the late 2000s, resulting in fines and displinary action for both countries' broadcasters over political stunts, and a forced change of title for one competing song due to allegations of political subtext. Interactions between and in the contest had originally been positive, however as political relations soured between the two countries so too have relations at Eurovision become more complex. Complaints were levied against Ukraine's winning song in , \"1944\", whose lyrics referenced the deportation of the Crimean Tatars, but which the Russian delegation claimed had a greater political meaning in light of Russia's annexation of Crimea. As Ukraine prepared to host the following year's contest, Russia's selected representative, Yuliya Samoylova, was barred from entering the country due to having previously entered Crimea illegally according to Ukrainian law. Russia eventually pulled out of the contest after offers for Samoylova to perform remotely were refused by Russia's broadcaster, Channel One Russia, resulting in the EBU reprimanding the Ukrainian broadcaster, . In the aftermath of the Russo-Georgian War, 's planned entry for the in Moscow, Russia, \"We Don't Wanna Put In\", caused controversy as the lyrics appeared to criticise Russian leader Vladimir Putin. After requests by the EBU for changes to the lyrics were refused, Georgia's broadcaster GPB subsequently withdrew from the event. ' planned entry in also caused controversy in the wake of demonstrations against disputed election results, resulting in the country's disqualification when two potential songs were deemed to breach the contest's rules on neutrality and politicisation.\n's participation in the contest has resulted in several controversial moments in the past, with the country's first appearance in , less than a year after the Munich massacre, resulting in an increased security presence at the venue in Luxembourg City. Israel's first win in proved controversial for Arab nations broadcasting the contest which would typically cut to advertisements when Israel performed due to a lack of recognition of the country, and when it became apparent Israel would win many of these broadcasters cut the feed before the end of the voting. Arab states which are eligible to compete have been precluded from participating due to Israel's presence, with the only Arab nation to have entered Eurovision, competing for the first, and the only time, in when Israel was absent. Israeli participation has been criticised by those who oppose current government policies in the state, with calls raised by various political groups for a boycott ahead of the in Tel Aviv, including proponents of the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) movement in response to the country's policies towards Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, as well as groups who take issue with perceived pinkwashing in Israel. Others campaigned against a boycott, asserting that any cultural boycott would be antithetical to advancing peace in the region.\nPolitical and geographical voting.\nThe contest has been described as containing political elements in its voting process, a perception that countries will give votes more frequently and in higher quantities to other countries based on political relationships, rather than the musical merits of the songs themselves. Numerous studies and academic papers have been written on this subject, which have corroborated that certain countries form \"clusters\" or \"cliques\" by frequently voting in the same way; one study concludes that voting blocs can play a crucial role in deciding the winner of the contest, with evidence that on at least two occasions bloc voting was a pivotal factor in the vote for the winning song. Other views on these \"blocs\" argue that certain countries will allocate high points to others based on similar musical tastes, shared cultural links and a high degree of similarity and mutual intelligibility between languages, and are therefore more likely to appreciate and vote for the competing songs from these countries based on these factors, rather than political relationships specifically.&lt;ref name=\"Spierdijk/Vellekoop\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Analysis on other voting patterns have revealed examples which indicate voting preferences among countries based on shared religion, as well as \"patriotic voting\", particularly since the introduction of televoting in 1997, where foreign nationals vote for their country of origin. \nVoting patterns in the contest have been reported by news publishers, including \"The Economist\" and \"BBC News\". Criticism of the voting system was at its highest in the mid-2000s, resulting in a number of calls for countries to boycott the contest over reported voting biases, particularly following the where Eastern European countries occupied the top 15 places in the final and dominated the qualifying spaces. The poor performance of the entries from more traditional Eurovision countries had subsequently been discussed in European national parliaments, and the developments in the voting was cited as among the reasons for the resignation of Terry Wogan as commentator for the UK, a role he had performed at every contest from 1980. In response to this criticism, the EBU introduced a second semi-final in 2008, with countries split based on geographic proximity and voting history, and juries of music professionals were reintroduced in 2009, in an effort to reduce the impacts of bloc voting.\nLGBT visibility.\nEurovision has had a long-held fan base in the LGBT community, and contest organisers have actively worked to include these fans in the event since the 1990s. Paul Oscar became the contest's first openly gay artist when he represented in , and Israel's Dana International, the contest's first trans performer, became the first LGBT artist to win in . Several open members of the LGBT community have since gone on to compete and win: Conchita Wurst, the drag persona of openly gay Thomas Neuwirth, won the 2014 contest for Austria; and openly bisexual performer Duncan Laurence was the winner of the 2019 contest for the Netherlands. Marija \u0160erifovi\u0107, who won the 2007 contest for Serbia, subsequently came out publicly as a lesbian in 2013. Past competing songs and performances have included references and allusions to same-sex relationships; \"Nous les amoureux\", the 1961 winning song, contained references to the difficulties faced by a homosexual relationship; Krista Siegfrids' performance of \"Marry Me\" at the included a same-sex kiss with one of her female backing dancers; and the stage show of Ireland's Ryan O'Shaughnessy's \"Together\" in had two male dancers portraying a same-sex relationship. Drag performers, such as Ukraine's Verka Serduchka, Denmark's DQ and Slovenia's Sestre, have appeared, including Wurst winning in 2014.\nIn more recent years, various political ideologies across Europe have clashed in the Eurovision setting, particularly on LGBT rights. Dana International's selection for the 1998 contest in Birmingham was marked by objections and death threats from orthodox religious sections of Israeli society, and at the contest her accommodation was reportedly in the only hotel in Birmingham with bulletproof windows. Turkey, once a regular participant and a one-time winner, first pulled out of the contest in 2013, citing dissatisfaction in the voting rules and more recently Turkish broadcaster TRT have cited LGBT performances as another reason for their continued boycott, refusing to broadcast the 2013 event over Finland's same sex kiss. LGBT visibility in the contest has been cited as a deciding factor for 's non-participation since 2020, although no official reason was given by the Hungarian broadcaster MTVA. The rise of anti-LGBT sentiment in Europe has led to a marked increase in booing from contest audiences, particularly since the introduction of a \"gay propaganda\" law in Russia in 2013. Conchita Wurst's win was met with criticism on the Russian political stage, with several conservative politicians voicing displeasure in the result. Clashes on LGBT visibility in the contest have occurred in countries which do not compete, such as in China, where broadcasting rights were terminated during the due to censorship of \"abnormal sexual relationships and behaviours\" that went against Chinese broadcasting guidelines.\nCultural influence.\nThe Eurovision Song Contest has amassed a global following and sees annual audience figures of between 100 million and 600 million. The contest has become a cultural influence worldwide since its first years, is regularly described as having kitsch appeal, and is included as a topic of parody in television sketches and in stage performances at the Edinburgh Fringe and Melbourne Comedy festivals among others. Several films have been created which celebrate the contest, including Eytan Fox's 2013 Israeli comedy ', and the Netflix 2020 musical comedy, ', produced with backing from the EBU and starring Will Ferrell and Rachel McAdams.\nEurovision has a large online following and multiple independent websites, news blogs and fan clubs are dedicated to the event. One of the oldest and largest Eurovision fan clubs is OGAE, founded in 1984 in Finland and currently a network of over 40 national branches across the world. National branches regularly host events to promote and celebrate Eurovision, and several participating broadcasters work closely with these branches when preparing their entries.\nIn the run-up to each year's contest, several countries regularly host smaller events between the conclusion of the national selection shows in March and the contest proper in May. These events typically include the artists which will go on to compete at that year's contest, and consist of performances at a venue and \"meet and greets\" with fans and the press. \"Eurovision in Concert\", held annually in Amsterdam, was one of the first of these events to be created, holding its first event in 2008. Other events held regularly include the \"London Eurovision Party\", the \"ESPreParty\" in Madrid, and the \"Eurovision PreParty\" in Riga. Several community events have been held virtually, particularly since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. \"#EurovisionAgain\", an initiative where fans watched and discussed past contests in sync on YouTube and other social media platforms started during the first COVID-19 lockdowns and subsequently became a top trend on Twitter across Europe, catching the attention of Eurovision organisers who began to broadcast the contests through their official YouTube channel. Through the EBU, the initiative was able to secure the rights to show several older editions for the first time on their YouTube channel, and over \u00a320,000 was raised for UK-based LGBTQ+ charities.\nSpecial events and related competitions.\nSeveral anniversary events, and related contests under the \"Eurovision Live Events\" brand, have been organised by the EBU with member broadcasters. In addition participating broadcasters have occasionally commissioned special Eurovision programmes for their home audiences, and a number of other imitator contests have been developed outside of the EBU framework, on both a national and international level.\nThe EBU has held several events to mark selected anniversaries in the contest's history: \"Songs of Europe\", held in 1981 to celebrate its twenty-fifth anniversary, had live performances and video recordings of all Eurovision Song Contest winners up to 1981; ' was organised in 2005 to celebrate the event's fiftieth anniversary, and featured a contest to determine the most popular song from among 14 selected entries from the contest's first 50 years; and in 2015 the event's sixtieth anniversary was marked by \"Eurovision Song Contest's Greatest Hits\", a concert of performances by past Eurovision artists and video montages of performances and footage from previous contests. Following the cancellation of the , the EBU subsequently organised a special non-competitive broadcast, ', which provided a showcase for the songs which would have competed in the competition.\nOther contests organised by the EBU include Eurovision Young Musicians, a classical music competition for European musicians between the ages of 12 and 21; Eurovision Young Dancers, a dance competition for non-professional performers between the ages of 16 and 21; Eurovision Choir, a choral competition for non-professional European choirs produced in partnership with Interkultur and modelled after the World Choir Games; and the Junior Eurovision Song Contest, a similar song contest for singers aged between 9 and 14 representing primarily European countries. The Eurovision Dance Contest was an event featuring pairs of dancers performing ballroom and latin dancing, which took place for two editions, in 2007 and 2008.\nSimilar international music competitions have been organised externally to the EBU. The Sopot International Song Festival has been held annually since 1961; between 1977 and 1980, under the patronage of the International Radio and Television Organisation (OIRT), an Eastern European broadcasting network similar to the EBU, it was rebranded as the Intervision Song Contest. A similar Ibero-American contest, the OTI Festival, was previously held among hispanophone and lusophone countries in Europe, North America and South America, and a contest for countries and autonomous regions with Turkic links, the Turkvision Song Contest, has been organised since 2013. The EBU has announced plans for a number of future contests in different regions: the Eurovision Asia Song Contest for countries in the Asia-Pacific region; and an American Song Contest has been announced as a counterpart in the United States, with artists representing the 50 U.S. states.\nReferences.\nSources:"}
{"id": "9955", "revid": "10044298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9955", "title": "Nitrox", "text": "Nitrox refers to any gas mixture composed (excepting trace gases) of nitrogen and oxygen. This includes atmospheric air, which is approximately 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, and 1% other gases, primarily argon. In the usual application, underwater diving, nitrox is normally distinguished from air and handled differently. The most common use of nitrox mixtures containing oxygen in higher proportions than atmospheric air is in scuba diving, where the reduced partial pressure of nitrogen is advantageous in reducing nitrogen uptake in the body's tissues, thereby extending the practicable underwater dive time by reducing the decompression requirement, or reducing the risk of decompression sickness (also known as \"the bends\").\nNitrox is used to a lesser extent in surface-supplied diving, as these advantages are reduced by the more complex logistical requirements for nitrox compared to the use of simple low-pressure compressors for breathing gas supply. Nitrox can also be used in hyperbaric treatment of decompression illness, usually at pressures where pure oxygen would be hazardous. Nitrox is not a safer gas than compressed air in all respects; although its use can reduce the risk of decompression sickness, it increases the risk of oxygen toxicity and fire.\nThough not generally referred to as nitrox, an oxygen-enriched air mixture is routinely provided at normal surface ambient pressure as oxygen therapy to patients with compromised respiration and circulation.\nPhysiological effects under pressure.\nDecompression benefits.\nReducing the proportion of nitrogen by increasing the proportion of oxygen reduces the risk of decompression sickness for the same dive profile, or allows extended dive times without increasing the need for decompression stops for the same risk. The significant aspect of extended no-stop time when using nitrox mixtures is reduced risk in a situation where breathing gas supply is compromised, as the diver can make a direct ascent to the surface with an acceptably low risk of decompression sickness. The exact values of the extended no-stop times vary depending on the decompression model used to derive the tables, but as an approximation, it is based on the partial pressure of nitrogen at the dive depth. This principle can be used to calculate an equivalent air depth (EAD) with the same partial pressure of nitrogen as the mix to be used, and this depth is less than the actual dive depth for oxygen enriched mixtures. The equivalent air depth is used with air decompression tables to calculate decompression obligation and no-stop times. The Goldman decompression model predicts a significant risk reduction by using nitrox (more so than the PADI tables suggest).\nNitrogen narcosis.\nControlled tests have not shown breathing nitrox to reduce the effects of nitrogen narcosis, as oxygen seems to have similarly narcotic properties under pressure to nitrogen; thus one should not expect a reduction in narcotic effects due only to the use of nitrox. Nonetheless, there are people in the diving community who insist that they feel reduced narcotic effects at depths breathing nitrox. This may be due to a dissociation of the subjective and behavioural effects of narcosis. Although oxygen appears chemically more narcotic at the surface, relative narcotic effects at depth have never been studied in detail, but it is known that different gases produce different narcotic effects as depth increases. Helium has no narcotic effect, but results in HPNS when breathed at high pressures, which does not happen with gases that have greater narcotic potency. However, because of risks associated with oxygen toxicity, divers do not usually use nitrox at greater depths where more pronounced narcosis symptoms are more likely to occur. For deep diving, trimix or heliox gases are typically used; these gases contain helium to reduce the amount of narcotic gases in the mixture.\nOxygen toxicity.\nDiving with and handling nitrox raise a number of potentially fatal dangers due to the high partial pressure of oxygen (ppO2). Nitrox is not a deep-diving gas mixture owing to the increased proportion of oxygen, which becomes toxic when breathed at high pressure. For example, the maximum operating depth of nitrox with 36% oxygen, a popular recreational diving mix, is to ensure a maximum ppO2 of no more than . The exact value of the maximum allowed ppO2 and maximum operating depth varies depending on factors such as the training agency, the type of dive, the breathing equipment and the level of surface support, with professional divers sometimes being allowed to breathe higher ppO2 than those recommended to recreational divers.\nTo dive safely with nitrox, the diver must learn good buoyancy control, a vital part of scuba diving in its own right, and a disciplined approach to preparing, planning and executing a dive to ensure that the ppO2 is known, and the maximum operating depth is not exceeded. Many dive shops, dive operators, and gas blenders (individuals trained to blend gases) require the diver to present a nitrox certification card before selling nitrox to divers.\nSome training agencies, such as PADI and Technical Diving International, teach the use of two depth limits to protect against oxygen toxicity. The shallower depth is called the \"maximum operating depth\" and is reached when the partial pressure of oxygen in the breathing gas reaches . The deeper depth, called the \"contingency depth\", is reached when the partial pressure reaches . Diving at or beyond this level exposes the diver to a greater risk of central nervous system (CNS) oxygen toxicity. This can be extremely dangerous since its onset is often without warning and can lead to drowning, as the regulator may be spat out during convulsions, which occur in conjunction with sudden unconsciousness (general seizure induced by oxygen toxicity).\nDivers trained to use nitrox may memorise the acronym VENTID-C or sometimes ConVENTID, (which stands for Vision (blurriness), Ears (ringing sound), Nausea, Twitching, Irritability, Dizziness, and Convulsions). However, evidence from non-fatal oxygen convulsions indicates that most convulsions are not preceded by any warning symptoms at all. Further, many of the suggested warning signs are also symptoms of nitrogen narcosis, and so may lead to misdiagnosis by a diver. A solution to either is to ascend to a shallower depth.\nCarbon dioxide retention.\nUse of nitrox may cause a reduced ventilatory response, and when breathing dense gas at the deeper limits of the usable range, this may result in carbon dioxide retention when exercise levels are high, with an increased risk of loss of consciousness.\nOther effects.\nThere is anecdotal evidence that the use of nitrox reduces post-dive fatigue, particularly in older and or obese divers; however a double-blind study to test this found no statistically significant reduction in reported fatigue. There was, however, some suggestion that post-dive fatigue is due to sub-clinical decompression sickness (DCS) (i.e. micro bubbles in the blood insufficient to cause symptoms of DCS); the fact that the study mentioned was conducted in a dry chamber with an ideal decompression profile may have been sufficient to reduce sub-clinical DCS and prevent fatigue in both nitrox and air divers. In 2008, a study was published using wet divers at the same depth no statistically significant reduction in reported fatigue was seen.\nFurther studies with a number of different dive profiles, and also different levels of exertion, would be necessary to fully investigate this issue. For example, there is much better scientific evidence that breathing high-oxygen gases increases exercise tolerance, during aerobic exertion. Though even moderate exertion while breathing from the regulator is a relatively uncommon occurrence in recreational scuba, as divers usually try to minimize it in order to conserve gas, episodes of exertion while regulator-breathing do occasionally occur in recreational diving. Examples are surface-swimming a distance to a boat or beach after surfacing, where residual \"safety\" cylinder gas is often used freely, since the remainder will be wasted anyway when the dive is completed, and unplanned contingencies due to currents or buoyancy problems. It is possible that these so-far un-studied situations have contributed to some of the positive reputation of nitrox.\nA 2010 study using critical flicker fusion frequency and perceived fatigue criteria found that diver alertness after a dive on nitrox was significantly better than after an air dive.\nUses.\nUnderwater diving.\nEnriched Air Nitrox, nitrox with an oxygen content above 21%, is mainly used in scuba diving to reduce the proportion of nitrogen in the breathing gas mixture. The main benefit is reduced decompression risk. To a considerably lesser extent it is also used in surface supplied diving, where the logistics are relatively complex, similar to the use of other diving gas mixtures like heliox and trimix.\nTherapeutic recompression.\nNitrox50 is used as one of the options in the first stages of therapeutic recompression using the Comex CX 30 table for treatment of vestibular or general decompression sickness. Nitrox is breathed at 30\u00a0msw and 24\u00a0msw and the ascents from these depths to the next stop. At 18m the gas is switched to oxygen for the rest of the treatment.\nMedicine, mountaineering and unpressurised aircraft.\nThe use of oxygen at high altitudes or as oxygen therapy may be as supplementary oxygen, added to the inspired air, which would technically be a use of nitrox, blended on site, but this is not normally referred to as such, as the gas provided for the purpose is oxygen.\nTerminology.\nNitrox is known by many names: Enriched\u00a0Air\u00a0Nitrox, Oxygen\u00a0Enriched\u00a0Air, Nitrox, EANx or Safe\u00a0Air. Since the word is a compound contraction or coined word and not an acronym, it should not be written in all upper case characters as \"NITROX\", but may be initially capitalized when referring to specific mixtures such as Nitrox32, which contains 68% nitrogen and 32% oxygen. When one figure is stated, it refers to the oxygen percentage, not the nitrogen percentage. The original convention, Nitrox68/32 became shortened as the first figure is redundant.\nThe term \"nitrox\" was originally used to refer to the breathing gas in a seafloor habitat where the oxygen has to be kept to a lower fraction than in air to avoid long term oxygen toxicity problems. It was later used by Dr Morgan Wells of NOAA for mixtures with an oxygen fraction higher than air, and has become a generic term for binary mixtures of nitrogen and oxygen with any oxygen fraction, and in the context of recreational and technical diving, now usually refers to a mixture of nitrogen and oxygen with more than 21% oxygen. \"Enriched Air Nitrox\" or \"EAN\", and \"Oxygen Enriched Air\" are used to emphasize richer than air mixtures. In \"EANx\", the \"x\" was originally the x of nitrox, but has come to indicate the percentage of oxygen in the mix and is replaced by a number when the percentage is known; for example, a 40% oxygen mix is called EAN40. The two most popular blends are EAN32 and EAN36, developed by NOAA for scientific diving, and also named Nitrox I and Nitrox II, respectively, or Nitrox68/32 and Nitrox64/36. These two mixtures were first utilized to the depth and oxygen limits for scientific diving designated by NOAA at the time.\nThe term Oxygen Enriched Air (OEN) was accepted by the (American) scientific diving community, but although it is probably the most unambiguous and simply descriptive term yet proposed, it was resisted by the recreational diving community, sometimes in favour of less appropriate terminology.\nIn its early days of introduction to non-technical divers, nitrox has occasionally also been known by detractors by less complimentary terms, such as \"devil gas\" or \"voodoo gas\" (a term now sometimes used with pride).\nAmerican Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) uses the term \"SafeAir\", which they define as any oxygen-enriched air mixture with O2 concentrations between 22% and 50% that meet their gas quality and handling specifications, and specifically claim that these mixtures are safer than normally produced breathing air. Considering the complexities and hazards of mixing, handling, analyzing, and using oxygen-enriched air, this name is considered inappropriate by those who consider that it is not inherently \"safe\", but merely has decompression advantages.\nThe constituent gas percentages are what the gas blender aims for, but the final actual mix may vary from the specification, and so a small flow of gas from the cylinder must be measured with an oxygen analyzer, before the cylinder is used underwater.\nMOD.\nMaximum Operating Depth (MOD) is the maximum safe depth at which a given nitrox mixture can be used. MOD depends on the allowed partial pressure of oxygen, which is related to exposure time and the acceptable risk assumed for central nervous system oxygen toxicity. Acceptable maximum ppO2 varies depending on the application:\nHigher values are used by commercial and military divers in special circumstances, often when the diver uses surface supplied breathing apparatus, or for treatment in a chamber, where the airway is relatively secure.\nChoice of mixture.\nThe two most common recreational diving nitrox mixes contain 32% and 36% oxygen, which have maximum operating depths (MODs) of and respectively when limited to a maximum partial pressure of oxygen of . Divers may calculate an equivalent air depth to determine their decompression requirements or may use nitrox tables or a nitrox-capable dive computer.\nNitrox with more than 40% oxygen is uncommon within recreational diving. There are two main reasons for this: the first is that all pieces of diving equipment that come into contact with mixes containing higher proportions of oxygen, particularly at high pressure, need special cleaning and servicing to reduce the risk of fire. The second reason is that richer mixes extend the time the diver can stay underwater without needing decompression stops far further than the duration permitted by the capacity of typical diving cylinders. For example, based on the PADI nitrox recommendations, the maximum operating depth for EAN45 would be and the maximum dive time available at this depth even with EAN36 is nearly 1 hour 15 minutes: a diver with a breathing rate of 20 litres per minute using twin 10-litre, 230-bar (about double 85 cu. ft.) cylinders would have completely emptied the cylinders after 1 hour 14 minutes at this depth.\nUse of nitrox mixtures containing 50% to 80% oxygen is common in technical diving as decompression gas, which by virtue of its lower partial pressure of inert gases such as nitrogen and helium, allows for more efficient (faster) elimination of these gases from the tissues than leaner oxygen mixtures.\nIn deep open circuit technical diving, where hypoxic gases are breathed during the bottom portion of the dive, a Nitrox mix with 50% or less oxygen called a \"travel mix\" is sometimes breathed during the beginning of the descent in order to avoid hypoxia. Normally, however, the most oxygen-lean of the diver's decompression gases would be used for this purpose, since descent time spent reaching a depth where bottom mix is no longer hypoxic is normally small, and the distance between this depth and the MOD of any nitrox decompression gas is likely to be very short, if it occurs at all.\nBest mix.\nThe composition of a nitrox mix can be optimized for a given planned dive profile. This is termed \"Best mix\", for the dive, and provides the maximum no-decompression time compatible with acceptable oxygen exposure. An acceptable maximum partial pressure of oxygen is selected based on depth and planned bottom time, and this value is used to calculate the oxygen content of the best mix for the dive:\nProduction.\nThere are several methods of production: \nCylinder markings to identify contents.\nAny diving cylinder containing a blend of gasses other than standard air is required by most diver training organizations, and some national governments, to be clearly marked to indicate the current gas mixture. In practice it is common to use a printed adhesive label to indicate the type of gas (in this case nitrox), and to add a temporary label to specify the analysis of the current mix.\nTraining standards for nitrox certification suggest the composition must be verified by the diver by using an oxygen analyzer before use.\nRegional standards and conventions.\nEuropean Union.\nWithin the EU, valves with M26x2 outlet thread are recommended for cylinders with increased oxygen content. Regulators for use with these cylinders require compatible connectors, and are not directly connectable with cylinders for compressed air.\nGermany.\nA German standard specifies that any mixture with an oxygen content greater than atmospheric air must be treated as pure oxygen. A nitrox cylinder is specially cleaned and identified. The cylinder colour is overall white with the letter N on opposite sides of the cylinder. The fraction of oxygen in the bottle is checked after filling and marked on the cylinder.\nSouth Africa.\nSouth African National Standard 10019:2008 specifies the colour of all scuba cylinders as Golden yellow with French gray shoulder. This applies to all underwater breathing gases except medical oxygen, which must be carried in cylinders that are Black with a White shoulder. Nitrox cylinders must be identified by a transparent, self-adhesive label with green lettering, fitted below the shoulder. In effect this is green lettering on a yellow cylinder, with a gray shoulder. The composition of the gas must also be specified on the label. In practice this is done by a small additional self-adhesive label with the oxygen fraction, which is changed when a new mix is filled.\nThe 2021 revision of SANS 10019 changed the colour specification to Light navy grey for the shoulder, and a different label specification which includes hazard markings for high pressure and oxidising materials.\nUnited States.\nEvery nitrox cylinder should also have a sticker stating whether or not the cylinder is \"oxygen clean\" and suitable for partial pressure blending. Any oxygen-clean cylinder may have any mix up to 100% oxygen inside. If by some accident an oxygen-clean cylinder is filled at a station that does not supply gas to oxygen-clean standards it is then considered contaminated and must be re-cleaned before a gas containing more than 40% oxygen may again be added. Cylinders marked as 'not oxygen clean' may only be filled with oxygen-enriched air mixtures from membrane or stick blending systems where the gas is mixed before being added to the cylinder, and to an oxygen fraction not exceeding 40% by volume.\nHazards.\nIncorrect gas mix.\nUse of a gas mix that differs from the planned mix introduces an increased risk of decompression sickness or an increased risk of oxygen toxicity, depending on the error. It may be possible to simply recalculate the dive plan or set the dive computer accordingly, but in some cases the planned dive may not be practicable.\nMany training agencies such as PADI, CMAS, SSI and NAUI train their divers to personally check the oxygen percentage content of each nitrox cylinder before every dive. If the oxygen percentage deviates by more than 1% from the planned mix, the diver must either recalculate the dive plan with the actual mix, or else abort the dive to avoid increased risk of oxygen toxicity or decompression sickness. Under IANTD and ANDI rules for use of nitrox, which are followed by most dive resorts around the world, filled nitrox cylinders are signed out personally in a gas blender log book, which contains, for each cylinder and fill, the cylinder number, the measured oxygen percent composition, the signature of the receiving diver (who should have personally measured the oxygen fraction before taking delivery), and the calculated maximum operating depth for that mix. All of these steps minimize danger but increase complexity of operations as each diver must use the specific cylinder they have checked out.\nIn South Africa, the national standard for handling and filling portable cylinders with pressurised gases (SANS 10019) requires that the cylinder be labelled with a sticker identifying the contents as nitrox, and specifying the oxygen fraction. Similar requirements may apply in other countries.\nFire and toxic cylinder contamination from oxygen reactions.\nPartial pressure blending using pure oxygen decanted into the cylinder before topping up with air may involve very high oxygen fractions and oxygen partial pressures during the decanting process, which constitute a relatively high fire hazard. This procedure requires care and precautions by the operator, and decanting equipment and cylinders which are clean for oxygen service, but the equipment is relatively simple and inexpensive. Partial pressure blending using pure oxygen is often used to provide nitrox on live-aboard dive boats, but it is also used in some dive shops and clubs.\nAny gas which contains a significantly larger percentage of oxygen than air is a fire hazard, and such gases can react with hydrocarbons or lubricants and sealing materials inside the filling system to produce toxic gases, even if a fire is not apparent. Some organisations exempt equipment from oxygen-clean standards if the oxygen fraction is limited to 40% or less.\nAmong recreational training agencies, only ANDI subscribes to the guideline of requiring oxygen cleaning for equipment used with more than 23% oxygen fraction. The USCG, NOAA, U.S. Navy, OSHA, and the other recreational training agencies accept the limit as 40% as no accident or incident has been known to occur when this guideline has been properly applied. Tens of thousands of recreational divers are trained each year and the overwhelming majority of these divers are taught the \"over 40% rule\". Most nitrox fill stations which supply pre-mixed nitrox will fill cylinders with mixtures below 40% without certification of cleanliness for oxygen service. Luxfer cylinders specify oxygen cleaning for all mixtures exceeding 23.5% oxygen.\nThe following references for oxygen cleaning specifically cite the \"over 40%\" guideline that has been in widespread use since the 1960s, and consensus at the 1992 Enriched Air Workshop was to accept that guideline and continue the status quo.\nMuch of the confusion appears to be a result of misapplying PVHO (pressure vessel for human occupancy) guidelines which prescribe a maximum ambient oxygen content of 25% when a human is sealed into a pressure vessel (chamber). The concern here is for a fire hazard to a living person who could be trapped in an oxygen-rich burning environment.\nOf the three commonly applied methods of producing enriched air mixes - continuous blending, partial pressure blending, and membrane separation systems - only partial pressure blending would require the valve and cylinder components to be oxygen cleaned for mixtures with less than 40% oxygen. The other two methods ensure that the equipment is never subjected to greater than 40% oxygen content.\nIn a fire, the pressure in a gas cylinder rises in direct proportion to its absolute temperature. If the internal pressure exceeds the mechanical limitations of the cylinder and there are no means to safely vent the pressurized gas to the atmosphere, the vessel will fail mechanically. If the vessel contents are ignitable or a contaminant is present this event may result in a \"fireball\".\nHistory.\nIn 1874, Henry Fleuss made what was possibly the first Nitrox dive using a rebreather.\nIn 1911 Draeger of Germany tested an injector operated rebreather backpack for a standard diving suit. This concept was produced and marketed as the DM20 oxygen rebreather system and the DM40 nitrox rebreather system, in which air from one cylinder and oxygen from a second cylinder were mixed during injection through a nozzle which circulated the breathing gas through the scrubber and the rest of the loop. The DM40 was rated for depths up to 40m.\nChristian J. Lambertsen proposed calculations for nitrogen addition to prevent oxygen toxicity in divers utilizing nitrogen-oxygen rebreather diving.\nIn World War II or soon after, British commando frogmen and clearance divers started occasionally diving with oxygen rebreathers adapted for semi-closed-circuit nitrox (which they called \"mixture\") diving by fitting larger cylinders and carefully setting the gas flow rate using a flow meter. These developments were kept secret until independently duplicated by civilians in the 1960s.\nLambertson published a paper on nitrox in 1947.\nIn the 1950s the United States Navy (USN) documented enriched oxygen gas procedures for military use of what we today call nitrox, in the US Navy Diving Manual.\nIn 1955, E. Lanphier described the use of nitrogen-oxygen diving mixtures, and the equivalent air depth method for calculating decompression from air tables.\nIn the 1960s, A. Galerne used on-line blending for commercial diving.\nIn 1970, Morgan Wells, who was the first director of the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Diving Center, began instituting diving procedures for oxygen-enriched air. He introduced the concept of Equivalent Air Depth (EAD). He also developed a process for mixing oxygen and air which he called a continuous blending system. For many years Wells' invention was the only practical alternative to partial pressure blending. In 1979 NOAA published Wells' procedures for the scientific use of nitrox in the NOAA Diving Manual.\nIn 1985 Dick Rutkowski, a former NOAA diving safety officer, formed IAND (International Association of Nitrox Divers) and began teaching nitrox use for recreational diving. This was considered dangerous by some, and met with heavy skepticism by the diving community.\nIn 1989, the Harbor Branch Oceanographic institution workshop addressed blending, oxygen limits and decompression issues.\nIn 1991, Bove, Bennett and \"Skindiver\" magazine took a stand against nitrox use for recreational diving. The annual DEMA show (held in Houston, Texas that year) banned nitrox training providers from the show. This caused a backlash, and when DEMA relented, a number of organizations took the opportunity to present nitrox workshops outside the show.\nIn 1992, the Scuba Diving Resources Group organised a workshop where some guidelines were established, and some misconceptions addressed.\nIn 1992 BSAC banned its members from using nitrox during BSAC activities. IAND's name was changed to the International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD), the T being added when the European Association of Technical Divers (EATD) merged with IAND. In the early 1990s, these agencies were teaching nitrox, but the main scuba agencies were not. Additional new organizations, including the American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) - which invented the term \"Safe Air\" for marketing purposes - and Technical Diving International (TDI) were begun. NAUI became the first existing major recreational diver training agency to sanction nitrox.\nIn 1993 the Sub-Aqua Association was the first UK recreational diving training agency to acknowledge and endorse the Nitrox training their members had undertaken with one of the tech agencies. The SAA's first recreational Nitrox qualification was issued in April 1993. The SAA's first Nitrox instructor was Vic Bonfante and he was certified in September 1993.\nMeanwhile, diving stores were finding a purely economic reason to offer nitrox: not only was an entire new course and certification needed to use it, but instead of cheap or free tank fills with compressed air, dive shops found they could charge premium amounts of money for custom-gas blending of nitrox to their ordinary, moderately experienced divers. With the new dive computers which could be programmed to allow for the longer bottom-times and shorter residual nitrogen times that nitrox gave, the incentive for the sport diver to use the gas increased.\nIn 1993 \"Skin Diver\" magazine, the leading recreational diving publication at the time, published a three-part series arguing that nitrox was unsafe for sport divers. DiveRite manufactured the first nitrox-compatible dive computer, called the Bridge, the aquaCorps TEK93 conference was held in San Francisco, and a practicable oil limit of 0.1\u00a0mg/m3 for oxygen compatible air was set. The Canadian armed forces issued EAD tables with an upper PO2 of 1.5 ATA.\nIn 1994 John Lamb and Vandagraph launched the first oxygen analyser built specifically for Nitrox and mixed-gas divers, at the Birmingham Dive Show.\nIn 1994 BSAC reversed its policy on Nitrox and announced BSAC nitrox training to start in 1995\nIn 1996, the Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) announced full educational support for nitrox. While other mainline scuba organizations had announced their support of nitrox earlier, it was PADI's endorsement that established nitrox as a standard recreational diving option.\nIn 1999 a survey by R.W. Hamilton showed that over hundreds of thousands of nitrox dives, the DCS record is good. Nitrox had become popular with recreational divers, but not used much by commercial divers who tend to use surface supplied breathing apparatus. The OSHA accepted a petition for a variance from the commercial diving regulations for recreational scuba instructors.\nThe 2001 edition of the \"NOAA Diving Manual\" included a chapter intended for Nitrox training.\nIn nature.\nAt times in the geological past, the Earth's atmosphere contained much more than 20% oxygen: e.g. up to 35% in the Upper Carboniferous period. This let animals absorb oxygen more easily and influenced their evolutionary patterns."}
{"id": "9956", "revid": "1023334743", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9956", "title": "Erik Satie", "text": "\u00c9ric Alfred Leslie Satie (, ; ; 17 May 18661 July 1925), who signed his name Erik Satie after 1884, was a French composer and pianist. Satie was an influential artist in the late 19th- and early 20th-century Parisian avant-garde. His work was a precursor to later artistic movements such as minimalism, repetitive music, and the Theatre of the Absurd, while his 1917 coinage \"furniture music\" would presage the development of background and ambient music.\nAn eccentric, Satie was introduced as a \"gymnopedist\" in 1887, shortly before writing his most famous works, the piano compositions \"Gymnop\u00e9dies\". Later, he also referred to himself as a \"phonometrician\" (meaning \"someone who measures sounds\"), preferring this designation to that of \"musician\", after having been called \"a clumsy but subtle technician\" in a book on contemporary French composers published in 1911.\nIn addition to his body of music, Satie left a set of writings, having contributed work for a range of publications from the dadaist \"391\" to the American culture chronicle \"Vanity Fair\". Although in later life he prided himself on publishing his work under his own name, in the late 19th century he appears to have used pseudonyms such as Virginie Lebeau and Fran\u00e7ois de Paule in some of his published writings.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nErik Satie was born on 17 May 1866, the son of Alfred Satie and his wife Jane Leslie (n\u00e9e Anton), who was born in London to Scottish parents. Erik was born at Honfleur in Normandy; his childhood home there is now open to the public. When Satie was four years old, his family moved to Paris, his father having been offered a translator's job in the capital. After his mother's death in 1872, he was sent (at age 6), together with his younger brother, Conrad, back to Honfleur to live with his paternal grandparents. There he received his first music lessons from a local organist. In 1878, when he was 12 years old, his grandmother died, and the two brothers were reunited in Paris with their father, who remarried (to a piano teacher) shortly afterwards. From the early 1880s onwards, Satie started publishing salon compositions by his stepmother and himself, among others.\nIn 1879, Satie entered the Paris Conservatoire, where he was labelled as lazy and unmotivated, but was still credited as a gifted pianist in his report cards.. Georges Mathias, his professor of piano at the Conservatoire, described his pupil's piano technique in flatly negative terms, \"insignificant and laborious\" and \"worthless\". \u00c9mile Decombes called him \"the laziest student in the Conservatoire\". Years later, Satie related that Mathias, with great insistence, had told him that his real talent lay in composing. After being sent home for two and a half years, he was readmitted to the Conservatoire at the end of 1885 (age 19), but was unable to make a more favourable impression on his teachers than he had before, and, as a result, resolved to take up military service a year later. However, Satie's military career did not last very long; within a few months he was discharged after being accused of deliberately infecting himself with bronchitis.\nMontmartre.\nSatie moved from his father's residence to lodgings in Montmartre in 1887, when he became 21. By this time he had started what was to be an enduring friendship with the romantic poet Contamine de Latour, and had his first compositions published by his father. He soon integrated with the artistic clientele of the Le Chat Noir Caf\u00e9-cabaret, and started publishing his \"Gymnop\u00e9dies\". Publication of compositions in the same vein (', ', etc.) followed. In the same period he befriended Claude Debussy. He moved to a smaller room, still in Montmartre (, now a museum), in 1890. By 1891 he was the official composer and chapel-master of the Rosicrucian Order (Ordre de la Rose-Croix Catholique, du Temple et du Graal), led by \"S\u00e2r\" Jos\u00e9phin P\u00e9ladan, which led to compositions such as ', \"Le Fils des \u00e9toiles\", and the '. Satie gave performances at the Salon de la Rose + Croix, organized by P\u00e9ladan.\nBy mid-1892, Satie had composed the first pieces in a compositional system of his own making ('), provided incidental music to a chivalric esoteric play (two '), had his first hoax published (announcing the premiere of \"\", an anti-Wagnerian opera he probably never composed), and broken from P\u00e9ladan, starting that autumn with the \"Uspud\" project, a \"Christian Ballet\", in collaboration with Contamine de Latour. While the comrades from both the Chat Noir and Miguel Utrillo's Auberge du Clou sympathised, a promotional brochure was produced for the project, which reads as a pamphlet for a new esoteric sect.\nSatie and Suzanne Valadon (an artists' model, artist, long-time friend of Miguel Utrillo, and mother of Maurice Utrillo) began an affair early in 1893. After their first night together, he proposed marriage. The two did not marry, but Valadon moved to a room next to Satie's at the . Satie became obsessed with her, calling her his \"\" and writing impassioned notes about \"her whole being, lovely eyes, gentle hands, and tiny feet\". During their relationship, Satie composed the \"Danses gothiques\" as a means of calming his mind, and Valadon painted a portrait of Satie, which she gave to him. After six months she moved away, leaving Satie broken-hearted. Afterwards, he said that he was left with \"nothing but an icy loneliness that fills the head with emptiness and the heart with sadness\". It is believed this was the only intimate relationship Satie ever had.\nIn 1893, Satie met the young Maurice Ravel for the first time, Satie's style emerging in the first compositions of the youngster. One of Satie's own compositions of that period, \"Vexations\", was to remain undisclosed until after his death. By the end of the year he had founded the \u00c9glise M\u00e9tropolitaine d'Art de J\u00e9sus Conducteur (Metropolitan Art Church of Jesus the Conductor). As its only member, in the role of \"Parcier et Ma\u00eetre de Chapelle\", he started to compose a \"\" (later to become known as the \"Messe des pauvres\"), and wrote a flood of letters, articles and pamphlets showing off his self-assuredness in religious and artistic matters. To give an example: he applied for membership in the Acad\u00e9mie Fran\u00e7aise twice, leaving no doubt in the application letter that the board of that organisation (presided over by Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns) as much as owed him such membership. Such proceedings without doubt rather helped to wreck his popularity in the cultural establishment. In 1895 he inherited some money, allowing him to have more of his writings printed, and to change from wearing a priest-like habit to being the \"Velvet Gentleman\".\nMove to Arcueil.\nBy mid-1896, all of Satie's financial means had vanished, and he had to move to cheaper and much smaller lodgings, first at the , and two years later, after he had composed the two first sets of \"\" in 1897, to Arcueil, a suburb some ten kilometres from Montmartre. During this period he re-established contact with his brother Conrad for numerous practical and financial matters, disclosing some of his inner feelings in the process. The letters to Conrad made it clear that he had set aside his religious ideas.\nFrom 1899 on, Satie started making money as a cabaret pianist, adapting over a hundred compositions of popular music for piano or piano and voice, adding some of his own. The most popular of these were ', text by Henry Pacory; ', text by Vincent Hyspa; ', a waltz; \"La Diva de l'Empire\", text by Dominique Bonnaud/Numa Bl\u00e8s; ', a march; ', text by Contamine de Latour (lost, but the music later reappears in '); and quite a few more, many of which have been lost. In his later years, Satie would reject all his cabaret music as vile and against his nature, but for the time being, it was an income.\nOnly a few compositions that Satie took seriously remain from this period: \"Jack in the Box\", music to a pantomime by Jules Depaquit (called a \" by Satie); \", a short comic opera on a serious theme, text by \"Lord Cheminot\"; \"The Dreamy Fish\", piano music to accompany a lost tale by Cheminot; and a few others that were mostly incomplete, hardly any of them staged, and none of them published at the time.\nBoth ' and \"The Dreamy Fish\" have been analysed by Ornella Volta as containing elements of competition with Claude Debussy, of which Debussy was probably not aware, Satie not making this music public. Meanwhile, Debussy was having one of his first major successes with ' in 1902, leading a few years later to who-was-precursor-to-whom debates between the two composers, in which Maurice Ravel would also get involved.\nIn October 1905, Satie enrolled in Vincent d'Indy's Schola Cantorum de Paris to study classical counterpoint while still continuing his cabaret work. Most of his friends were as dumbfounded as the professors at the Schola when they heard about his new plan to return to the classrooms, especially as d'Indy was an admiring pupil of Saint-Sa\u00ebns, not particularly favoured by Satie. Satie would follow these courses at the Schola, as a respected pupil, for more than five years, receiving a first (intermediate) diploma in 1908. Some of his classroom counterpoint exercises, such as the \"\", were published after his death. Another summary, of the period prior to the Schola, also appeared in 1911: the \"Trois morceaux en forme de poire\", which was a kind of compilation of the best of what he had written up to 1903.\nSomething that becomes clear through these published compilations is that Satie did not so much reject Romanticism and its exponents like Wagner, but that he rejected certain aspects of it. From his first composition to his last, he rejected the idea of musical development, in the strict definition of this term: the intertwining of different themes in a development section of a sonata form. As a result, his contrapuntal and other works were very short; the \"new, modern\" Fugues do not extend further than the exposition of the theme(s). Generally, he would say that he did not think it permitted that a composer take more time from his public than strictly necessary. Also, Satie avoided Melodrama, in its historical sense of a romantic genre of spoken words set in a background of music. His 1913 \"Le pi\u00e8ge de M\u00e9duse\" could be seen as an absurdist spoof of that genre.\nIn the meantime, other changes had also taken place: Satie was a member of a radical socialist party (he later switched his membership to the Communist Party in that area after December 1920), and had socialised with the Arcueil community: among other things, he had been involved in the \"\" work for children. He also changed his appearance to that of the bourgeois functionary with bowler hat, umbrella, etc. He channelled his medieval interests into a peculiar secret hobby: in a filing cabinet he maintained a collection of imaginary buildings, most of them described as being made out of some kind of metal, which he drew on little cards. Occasionally, extending the game, he would publish anonymous small announcements in local journals, offering some of these buildings, e.g., a \"castle in lead\", for sale or rent.\nA rare autochrome photograph of Satie exists that dates from 1911. It was reproduced on the cover of Robert Orledge's second book on the composer, \"Satie Remembered\" (1995), but where this autochrome was found has not been made known.\nLater life.\nStarting in 1912, Satie's new humorous miniatures for piano became very successful, and he wrote and published many of these over the next few years (most of them premiered by the pianist Ricardo Vi\u00f1es). His habit of accompanying the scores of his compositions with all kinds of written remarks was now well established, so that a few years later he had to insist that these not be read out during performances. He wrote in the first edition of \"Heures s\u00e9culaires et instantan\u00e9es\", \"To whom it may concern: 'I forbid anyone to read the text aloud during the musical performance. Ignorance of my instructions will incur my righteous indignation against the presumptuous culprit. No exception will be allowed. He had mostly stopped using barlines by this time. In some ways, these compositions were very reminiscent of Rossini's compositions from the final years of his life, grouped under the name P\u00e9ch\u00e9s de vieillesse.\nHowever, the acceleration in Satie's life did not come so much from the success of his new piano pieces; it was Ravel who inadvertently triggered the characteristics of Satie's remaining years and thus influenced the successive progressive artistic and cultural movements that rapidly manifested themselves in Paris over the following years. Paris was seen as the artistic capital of the world, and the beginning of the new century appeared to have set many minds on fire. In 1910 the \", a group of young musicians around Ravel, proclaimed their preference for Satie's earlier work from before the Schola period, reinforcing the idea that Satie had been a precursor of Debussy.\nAt first, Satie was pleased that at least some of his works were receiving public attention, but when he realised that this meant that his more recent work was overlooked or dismissed, he looked for other young artists who related better to his more recent ideas, so as to have better mutual support in creative activity. Thus, young artists such as Roland-Manuel, and later Georges Auric, and Jean Cocteau, started to receive more of his attention than the \".\nAs a result of his contact with Roland-Manuel, Satie again began publicising his thoughts, with far more irony than he had done before (amongst other things, the ' and ').\nWith Jean Cocteau, whom he had first met in 1915, Satie started work on incidental music for a production of Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\", resulting in the \"Cinq grimaces pour Le songe d'une nuit d'\u00e9t\u00e9\". From 1916, he and Cocteau worked on the ballet \"Parade\", which was premiered in 1917 by Sergei Diaghilev's Ballets Russes, with sets and costumes by Pablo Picasso, and choreography by L\u00e9onide Massine. Through Picasso, Satie also became acquainted with other cubists, such as Georges Braque, with whom he would work on other, aborted, projects.\nWith Georges Auric, Louis Durey, Arthur Honegger, and Germaine Tailleferre, Satie formed the Nouveaux jeunes, shortly after writing \"Parade\". Later, the group was joined by Francis Poulenc and Darius Milhaud. In September 1918, Satie\u00a0\u2013 giving little or no explanation\u00a0\u2013 withdrew from the . Jean Cocteau gathered the six remaining members, forming the Groupe des six (to which Satie would later have access, but later again would fall out with most of its members).\nFrom 1919, Satie was in contact with Tristan Tzara, the initiator of the Dada movement. He became acquainted with other artists involved in the movement, such as Francis Picabia (later to become a Surrealist), Andr\u00e9 Derain, Marcel Duchamp, Jean Hugo and Man Ray, among others. On the day of his first meeting with Man Ray, the two fabricated the artist's first readymade: \"The Gift\" (1921). Satie contributed writing to the Dadaist publication \"391\". In the first months of 1922, he was surprised to find himself entangled in the argument between Tzara and Andr\u00e9 Breton about the true nature of avant-garde art, epitomised by the failure of the Congr\u00e8s de Paris. Satie originally sided with Tzara, but managed to maintain friendly relations with most players in both camps. Meanwhile, an \"\" had formed around Satie, taking the name from the relatively remote district of Paris where Satie lived; it included young musicians such as Henri Sauguet, Maxime Jacob, Roger D\u00e9sormi\u00e8re and Henri Cliquet-Pleyel.\nOther work and episodes in this last period of Satie's life:\nSatie's last compositions were two 1924 ballets. \"Mercure\" reunited him with Picasso and Massine for a mythological spoof produced by Count \u00c9tienne de Beaumont's Soir\u00e9es de Paris, and he wrote the \" ballet ' in collaboration with Picabia, for the of Rolf de Mar\u00e9. In a simultaneous project, Satie added music to the surrealist film ' by Ren\u00e9 Clair, which was given as an intermezzo for \".\nAfter years of heavy drinking (including consumption of absinthe), Satie died at age 59, on 1 July 1925 from cirrhosis of the liver. He is buried in the cemetery in Arcueil. There is a tiny stone monument designating a grassy area in front of an apartment building \u2013 ' Erik Satie'. Over the course of his 27 years in residence at Arcueil, where Satie lived in stark simplicity, no one had ever visited his room. After his death, Satie's friends discovered an apartment replete with squalor and chaos. Among many other unsorted papers and miscellaneous items, it contained a large number of umbrellas, and two grand pianos placed one on top of the other, the upper instrument used as storage for letters and parcels. They discovered compositions that were thought to have been lost or were totally unknown. The score to \"Jack in the Box\" was thought, by Satie, to have been left on a bus years before. These were found behind the piano, in the pockets of his velvet suits, and in other odd places, and included \"Vexations\"; \"Genevi\u00e8ve de Brabant\" and other unpublished or unfinished stage works; \"The Dreamy Fish\"; many Schola Cantorum exercises; a previously unseen set of \"canine\" piano pieces; and several other works for piano, many untitled. Some of these would be published later as additional ', ', \"\", and \"furniture music\". \nWorks.\nWritings.\nSatie's writings include:"}
{"id": "9960", "revid": "35859266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9960", "title": "Elliptic integral", "text": "In integral calculus, an elliptic integral is one of a number of related functions defined as the value of certain integrals. Originally, they arose in connection with the problem of finding the arc length of an ellipse and were first studied by Giulio Fagnano and Leonhard Euler (). Modern mathematics defines an \"elliptic integral\" as any function which can be expressed in the form\nwhere is a rational function of its two arguments, is a polynomial of degree 3 or 4 with no repeated roots, and is a constant.\nIn general, integrals in this form cannot be expressed in terms of elementary functions. Exceptions to this general rule are when has repeated roots, or when contains no odd powers of . However, with the appropriate reduction formula, every elliptic integral can be brought into a form that involves integrals over rational functions and the three Legendre canonical forms (i.e. the elliptic integrals of the first, second and third kind).\nBesides the Legendre form given below, the elliptic integrals may also be expressed in Carlson symmetric form. Additional insight into the theory of the elliptic integral may be gained through the study of the Schwarz\u2013Christoffel mapping. Historically, elliptic functions were discovered as inverse functions of elliptic integrals.\nArgument notation.\n\"Incomplete elliptic integrals\" are functions of two arguments; \"complete elliptic integrals\" are functions of a single argument. These arguments are expressed in a variety of different but equivalent ways (they give the same elliptic integral). Most texts adhere to a canonical naming scheme, using the following naming conventions.\nFor expressing one argument:\nEach of the above three quantities is completely determined by any of the others (given that they are non-negative). Thus, they can be used interchangeably.\nThe other argument can likewise be expressed as , the \"amplitude\", or as or , where and is one of the Jacobian elliptic functions.\nSpecifying the value of any one of these quantities determines the others. Note that also depends on . Some additional relationships involving \"u\" include\nThe latter is sometimes called the \"delta amplitude\" and written as . Sometimes the literature also refers to the \"complementary parameter\", the \"complementary modulus,\" or the \"complementary modular angle\". These are further defined in the article on quarter periods.\nIncomplete elliptic integral of the first kind.\nThe incomplete elliptic integral of the first kind is defined as\nThis is the trigonometric form of the integral; substituting and , one obtains the Legendre normal form:\nEquivalently, in terms of the amplitude and modular angle one has:\nIn this notation, the use of a vertical bar as delimiter indicates that the argument following it is the \"parameter\" (as defined above), while the backslash indicates that it is the modular angle. The use of a semicolon implies that the argument preceding it is the sine of the amplitude:\nThis potentially confusing use of different argument delimiters is traditional in elliptic integrals and much of the notation is compatible with that used in the reference book by Abramowitz and Stegun and that used in the integral tables by Gradshteyn and Ryzhik.\nWith one has:\nthus, the Jacobian elliptic functions are inverses to the elliptic integrals.\nThe incomplete elliptic integral of the first kind has following addition theorem:\nThe elliptic modulus can be transformed that way:\nNotational variants.\nThere are still other conventions for the notation of elliptic integrals employed in the literature. The notation with interchanged arguments, , is often encountered; and similarly for the integral of the second kind. Abramowitz and Stegun substitute the integral of the first kind, , for the argument in their definition of the integrals of the second and third kinds, unless this argument is followed by a vertical bar: i.e. for . Moreover, their complete integrals employ the \"parameter\" as argument in place of the modulus , i.e. rather than . And the integral of the third kind defined by Gradshteyn and Ryzhik, , puts the amplitude first and not the \"characteristic\" .\nThus one must be careful with the notation when using these functions, because various reputable references and software packages use different conventions in the definitions of the elliptic functions. For example, some references, and Wolfram's Mathematica software and Wolfram Alpha, define the complete elliptic integral of the first kind in terms of the parameter , instead of the elliptic modulus . \nIncomplete elliptic integral of the second kind.\nThe incomplete elliptic integral of the second kind in trigonometric form is\nSubstituting and , one obtains the Legendre normal form:\nEquivalently, in terms of the amplitude and modular angle:\nRelations with the Jacobi elliptic functions include\nThe meridian arc length from the equator to latitude is written in terms of :\nwhere is the semi-major axis, and is the eccentricity.\nThe incomplete elliptic integral of the second kind has following addition theorem:\nThe elliptic modulus can be transformed that way:\nIncomplete elliptic integral of the third kind.\nThe incomplete elliptic integral of the third kind is \nor\nThe number is called the characteristic and can take on any value, independently of the other arguments. Note though that the value is infinite, for any .\nA relation with the Jacobian elliptic functions is\nThe meridian arc length from the equator to latitude is also related to a special case of :\nComplete elliptic integral of the first kind.\nElliptic Integrals are said to be 'complete' when the amplitude and therefore . The complete elliptic integral of the first kind may thus be defined as\nor more compactly in terms of the incomplete integral of the first kind as\nIt can be expressed as a power series\nwhere is the Legendre polynomials, which is equivalent to\nwhere denotes the double factorial. In terms of the Gauss hypergeometric function, the complete elliptic integral of the first kind can be expressed as\nThe complete elliptic integral of the first kind is sometimes called the quarter period. It can be computed very efficiently in terms of the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean:\nSee for details.\nTherefore the modulus can be transformed that way:\nThis expression is valid for all n \u2208 \u2115 and 0 \u2264 k \u2264 1:\nRelation to Jacobi theta function.\nThe relation to Jacobi's theta function is given by \nwhere the nome is\nAsymptotic expressions.\nThis approximation has a relative precision better than for . Keeping only the first two terms is correct to 0.01 precision for .\nDifferential equation.\nThe differential equation for the elliptic integral of the first kind is\nA second solution to this equation is formula_35. This solution satisfies the relation\nContinued fraction.\nA continued fraction expansion is: \nwhere the nome is .\nComplete elliptic integral of the second kind.\nThe complete elliptic integral of the second kind is defined as\nor more compactly in terms of the incomplete integral of the second kind as\nFor an ellipse with semi-major axis and semi-minor axis and eccentricity , the complete elliptic integral of the second kind is equal to one quarter of the circumference of the ellipse measured in units of the semi-major axis . In other words:\nThe complete elliptic integral of the second kind can be expressed as a power series\nwhich is equivalent to\nIn terms of the Gauss hypergeometric function, the complete elliptic integral of the second kind can be expressed as\nThe modulus can be transformed that way:\nComputation.\nLike the integral of the first kind, the complete elliptic integral of the second kind can be computed very efficiently using the arithmetic\u2013geometric mean .\nDefine sequences formula_45 and formula_46, where formula_47, formula_48 and the recurrence relations formula_49, formula_50 hold. Furthermore, define formula_51. By definition,\nAlso, formula_53. Then\nIn practice, the arithmetic-geometric mean would simply be computed up to some limit. This formula converges quadratically for all formula_55. To speed up computation further, the relation formula_56 can be used.\nDerivative and differential equation.\nA second solution to this equation is .\nComplete elliptic integral of the third kind.\nThe complete elliptic integral of the third kind can be defined as\nNote that sometimes the elliptic integral of the third kind is defined with an inverse sign for the \"characteristic\" ,\nJust like the complete elliptic integrals of the first and second kind, the complete elliptic integral of the third kind can be computed very efficiently using the arithmetic-geometric mean .\nFunctional relations.\nLegendre's relation:"}
{"id": "9961", "revid": "41304243", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9961", "title": "Epistle to the Romans", "text": "The Epistle to the Romans or Letter to the Romans, often shortened to Romans, is the sixth book in the New Testament. Biblical scholars agree that it was composed by Paul the Apostle to explain that salvation is offered through the gospel of Jesus Christ. It is the longest of the Pauline epistles.\nGeneral presentation.\nIn the opinion of Jesuit scholar Joseph Fitzmyer, the book \"overwhelms the reader by the density and sublimity of the topic with which it deals, the gospel of the justification and salvation of Jew and Greek alike by the grace of God through faith in Jesus Christ, revealing the uprightness and love of God the Father.\"\nN. T. Wright notes that Romans is\nAuthorship and dating.\nThe scholarly consensus is that Paul wrote the Epistle to the Romans. C. E. B. Cranfield, in the introduction to his commentary on Romans, says:\nThe denial of Paul's authorship of Romans by such critics ... is now rightly relegated to a place among the curiosities of NT scholarship. Today no responsible criticism disputes its Pauline origin. The evidence of its use in the Apostolic Fathers is clear, and before the end of the second century it is listed and cited as Paul's. Every extant early list of NT books includes it among his letters. The external evidence of authenticity could indeed hardly be stronger; and it is altogether borne out by the internal evidence, linguistic, stylistic, literary, historical and theological.\nThe letter was most probably written while Paul was in Corinth, probably while he was staying in the house of Gaius, and transcribed by Tertius, his amanuensis. There are a number of reasons why Corinth is considered most plausible. Paul was about to travel to Jerusalem on writing the letter, which matches Acts where it is reported that Paul stayed for three months in Greece. This probably implies Corinth as it was the location of Paul's greatest missionary success in Greece. Additionally, Phoebe was a deacon of the church in Cenchreae, a port to the east of Corinth, and would have been able to convey the letter to Rome after passing through Corinth and taking a ship from Corinth's west port. Erastus, mentioned in , also lived in Corinth, being the city's commissioner for public works and city treasurer at various times, again indicating that the letter was written in Corinth.\nThe precise time at which it was written is not mentioned in the epistle, but it was obviously written when the collection for Jerusalem had been assembled and Paul was about to \"go unto Jerusalem to minister unto the saints\", that is, at the close of his second visit to Greece, during the winter preceding his last visit to that city. The majority of scholars writing on Romans propose the letter was written in late 55/early 56 or late 56/early 57. Early 55 and early 58 both have some support, while German New Testament scholar Gerd L\u00fcdemann argues for a date as early as 51/52 (or 54/55), following on from Knox, who proposed 53/54. L\u00fcdemann is the only serious challenge to the consensus of mid to late 50s.\nTextual variants.\nFourteen-chapter form.\nThere is strong, albeit indirect, evidence that a recension of Romans that lacked Chapters 15 and 16 was widely used in the western half of the Roman Empire until the mid-4th century. This conclusion is partially based on the fact that a variety of Church Fathers, such as Origen and Tertullian, refer to a fourteen-chapter edition of Romans, either directly or indirectly. The fact that Paul's doxology is placed in various different places in different manuscripts of Romans only strengthens the case for an early fourteen-chapter recension. While there is some uncertainty, Harry Gamble concludes that the canonical sixteen-chapter recension is likely the earlier version of the text.\nThe Codex Boernerianus lacks the explicit references to the Roman church as the audience of the epistle found in Romans 1:7 and 1:15. There is evidence from patristic commentaries indicating that Boernarianus is not unique in this regard; many early, no longer extant manuscripts also lacked an explicit Roman addressee in Chapter 1. It is notable that, when this textual variant is combined with the omission of Chapters 15 and 16, there is no longer any clear reference to the Roman church throughout the entire epistle. Harry Gamble speculates that 1:7, 1:15, and Chapters 15 and 16 may have been removed by a scribe in order to make the epistle more suitable for a \"general\" audience.\nFifteen-chapter form.\nIt is quite possible that a fifteen-chapter form of Romans, omitting Chapter 16, may have existed at an early date. Several scholars have argued, largely on the basis of internal evidence, that Chapter 16 represents a separate letter of Paul\u2014 possibly addressed to Ephesus\u2014 that was later appended to Romans.\nThere are a few different arguments for this conclusion. First of all, there is a concluding peace benediction at 15:33, which reads like the other Pauline benedictions that conclude their respective letters. Secondly, Paul greets a large number of people and families in Chapter 16, in a way that suggests he was already familiar with them, whereas the material of Chapters 1-15 presupposes that Paul has never met anyone from the Roman church. The fact that Papyrus 46 places Paul's doxology at the end of Chapter 15 can also be interpreted as evidence for the existence of a fifteen-chapter recension of the epistle.\nSubscript.\nSome manuscripts have a subscript at the end of the Epistle:\nPaul's life in relation to his epistle.\nFor ten years before writing the letter (approx. 47\u201357), Paul had traveled around the territories bordering the Aegean Sea evangelizing. Churches had been planted in the Roman provinces of Galatia, Macedonia, Achaia and Asia. Paul, considering his task complete, wanted to preach the gospel in Spain, where he would not \"build upon another man\u2019s foundation\". This allowed him to visit Rome on the way, a long-time ambition of his. The letter to the Romans, in part, prepares them and gives reasons for his visit.\nIn addition to Paul's geographic location, his religious views are important. First, Paul was a Hellenistic Jew with a Pharisaic background (see Gamaliel), integral to his identity: see Paul the Apostle and Judaism for details. His concern for his people is one part of the dialogue and runs throughout the letter. Second, the other side of the dialogue is Paul's conversion and calling to follow Christ in the early 30s.\nThe churches in Rome.\nThe most probable ancient account of the beginning of Christianity in Rome is given by a 4th-century writer known as Ambrosiaster:\nFrom Adam Clarke:\nAt this time, the Jews made up a substantial number in Rome, and their synagogues, frequented by many, enabled the Gentiles to become acquainted with the story of Jesus of Nazareth. Consequently, churches composed of both Jews and Gentiles were formed at Rome. According to Irenaeus, a 2nd-century Church Father, the church at Rome was founded directly by the apostles Peter and Paul. However, many modern scholars disagree with Irenaeus, holding that while little is known of the circumstances of the church's founding, it was not founded by Paul:\nNote the large number of names in of those then in Rome, and verses 5, 15 and 16 indicate there was more than one church assembly or company of believers in Rome. Verse 5 mentions a church that met in the house of Aquila and Priscilla. Verses 14 and 15 each mention groupings of believers and saints.\nJews were expelled from Rome because of disturbances around AD 49 by the edict of Claudius. Fitzmyer claims that both Jews and Jewish Christians were expelled as a result of their infighting. Claudius died around the year AD 54, and his successor, Emperor Nero, allowed the Jews back into Rome, but then, after the Great Fire of Rome of 64, Christians were persecuted. Fitzmyer argues that with the return of the Jews to Rome in 54 new conflict arose between the Gentile Christians and the Jewish Christians who had formerly been expelled. Keck thinks Gentile Christians may have developed a dislike of or looked down on Jews (see also Antisemitism and Responsibility for the death of Jesus), because they theologically rationalized that Jews were no longer God's people.\nStyle.\nScholars often have difficulty assessing whether Romans is a letter or an epistle, a relevant distinction in form-critical analysis:\nA letter is something non-literary, a means of communication between persons who are separated from each other. Confidential and personal in nature, it is intended only for the person or persons to whom it is addressed, and not at all for the public or any kind of publicity...An Epistle is an artistic literary form, just like the dialogue, the oration, or the drama. It has nothing in common with the letter except its form: apart from that one might venture the paradox that the epistle is the opposite of a real letter. The contents of the epistle are intended for publicity\u2014they aim at interesting \"the public.\"\nJoseph Fitzmyer argues, from evidence put forth by Stirewalt, that the style of Romans is an \"essay-letter.\" Philip Melanchthon, a writer during the Reformation, suggested that Romans was \"caput et summa universae doctrinae christianae\" (\"a summary of all Christian doctrine\"). While some scholars suggest, like Melanchthon, that it is a type of theological treatise, this view largely ignores chapters 14 and 15 of Romans. There are also many \"noteworthy elements\" missing from Romans that are included in other areas of the Pauline corpus. The breakdown of Romans as a treatise began with F.C. Baur in 1836 when he suggested \"this letter had to be interpreted according to the historical circumstances in which Paul wrote it.\"\nPaul sometimes uses a style of writing common in his time called a \"diatribe\". He appears to be responding to a \"heckler\" (probably an imaginary one based on Paul's encounters with real objections in his previous preaching), and the letter is structured as a series of arguments. In the flow of the letter, Paul shifts his arguments, sometimes addressing the Jewish members of the church, sometimes the Gentile membership and sometimes the church as a whole.\nPurposes of writing.\nTo review the current scholarly viewpoints on the purpose of Romans, along with a bibliography, see \"Dictionary of Paul and His Letters\". For a 16th-century \"Lollard\" reformer view, see the work of William Tyndale. In his prologue to his translation of the book of Romans, which was largely taken from the prologue of German Reformer Martin Luther, Tyndale writes that:\n... this epistle is the principal and most excellent part of the new testament, and most pure evangelion, that is to say glad tidings and what we call the gospel, and also a light and a way in unto the whole scripture ... The sum and whole cause of the writings of this epistle, is, to prove that a man is justified by faith only: which proposition whoso denieth, to him is not only this epistle and all that Paul writeth, but also the whole scripture, so locked up that he shall never understand it to his soul's health. And to bring a man to the understanding and feeling that faith only justifieth, Paul proveth that the whole nature of man is so poisoned and so corrupt, yea and so dead concerning godly living or godly thinking, that it is impossible for her to keep the law in the sight of God.\nContents.\nThis essay-letter composed by Paul was written to a specific audience at a specific time; to understand it, the situations of both Paul and the recipients must be understood.\nPrologue (1:1\u201315).\nGreeting (1:1\u20137).\nThe introduction provides some general notes about Paul. He introduces here and introductory notes about the gospel he wishes to preach to the church at Rome. Jesus' human line stems from David. Paul, however, does not limit his ministry to Jews. Paul's goal is that the Gentiles would also hear the gospel.\nPrayer of Thanksgiving (1:8\u201315).\nHe commends the Romans for faith. Paul also speaks of the past obstacles that have blocked his coming to Rome earlier.\nSalvation in the Christ (1:16 \u20138:39).\nRighteousness of God (1:16\u201317).\nPaul's announcement that he is not \"ashamed\" (\"epaisc\u00fanomai\") of his gospel because it holds power (\"d\u00fanamis\"). These two verses form a backdrop for the rest of the book. First, we note that Paul is unashamed of his love for this gospel that he preaches about Jesus Christ. He also notes that he is speaking to the \"Jew first.\" There is significance to this, but much of it is scholarly conjecture as the relationship of Paul the Apostle and Judaism is still debated. We are hard-pressed to find an answer to such a question without knowing more about the audience in question. Wayne Brindle argues, based on Paul's former writings against the Judaizers in Galatians and 2\u00a0Corinthians, that rumors had probably spread about Paul totally negating the Jewish existence in a Christian world (see also Antinomianism in the New Testament and Supersessionism). Paul may have used the \"Jew first\" approach to counter such a view.\nCondemnation: The Universal corruption of Gentiles and Jews (1:18 \u20133:20).\nThe judgment of God (1:18\u201332).\nPaul begins with a summary of Hellenistic Jewish apologist discourse. His summary begins by suggesting that humans have taken up ungodliness and wickedness for which there already is wrath from God. People have taken God's invisible image and made him into an idol. Paul draws heavily here from the Wisdom of Solomon. This summary condemns \"unnatural sexual behavior\" and warns that such behavior has already resulted in a depraved body and mind (\"reprobate mind\" in the King James Version) and says that people who do such things (including murder and wickedness ) are worthy of death. Paul stands firmly against the idol worship system which was common in Rome. Several scholars believe the passage is a non-Pauline interpolation.\nPaul's warning of hypocrites (2:1\u20134).\nOn the traditional Protestant interpretation, Paul here calls out Jews who are condemning others for not following the law when they themselves are also not following the law. Stanley Stowers, however, has argued on rhetorical grounds that Paul is in these verses not addressing a Jew at all but rather an easily recognizable caricature of the typical boastful person (\u1f41 \u1f00\u03bb\u03b1\u03b6\u03c9\u03bd). Stowers writes, \"There is absolutely no justification for reading as Paul's attack on 'the hypocrisy of the Jew.' No one in the first century would have identified \"ho alazon\" with Judaism. That popular interpretation depends upon anachronistically reading later Christian characterizations of Jews as 'hypocritical Pharisees'\". See also Anti-Judaism.\nJustification: The Gift of Grace and Forgiveness through Faith (3:21 \u20135:11).\nPaul says that a righteousness from God has made itself known apart from the law, to which the law and prophets testify, and this righteousness from God comes through faith in Jesus to all who believe. He describes justification \u2013 legally clearing the believer of the guilt and penalty of sin \u2013 as a gift of God, and not the work of man (lest he might boast), but by faith.\nAssurance of salvation (5 \u201311).\nIn chapters five through eight, Paul argues that believers can be assured of their hope in salvation, having been freed from the bondage of sin. Paul teaches that through faith, the faithful have been joined with Jesus and freed from sin. Believers should celebrate in the assurance of salvation and be certain that no external force or party can take their salvation away from them. This promise is open to everyone since everyone has sinned, save the one who paid for all of them.\nIn Paul addresses the faithfulness of God to the Israelites, where he says that God has been faithful to his promise. Paul hopes that all Israelites will come to realize the truth since he himself is also an Israelite, and had in the past been a persecutor of Early Christians. In Paul talks about how the nation of Israel has not been cast away, and the conditions under which Israel will be God's chosen nation again: when Israel returns to its faith, sets aside its unbelief.\nIn , Paul says that humans are under the law while we live: \"Know ye not...that the law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth?\" However, Jesus' death on the cross makes believers dead to the law (, \"Wherefore, my brethren, ye are also become dead to the law by the body of Christ\"), according to an antinomistic interpretation.\nTransformation of believers (12 \u201315:13).\nFrom chapter 12 through the first part of chapter 15, Paul outlines how the Gospel transforms believers and the behaviour that results from such a transformation. This transformation is described as a \"renewing of your mind\" (12:2), a transformation that Douglas J. Moo characterizes as \u201cthe heart of the matter.\u201d It is a transformation so radical that it amounts to \u201ca transfiguration of your brain,\u201d a \"metanoia\", a \u201cmental revolution.\u201d\nPaul goes on to describe how believers should live. Christians are no longer under the law, that is, no longer bound by the law of Moses, but under the grace of God, see Law and grace. We do not need to live under the law because to the extent our minds have been renewed, we will know \"almost instinctively\" what God wants of us. The law then provides an \"objective standard\" for judging progress in the \"lifelong process\" of our mind's renewal.\nTo the extent they have been set free from sin by renewed minds (Romans 6:18), believers are no longer bound to sin. Believers are free to live in obedience to God and love everybody. As Paul says in Romans 13:10, \"love (\u1f00\u03b3\u03ac\u03c0\u03b7) worketh no ill to his neighbor: therefore love is the fulfilling of law\".\nObedience to earthly powers (13:1\u20137).\nThe fragment in Romans 13:1\u20137 dealing with obedience to earthly powers is considered by some, for example James Kallas, to be an interpolation. (See also the Great Commandment and Christianity and politics). Paul Tillich accepts the historical authenticity of Romans 13:1\u20137, but claims it has been misinterpreted by churches with an anti-revolutionary bias:\nOne of the many politico-theological abuses of biblical statements is the understanding of Paul\u2019s words [Romans 13:1\u20137] as justifying the anti-revolutionary bias of some churches, particularly the Lutheran. But neither these words nor any other New Testament statement deals with the methods of gaining political power. In Romans, Paul is addressing eschatological enthusiasts, not a revolutionary political movement.\nEpilogue (15:1 \u201316:23).\nPaul's ministry and travel plans (16:14\u201327).\nThe concluding verses contain a description of his travel plans, personal greetings and salutations. One-third of the twenty-one Christians identified in the greetings are women. Additionally, none of these Christians answer to the name Peter, although according to the Catholic tradition, he had been ruling as Pope in Rome for about 25 years. Possibly related was the Incident at Antioch between Paul and Cephas.\nHermeneutics.\nCatholic interpretation.\nRoman Catholics accept the necessity of faith for salvation but point to for the necessity of living a virtuous life as well:\nBut by your hard and impenitent heart you are storing up wrath for yourself on the day of wrath when God's righteous judgment will be revealed. For he will render to every man according to his works: to those who by patience in well-doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, he will give eternal life; but for those who are factious and do not obey the truth, but obey wickedness, there will be wrath and fury. There will be tribulation and distress for every human being who does evil, the Jew first and also the Greek, but glory and honor and peace for every one who does good, the Jew first and also the Greek. For God shows no partiality.\nCatholics would also look to the passage in Romans 8:13 for evidence that justification by faith is only valid so long as it is combined with obedient cooperation with The Holy Spirit, and the passage in Romans 11:22 to show that the Christian can lose their justification if they turn away from cooperating with The Holy Spirit and reject Christ through mortal sin.\nProtestant interpretation.\nIn the Protestant interpretation, the New Testament epistles (including Romans), describes salvation as coming from faith and not from righteous actions. For example, Romans (underlining added):\nThey also point out that in Romans , Paul says that God will reward those who follow the law and then goes on to say that \"no one\" follows the law perfectly (see also Sermon on the Mount: Interpretation) Romans :\nRomans has been at the forefront of several major movements in Protestantism. Martin Luther's lectures on Romans in 1515\u20131516 probably coincided with the development of his criticism of Roman Catholicism which led to the \"95 Theses\" of 1517. In the preface to his German translation of Romans, Luther described Paul's letter to the Romans as \"the most important piece in the New Testament. It is purest Gospel. It is well worth a Christian's while not only to memorize it word for word but also to occupy himself with it daily, as though it were the daily bread of the soul\". In 1738, while hearing Luther's Preface to the Epistle to the Romans read at St. Botolph Church on Aldersgate Street in London, John Wesley famously felt his heart \"strangely warmed\", a conversion experience which is often seen as the beginning of Methodism.\nLuther controversially added the word \"alone\" (\"allein\" in German) to Romans so that it read: \"thus, we hold, then, that man is justified without doing the works of the law, \"alone\" through faith\". The word \"alone\" does not appear in the original Greek text, but Luther defended his translation by maintaining that the adverb \"alone\" was required both by idiomatic German and Paul's intended meaning. This is a \"literalist view\" rather than a literal view of the Bible.\nApologist James Swan lists numerous Catholic sources that also translated Romans 3:28 with the word \"alone,\" or testified to others doing so before Luther. A Bible commentary published in 1864 reports that:\nThe \"Romans Road\" (or \"Roman Road\") refers to a set of scriptures from Romans that Christian evangelists use to present a clear and simple case for personal salvation to each person, as all the verses are contained in one single book, making it easier for evangelism without going back and forth through the entire New Testament. The core verses used by nearly all groups using \"Romans Road\" are: Romans , , , , and .\nExternal links.\n\"Translations\"\n\"Other\""}
{"id": "9962", "revid": "28078513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9962", "title": "Eleanor of Aquitaine", "text": "Eleanor of Aquitaine (1122 \u2013 1 April 1204) () was queen consort of France (1137\u20131152) and England (1154\u20131189) and duchess of Aquitaine in her own right (1137\u20131204). As the heir of the House of Poitiers, rulers in southwestern France, she was one of the wealthiest and most powerful women in western Europe during the High Middle Ages. She was patron of literary figures such as Wace, Beno\u00eet de Sainte-Maure, and Bernart de Ventadorn. She led armies several times in her life and was a leader of the Second Crusade.\nAs the duchess of Aquitaine, Eleanor was the most eligible bride in Europe. Three months after becoming duchess upon the death of her father, William X, she married King Louis VII of France, son of her guardian, King Louis VI. As queen of France, she participated in the unsuccessful Second Crusade. Soon afterwards, Eleanor sought an annulment of her marriage, but her request was rejected by Pope Eugene III. However, after the birth of her second daughter Alix, Louis agreed to an annulment, as 15 years of marriage had not produced a son. The marriage was annulled on 21 March 1152 on the grounds of consanguinity within the fourth degree. Their daughters were declared legitimate, custody was awarded to Louis, and Eleanor's lands were restored to her.\nAs soon as the annulment was granted, Eleanor became engaged to the Duke of Normandy, who became King Henry II of England in 1154. Henry was her third cousin and 11 years younger. The couple married on Whitsun, 18 May 1152, eight weeks after the annulment of Eleanor's first marriage, in Poitiers Cathedral. Over the next 13 years, she bore eight children: five sons, three of whom became kings; and three daughters. However, Henry and Eleanor eventually became estranged. Henry imprisoned her in 1173 for supporting their son Henry's revolt against him. She was not released until 6 July 1189, when her husband Henry died and their third son, Richard the Lionheart, ascended the throne.\nAs queen dowager, Eleanor acted as regent while Richard went on the Third Crusade. Eleanor also lived well into the reign of Richard's heir and her youngest son, John.\nEarly life.\nEleanor's year of birth is not known precisely: a late 13th-century genealogy of her family listing her as 13 years old in the spring of 1137 provides the best evidence that Eleanor was perhaps born as late as 1124. On the other hand, some chronicles mention a fidelity oath of some lords of Aquitaine on the occasion of Eleanor's fourteenth birthday in 1136. This, and her known age of 82 at her death make 1122 the most likely year of her birth. Her parents almost certainly married in 1121. Her birthplace may have been Poitiers, Bordeaux, or Nieul-sur-l'Autise, where her mother and brother died when Eleanor was 6 or 8.\nEleanor (or Ali\u00e9nor) was the oldest of three children of William X, Duke of Aquitaine, whose glittering ducal court was renowned in early 12th-century Europe, and his wife, Aenor de Ch\u00e2tellerault, the daughter of Aimery I, Viscount of Ch\u00e2tellerault, and Dangereuse de l'Isle Bouchard, who was William IX's longtime mistress as well as Eleanor's maternal grandmother. Her parents' marriage had been arranged by Dangereuse with her paternal grandfather WilliamIX.\nEleanor is said to have been named for her mother Aenor and called \"Ali\u00e9nor\" from the Latin \"Alia Aenor\", which means \"the other Aenor\". It became \"El\u00e9anor\" in the \"langues d'o\u00efl\" of northern France and \"Eleanor\" in English. There was, however, another prominent Eleanor before her\u2014Eleanor of Normandy, an aunt of William the Conqueror, who lived a century earlier than Eleanor of Aquitaine. In Paris as the queen of France, she was called Helienordis, her honorific name as written in the Latin epistles.\nBy all accounts, Eleanor's father ensured that she had the best possible education. Eleanor came to learn arithmetic, the constellations, and history. She also learned domestic skills such as household management and the needle arts of embroidery, needlepoint, sewing, spinning, and weaving. Eleanor developed skills in conversation, dancing, games such as backgammon, checkers, and chess, playing the harp, and singing. Although her native tongue was Poitevin, she was taught to read and speak Latin, was well versed in music and literature, and schooled in riding, hawking, and hunting. Eleanor was extroverted, lively, intelligent, and strong-willed. Her four-year-old brother William Aigret and their mother died at the castle of Talmont on Aquitaine's Atlantic coast in the spring of 1130. Eleanor became the heir presumptive to her father's domains. The Duchy of Aquitaine was the largest and richest province of France. Poitou, where Eleanor spent most of her childhood, and Aquitaine together was almost one-third the size of modern France. Eleanor had only one other legitimate sibling, a younger sister named Aelith (also called Petronilla). Her half-brother Joscelin was acknowledged by WilliamX as a son, but not as his heir. The notion that she had another half-brother, William, has been discredited. Later, during the first four years of HenryII's reign, her siblings joined Eleanor's royal household.\nInheritance.\nIn 1137 Duke William X left Poitiers for Bordeaux and took his daughters with him. Upon reaching Bordeaux, he left them in the charge of the archbishop of Bordeaux, one of his few loyal vassals. The duke then set out for the Shrine of Saint James of Compostela in the company of other pilgrims. However, he died on Good Friday of that year (9April).\nEleanor, aged 12 to 15, then became the duchess of Aquitaine, and thus the most eligible heiress in Europe. As these were the days when kidnapping an heiress was seen as a viable option for obtaining a title, William dictated a will on the very day he died that bequeathed his domains to Eleanor and appointed King Louis VI of France as her guardian. William requested of the king that he take care of both the lands and the duchess, and find her a suitable husband. However, until a husband was found, the king had the legal right to Eleanor's lands. The duke also insisted to his companions that his death be kept a secret until Louis was informed; the men were to journey from Saint James of Compostela across the Pyrenees as quickly as possible to call at Bordeaux to notify the archbishop, then to make all speed to Paris to inform the king.\nThe king of France, known as Louis the Fat, was also gravely ill at that time, suffering from a bout of dysentery from which he appeared unlikely to recover. Yet despite his impending death, Louis's mind remained clear. His eldest surviving son, Louis, had originally been destined for monastic life, but had become the heir apparent when the firstborn, Philip, died in a riding accident in 1131.\nThe death of William, one of the king's most powerful vassals, made available the most desirable duchy in France. While presenting a solemn and dignified face to the grieving Aquitainian messengers, Louis exulted when they departed. Rather than act as guardian to the duchess and duchy, he decided to marry the duchess to his 17-year-old heir and bring Aquitaine under the control of the French crown, thereby greatly increasing the power and prominence of France and its ruling family, the House of Capet. Within hours, the king had arranged for his son Louis to be married to Eleanor, with Abbot Suger in charge of the wedding arrangements. Louis was sent to Bordeaux with an escort of 500 knights, along with Abbot Suger, Theobald II, Count of Champagne, and Count Ralph.\nFirst marriage.\nOn 25 July 1137, Eleanor and Louis were married in the Cathedral of Saint-Andr\u00e9 in Bordeaux by the archbishop of Bordeaux. Immediately after the wedding, the couple were enthroned as duke and duchess of Aquitaine. It was agreed that the land would remain independent of France until Eleanor's oldest son became both king of France and duke of Aquitaine. Thus, her holdings would not be merged with France until the next generation. As a wedding present she gave Louis a rock crystal vase , currently on display at the Louvre. Louis gave the vase to the Basilica of St Denis. This vase is the only object connected with Eleanor of Aquitaine that still survives.\nLouis's tenure as count of Poitou and duke of Aquitaine and Gascony lasted only a few days. Although he had been invested as such on 8 August 1137, a messenger gave him the news that Louis VI had died of dysentery on 1 August while he and Eleanor were making a tour of the provinces. He and Eleanor were anointed and crowned king and queen of France on Christmas Day of the same year.\nPossessing a high-spirited nature, Eleanor was not popular with the staid northerners; according to sources, Louis's mother Adelaide of Maurienne thought her flighty and a bad influence. She was not aided by memories of Constance of Arles, the Proven\u00e7al wife of Robert II, tales of whose immodest dress and language were still told with horror. Eleanor's conduct was repeatedly criticised by church elders, particularly Bernard of Clairvaux and Abbot Suger, as indecorous. The king was madly in love with his beautiful and worldly bride, however, and granted her every whim, even though her behaviour baffled and vexed him. Much money went into making the austere Cit\u00e9 Palace in Paris more comfortable for Eleanor's sake.\nConflict.\nLouis soon came into violent conflict with Pope Innocent II. In 1141, the Archbishopric of Bourges became vacant, and the king put forward as a candidate one of his chancellors, Cadurc, while vetoing the one suitable candidate, Pierre de la Chatre, who was promptly elected by the canons of Bourges and consecrated by the Pope. Louis accordingly bolted the gates of Bourges against the new bishop. The Pope, recalling similar attempts by William X to exile supporters of Innocent from Poitou and replace them with priests loyal to himself, blamed Eleanor, saying that Louis was only a child and should be taught manners. Outraged, Louis swore upon relics that so long as he lived Pierre should never enter Bourges. An interdict was thereupon imposed upon the king's lands, and Pierre was given refuge by Theobald II, Count of Champagne.\nLouis became involved in a war with Count Theobald by permitting Raoul I, Count of Vermandois and seneschal of France, to repudiate his wife Eleanor of Blois, Theobald's sister, and to marry Petronilla of Aquitaine, Eleanor's sister. Eleanor urged Louis to support her sister's marriage to Count Raoul. Theobald had also offended Louis by siding with the Pope in the dispute over Bourges. The war lasted two years (1142\u201344) and ended with the occupation of Champagne by the royal army. Louis was personally involved in the assault and burning of the town of Vitry. More than a thousand people who sought refuge in the church there died in the flames. Horrified, and desiring an end to the war, Louis attempted to make peace with Theobald in exchange for his support in lifting the interdict on Raoul and Petronilla. This was duly lifted for long enough to allow Theobald's lands to be restored; it was then lowered once more when Raoul refused to repudiate Petronilla, prompting Louis to return to Champagne and ravage it once more.\nIn June 1144, the king and queen visited the newly built monastic church at Saint-Denis. While there, the queen met with Bernard of Clairvaux, demanding that he use his influence with the Pope to have the excommunication of Petronilla and Raoul lifted, in exchange for which King Louis would make concessions in Champagne and recognise Pierre de la Chatre as archbishop of Bourges. Dismayed at her attitude, Bernard scolded Eleanor for her lack of penitence and interference in matters of state. In response, Eleanor broke down and meekly excused her behaviour, claiming to be bitter because of her lack of children (her only recorded pregnancy at that time was in about 1138, but she miscarried). In response, Bernard became more kindly towards her: \"My child, seek those things which make for peace. Cease to stir up the king against the Church, and urge upon him a better course of action. If you will promise to do this, I in return promise to entreat the merciful Lord to grant you offspring.\" In a matter of weeks, peace had returned to France: Theobald's provinces were returned and Pierre de la Chatre was installed as archbishop of Bourges. In April 1145, Eleanor gave birth to a daughter, Marie.\nLouis, however, still burned with guilt over the massacre at Vitry and wished to make a pilgrimage to the Holy Land to atone for his sins. In autumn 1145, Pope Eugene III requested that Louis lead a Crusade to the Middle East to rescue the Frankish states there from disaster. Accordingly, Louis declared on Christmas Day 1145 at Bourges his intention of going on a crusade.\nCrusade.\nEleanor of Aquitaine also formally took up the cross symbolic of the Second Crusade during a sermon preached by Bernard of Clairvaux. In addition, she had been corresponding with her uncle Raymond, Prince of Antioch, who was seeking further protection from the French crown against the Saracens. Eleanor recruited some of her royal ladies-in-waiting for the campaign as well as 300 non-noble Aquitainian vassals. She insisted on taking part in the Crusades as the feudal leader of the soldiers from her duchy. The story that she and her ladies dressed as Amazons is disputed by historians, sometimes confused with the account of King Conrad's train of ladies during this campaign in Edward Gibbon's \"The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire\". She left for the Second Crusade from V\u00e9zelay, the rumoured location of Mary Magdalene's grave, in June 1147.\nThe Crusade itself achieved little. Louis was a weak and ineffectual military leader with no skill for maintaining troop discipline or morale, or of making informed and logical tactical decisions. In eastern Europe, the French army was at times hindered by Manuel I Comnenus, the Byzantine Emperor, who feared that the Crusade would jeopardise the tenuous safety of his empire. Notwithstanding, during their three-week stay at Constantinople, Louis was f\u00eated and Eleanor was much admired. She was compared with Penthesilea, mythical queen of the Amazons, by the Greek historian Nicetas Choniates. He added that she gained the epithet \"chrysopous\" (golden-foot) from the cloth of gold that decorated and fringed her robe. Louis and Eleanor stayed in the Philopation palace just outside the city walls.\nFrom the moment the Crusaders entered Asia Minor, things began to go badly. The king and queen were still optimistic\u00a0\u2014the Byzantine Emperor had told them that King Conrad III of Germany had won a great victory against a Turkish army when in fact the German army had been almost completely destroyed at Dorylaeum. However, while camping near Nicea, the remnants of the German army, including a dazed and sick Conrad III, staggered past the French camp, bringing news of their disaster. The French, with what remained of the Germans, then began to march in increasingly disorganised fashion towards Antioch. They were in high spirits on Christmas Eve, when they chose to camp in a lush valley near Ephesus. Here they were ambushed by a Turkish detachment, but the French proceeded to slaughter this detachment and appropriate their camp.\nLouis then decided to cross the Phrygian mountains directly in the hope of reaching Raymond of Poitiers in Antioch more quickly. As they ascended the mountains, however, the army and the king and queen were horrified to discover the unburied corpses of the Germans killed earlier.\nOn the day set for the crossing of Mount Cadmus, Louis chose to take charge of the rear of the column, where the unarmed pilgrims and the baggage trains marched. The vanguard, with which Queen Eleanor marched, was commanded by her Aquitainian vassal, Geoffrey de Rancon. Unencumbered by baggage, they reached the summit of Cadmus, where Rancon had been ordered to make camp for the night. Rancon, however, chose to continue on, deciding in concert with Amadeus III, Count of Savoy, Louis's uncle, that a nearby plateau would make a better campsite. Such disobedience was reportedly common.\nAccordingly, by mid-afternoon, the rear of the column \u00a0\u2014believing the day's march to be nearly at an end\u00a0\u2014was dawdling. This resulted in the army becoming separated, with some having already crossed the summit and others still approaching it. In the ensuing battle of Mount Cadmus, the Turks, who had been following and feinting for many days, seized their opportunity and attacked those who had not yet crossed the summit. The French, both soldiers, and pilgrims, taken by surprise, were trapped. Those who tried to escape were caught and killed. Many men, horses, and much of the baggage were cast into the canyon below. The chronicler William of Tyre, writing between 1170 and 1184 and thus perhaps too long after the event to be considered historically accurate, placed the blame for this disaster firmly on the amount of baggage being carried, much of it reputedly belonging to Eleanor and her ladies, and the presence of non-combatants.\nThe king, having scorned royal apparel in favour of a simple pilgrim's tunic, escaped notice, unlike his bodyguards, whose skulls were brutally smashed and limbs severed. He reportedly \"nimbly and bravely scaled a rock by making use of some tree roots which God had provided for his safety\" and managed to survive the attack. Others were not so fortunate: \"No aid came from Heaven, except that night fell.\"\nOfficial blame for the disaster was placed on Geoffrey de Rancon, who had made the decision to continue, and it was suggested that he be hanged, a suggestion which the king ignored. Since Geoffrey was Eleanor's vassal, many believed that it was she who had been ultimately responsible for the change in plan, and thus the massacre. This suspicion of responsibility did nothing for her popularity in Christendom. She was also blamed for the size of the baggage train and the fact that her Aquitanian soldiers had marched at the front and thus were not involved in the fight. Continuing on, the army became split, with the commoners marching towards Antioch and the royalty travelling by sea. When most of the land army arrived, the king and queen had a dispute. Some, such as John of Salisbury and William of Tyre, say Eleanor's reputation was sullied by rumours of an affair with her uncle Raymond. However, this rumour may have been a ruse, as Raymond, through Eleanor, had been trying to induce Louis to use his army to attack the actual Muslim encampment at nearby Aleppo, gateway to retaking Edessa, which had all along, by papal decree, been the main objective of the Crusade. Although this was perhaps a better military plan, Louis was not keen to fight in northern Syria. One of Louis's avowed Crusade goals was to journey in pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and he stated his intention to continue. Reputedly Eleanor then requested to stay with Raymond and brought up the matter of consanguinity \u00a0\u2014the fact that she and her husband, King Louis, were perhaps too closely related. Consanguinity was grounds for annulment in the medieval period. But rather than allowing her to stay, Louis took Eleanor from Antioch against her will and continued on to Jerusalem with his dwindling army.\nLouis's refusal and his forcing her to accompany him humiliated Eleanor, and she maintained a low profile for the rest of the crusade. Louis's subsequent siege of Damascus in 1148 with his remaining army, reinforced by Conrad and Baldwin III of Jerusalem, achieved little. Damascus was a major wealthy trading centre and was under normal circumstances a potential threat, but the rulers of Jerusalem had recently entered into a truce with the city, which they then forswore. It was a gamble that did not pay off, and whether through military error or betrayal, the Damascus campaign was a failure. Louis's long march to Jerusalem and back north, which Eleanor was forced to join, debilitated his army and disheartened her knights; the divided Crusade armies could not overcome the Muslim forces, and the royal couple had to return home. The French royal family retreated to Jerusalem and then sailed to Rome and made their way back to Paris.\nWhile in the eastern Mediterranean, Eleanor learned about maritime conventions developing there, which were the beginnings of what would become admiralty law. She introduced those conventions in her own lands on the island of Ol\u00e9ron in 1160 (with the \"Rolls of Ol\u00e9ron\") and later in England as well. She was also instrumental in developing trade agreements with Constantinople and ports of trade in the Holy Lands.\nAnnulment.\nEven before the Crusade, Eleanor and Louis were becoming estranged, and their differences were only exacerbated while they were abroad. Eleanor's purported relationship with her uncle Raymond, the ruler of Antioch, was a major source of discord. Eleanor supported her uncle's desire to re-capture the nearby County of Edessa, the objective of the Crusade. In addition, having been close to him in their youth, she now showed what was considered to be \"excessive affection\" towards her uncle. Raymond had plans to abduct Eleanor, to which she consented. While many historians today dismiss this as familial affection, noting their early friendship and his similarity to her father and grandfather, some of Eleanor's adversaries interpreted the generous displays of affection as an incestuous affair.\nHome, however, was not easily reached. Louis and Eleanor, on separate ships due to their disagreements, were first attacked in May 1149 by Byzantine ships attempting to capture both on the orders of the Byzantine Emperor. Although they escaped this attempt unharmed, stormy weather drove Eleanor's ship far to the south to the Barbary Coast and caused her to lose track of her husband. Neither was heard of for over two months. In mid-July, Eleanor's ship finally reached Palermo in Sicily, where she discovered that she and her husband had both been given up for dead. She was given shelter and food by servants of King Roger II of Sicily, until the king eventually reached Calabria, and she set out to meet him there. Later, at King Roger's court in Potenza, she learned of the death of her uncle Raymond, who had been beheaded by Muslim forces in the Holy Land. This news appears to have forced a change of plans, for instead of returning to France from Marseilles, they went to see Pope Eugene III in Tusculum, where he had been driven five months before by a revolt of the Commune of Rome.\nEugene did not, as Eleanor had hoped, grant an annulment. Instead, he attempted to reconcile Eleanor and Louis, confirming the legality of their marriage. He proclaimed that no word could be spoken against it, and that it might not be dissolved under any pretext. Eventually, he arranged events so that Eleanor had no choice but to sleep with Louis in a bed specially prepared by the Pope. Thus was conceived their second child\u00a0\u2014not a son, but another daughter, Alix of France.\nThe marriage was now doomed. Still without a son and in danger of being left with no male heir, as well as facing substantial opposition to Eleanor from many of his barons and her own desire for annulment, Louis bowed to the inevitable. On 11 March 1152, they met at the royal castle of Beaugency to dissolve the marriage. Hugues de Toucy, archbishop of Sens, presided, and Louis and Eleanor were both present, as were the archbishop of Bordeaux and Rouen. Archbishop Samson of Reims acted for Eleanor.\nOn 21 March, the four archbishops, with the approval of Pope Eugene, granted an annulment on grounds of consanguinity within the fourth degree; Eleanor was Louis' third cousin once removed, and shared common ancestry with Robert II of France. Their two daughters were, however, declared legitimate. Children born to a marriage that was later annulled were not at risk of being \"bastardised,\" because \"[w]here parties married in good faith, without knowledge of an impediment,\u00a0... children of the marriage were legitimate.\" [Berman 228.] ) Custody of them was awarded to King Louis. Archbishop Samson received assurances from Louis that Eleanor's lands would be restored to her.\nSecond marriage.\nAs Eleanor travelled to Poitiers, two lords\u00a0\u2014 Theobald V, Count of Blois, and Geoffrey, Count of Nantes, brother of Henry II, Duke of Normandy\u00a0\u2014 tried to kidnap and marry her to claim her lands. As soon as she arrived in Poitiers, Eleanor sent envoys to Henry, Duke of Normandy and future king of England, asking him to come at once to marry her. On 18 May 1152 (Whit Sunday), eight weeks after her annulment, Eleanor married Henry \"without the pomp and ceremony that befitted their rank.\"\nEleanor was related to Henry even more closely than she had been to Louis: they were cousins to the third degree through their common ancestor Ermengarde of Anjou, wife of Robert I, Duke of Burgundy and Geoffrey, Count of G\u00e2tinais, and they were also descended from King Robert II of France. A marriage between Henry and Eleanor's daughter Marie had earlier been declared impossible due to their status as third cousins once removed. It was rumoured by some that Eleanor had had an affair with Henry's own father, Geoffrey V, Count of Anjou, who had advised his son to avoid any involvement with her.\nOn 25 October 1154, Henry became king of England. Eleanor was crowned queen of England by the archbishop of Canterbury on 19 December 1154. She may not have been anointed on this occasion, however, because she had already been anointed in 1137. Over the next 13 years, she bore Henry five sons and three daughters: William, Henry, Richard, Geoffrey, John, Matilda, Eleanor, and Joan. John Speed, in his 1611 work \"History of Great Britain\", mentions the possibility that Eleanor had a son named Philip, who died young. His sources no longer exist, and he alone mentions this birth.\nEleanor's marriage to Henry was reputed to be tumultuous and argumentative, although sufficiently cooperative to produce at least eight pregnancies. Henry was by no means faithful to his wife and had a reputation for philandering. Henry fathered other, illegitimate children throughout the marriage. Eleanor appears to have taken an ambivalent attitude towards these affairs. Geoffrey of York, for example, was an illegitimate son of Henry, but acknowledged by Henry as his child and raised at Westminster in the care of the queen.\nDuring the period from Henry's accession to the birth of Eleanor's youngest son John, affairs in the kingdom were turbulent: Aquitaine, as was the norm, defied the authority of Henry as Eleanor's husband and answered only to their duchess. Attempts were made to claim Toulouse, the rightful inheritance of Eleanor's grandmother Philippa of Toulouse, but they ended in failure. A bitter feud arose between the king and Thomas Becket, initially his chancellor and closest adviser and later the archbishop of Canterbury. Louis of France had remarried and been widowed; he married for the third time and finally fathered a long-hoped-for son, Philip Augustus, also known as Dieudonne\u2014God-given). \"Young Henry,\" son of Henry and Eleanor, wed Margaret, daughter of Louis from his second marriage. Little is known of Eleanor's involvement in these events. It is certain that by late 1166, Henry's notorious affair with Rosamund Clifford had become known, and Eleanor's marriage to Henry appears to have become terminally strained.\nIn 1167, Eleanor's third daughter, Matilda, married Henry the Lion of Saxony. Eleanor remained in England with her daughter for the year prior to Matilda's departure for Normandy in September. In December, Eleanor gathered her movable possessions in England and transported them on several ships to Argentan. Christmas was celebrated at the royal court there, and she appears to have agreed to a separation from Henry. She certainly left for her own city of Poitiers immediately after Christmas. Henry did not stop her; on the contrary, he and his army personally escorted her there before attacking a castle belonging to the rebellious Lusignan family. Henry then went about his own business outside Aquitaine, leaving Earl Patrick, his regional military commander, as her protective custodian. When Patrick was killed in a skirmish, Eleanor, who proceeded to ransom his captured nephew, the young William Marshal, was left in control of her lands.\nThe Court of Love in Poitiers.\nOf all her influence on culture, Eleanor's time in Poitiers between 1168 and 1173 was perhaps the most critical, yet very little is known about it. Henry II was elsewhere, attending to his own affairs after escorting Eleanor there. Some believe that Eleanor's court in Poitiers was the \"Court of Love\" where Eleanor and her daughter Marie meshed and encouraged the ideas of troubadours, chivalry, and courtly love into a single court. It may have been largely to teach manners, something the French courts would be known for in later generations. Yet the existence and reasons for this court are debated.\nIn \"The Art of Courtly Love\", Andreas Capellanus, Andrew the chaplain, refers to the court of Poitiers. He claims that Eleanor, her daughter Marie, Ermengarde, Viscountess of Narbonne, and Isabelle of Flanders would sit and listen to the quarrels of lovers and act as a jury to the questions of the court that revolved around acts of romantic love. He records some twenty-one cases, the most famous of them being a problem posed to the women about whether true love can exist in marriage. According to Capellanus, the women decided that it was not at all likely.\nSome scholars believe that the \"court of love\" probably never existed since the only evidence for it is Andreas Capellanus' book. To strengthen their argument, they state that there is no other evidence that Marie ever stayed with her mother in Poitiers. Andreas wrote for the court of the king of France, where Eleanor was not held in esteem. Polly Schroyer Brooks, the author of a non-academic biography of Eleanor, suggests that the court did exist, but that it was not taken very seriously, and that acts of courtly love were just a \"parlour game\" made up by Eleanor and Marie in order to place some order over the young courtiers living there.\nThere is no claim that Eleanor invented courtly love, for it was a concept that had begun to grow before Eleanor's court arose. All that can be said is that her court at Poitiers was most likely a catalyst for the increased popularity of courtly love literature in the Western European regions. Amy Kelly, in her article, \"Eleanor of Aquitaine and Her Courts of Love,\" gives a very plausible description of the origins of the rules of Eleanor's court: \"In the Poitevin code, man is the property, the very thing of woman; whereas a precisely contrary state of things existed in the adjacent realms of the two kings from whom the reigning duchess of Aquitaine was estranged.\"\nRevolt and capture.\nIn March 1173, aggrieved at his lack of power and egged on by Henry's enemies, his son by the same name, the younger Henry, launched the Revolt of 1173\u20131174. He fled to Paris. From there, \"the younger Henry, devising evil against his father from every side by the advice of the French king, went secretly into Aquitaine where his two youthful brothers, Richard and Geoffrey, were living with their mother, and with her connivance, so it is said, he incited them to join him.\" One source claimed that the queen sent her younger sons to France \"to join with him against their father the king.\" Once her sons had left for Paris, Eleanor may have encouraged the lords of the south to rise up and support them.\nSometime between the end of March and the beginning of May, Eleanor left Poitiers, but was arrested and sent to the king at Rouen. The king did not announce the arrest publicly; for the next year, the queen's whereabouts were unknown. On 8 July 1174, Henry and Eleanor took ship for England from Barfleur. As soon as they disembarked at Southampton, Eleanor was taken either to Winchester Castle or Sarum Castle and held there.\nYears of imprisonment 1173\u20131189.\nEleanor was imprisoned for the next 16 years, much of the time in various locations in England. During her imprisonment, Eleanor became more and more distant from her sons, especially from Richard, who had always been her favourite. She did not have the opportunity to see her sons very often during her imprisonment, though she was released for special occasions such as Christmas. About four miles from Shrewsbury and close by Haughmond Abbey is \"Queen Eleanor's Bower\", the remains of a triangular castle which is believed to have been one of her prisons.\nHenry lost the woman reputed to be his great love, Rosamund Clifford, in 1176. He had met her in 1166 and had begun their liaison in 1173, supposedly contemplating divorce from Eleanor. This notorious affair caused a monkish scribe to transcribe Rosamund's name in Latin to \"Rosa Immundi\", or \"Rose of Unchastity\". The king had many mistresses, but although he treated earlier liaisons discreetly, he flaunted Rosamund. He may have done so to provoke Eleanor into seeking an annulment, but if so, the queen disappointed him. Nevertheless, rumours persisted, perhaps assisted by Henry's camp, that Eleanor had poisoned Rosamund. It is also speculated that Eleanor placed Rosamund in a bathtub and had an old woman cut Rosamund's arms. Henry donated much money to Godstow Nunnery, where Rosamund was buried.\nIn 1183, the young King Henry tried again to force his father to hand over some of his patrimony. In debt and refused control of Normandy, he tried to ambush his father at Limoges. He was joined by troops sent by his brother Geoffrey and Philip II of France. Henry II's troops besieged the town, forcing his son to flee. After wandering aimlessly through Aquitaine, Henry the Younger caught dysentery. On Saturday, 11 June 1183, the young king realized he was dying and was overcome with remorse for his sins. When his father's ring was sent to him, he begged that his father would show mercy to his mother, and that all his companions would plead with Henry to set her free. Henry II sent Thomas of Earley, Archdeacon of Wells, to break the news to Eleanor at Sarum. Eleanor reputedly had a dream in which she foresaw her son Henry's death. In 1193, she would tell Pope Celestine III that she was tortured by his memory.\nKing Philip II of France claimed that certain properties in Normandy belonged to his half-sister Margaret, widow of the young Henry, but Henry insisted that they had once belonged to Eleanor and would revert to her upon her son's death. For this reason Henry summoned Eleanor to Normandy in the late summer of 1183. She stayed in Normandy for six months. This was the beginning of a period of greater freedom for the still-supervised Eleanor. Eleanor went back to England probably early in 1184. Over the next few years Eleanor often travelled with her husband and was sometimes associated with him in the government of the realm, but still had a custodian so that she was not free.\nWidowhood.\nUpon the death of her husband Henry II on 6 July 1189, Richard I was the undisputed heir. One of his first acts as king was to send William Marshal to England with orders to release Eleanor from prison; he found upon his arrival that her custodians had already released her. Eleanor rode to Westminster and received the oaths of fealty from many lords and prelates on behalf of the king. She ruled England in Richard's name, signing herself \"Eleanor, by the grace of God, Queen of England.\" On 13August 1189, Richard sailed from Barfleur to Portsmouth and was received with enthusiasm. Between 1190 and 1194, Richard was absent from England, engaged in the Third Crusade from 1190 to 1192, and then held in captivity by Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor. During Richard's absence, royal authority in England was represented by a Council of Regency in conjunction with a succession of chief justiciarsWilliam de Longchamp (1190\u20131191), Walter deCoutances (1191\u20131193), and finally Hubert Walter. Although Eleanor held no formal office in England during this period, she arrived in England in the company of Coutances in June 1191, and for the remainder of Richard's absence, she exercised a considerable degree of influence over the affairs of England as well as the conduct of Prince John. Eleanor played a key role in raising the ransom demanded from England by HenryVI and in the negotiations with the Holy Roman Emperor that eventually secured Richard's release.\nEleanor survived Richard and lived well into the reign of her youngest son, King John. In 1199, under the terms of a truce between King PhilipII and King John, it was agreed that Philip's 12-year-old heir-apparent Louis would be married to one of John's nieces, daughters of his sister Eleanor of England, queen of Castile. John instructed his mother to travel to Castile to select one of the princesses. Now 77, Eleanor set out from Poitiers. Just outside Poitiers she was ambushed and held captive by Hugh IX of Lusignan, whose lands had been sold to HenryII by his forebears. Eleanor secured her freedom by agreeing to his demands. She continued south, crossed the Pyrenees, and travelled through the kingdoms of Navarre and Castile, arriving in Castile before the end of January 1200.\nEleanor's daughter, Queen Eleanor of Castile, had two remaining unmarried daughters, Urraca and Blanche. Eleanor selected the younger daughter, Blanche. She stayed for two months at the Castilian court, then late in March journeyed with granddaughter Blanche back across the Pyrenees. She celebrated Easter in Bordeaux, where the famous warrior Mercadier came to her court. It was decided that he would escort the queen and princess north. \"On the second day in Easter week, he was slain in the city by a man-at-arms in the service of Brandin,\" a rival mercenary captain. This tragedy was too much for the elderly queen, who was fatigued and unable to continue to Normandy. She and Blanche rode in easy stages to the valley of the Loire, and she entrusted Blanche to the archbishop of Bordeaux, who took over as her escort. The exhausted Eleanor went to Fontevraud, where she remained. In early summer, Eleanor was ill, and John visited her at Fontevraud.\nEleanor was again unwell in early 1201. When war broke out between John and Philip, Eleanor declared her support for John and set out from Fontevraud to her capital Poitiers to prevent her grandson Arthur I, Duke of Brittany, posthumous son of Eleanor's son Geoffrey and John's rival for the English throne, from taking control. Arthur learned of her whereabouts and besieged her in the castle of Mirebeau. As soon as John heard of this, he marched south, overcame the besiegers, and captured the 15-year-old Arthur, and probably his sister Eleanor, Fair Maid of Brittany, whom Eleanor had raised with Richard. Eleanor then returned to Fontevraud where she took the veil as a nun.\nEleanor died in 1204 and was entombed in Fontevraud Abbey next to her husband Henry and her son Richard. Her tomb effigy shows her reading a Bible and is decorated with magnificent jewellery. By the time of her death she had outlived all of her children except for King John of England and Queen Eleanor of Castile.\nAppearance.\nContemporary sources praise Eleanor's beauty. Even in an era when ladies of the nobility were excessively praised, their praise of her was undoubtedly sincere. When she was young, she was described as \"perpulchra\"more than beautiful. When she was around 30, Bernard de Ventadour, a noted troubadour, called her \"gracious, lovely, the embodiment of charm,\" extolling her \"lovely eyes and noble countenance\" and declaring that she was \"one meet to crown the state of any king.\" William of Newburgh emphasised the charms of her person, and even in her old age Richard of Devizes described her as beautiful, while Matthew Paris, writing in the 13thcentury, recalled her \"admirable beauty.\"\nIn spite of all these words of praise, no one left a more detailed description of Eleanor; the colour of her hair and eyes, for example, are unknown. The effigy on her tomb shows a tall and large-boned woman with brown skin, though this may not be an accurate representation. Her seal of 1152 shows a woman with a slender figure, but this is probably an impersonal image.\nPopular culture.\nArt.\nJudy Chicago's artistic installation \"The Dinner Party\" features a place setting for Eleanor, and she was portrayed by Frederick Sandys in his 1858 painting, \"Queen Eleanor\".\nBooks and dramas.\nHenry and Eleanor are the main characters in James Goldman's 1966 play \"The Lion in Winter\", which was made into a film in 1968 starring Peter O'Toole as Henry and Katharine Hepburn in the role of Eleanor, for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress and the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role and was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress\u2014Motion Picture Drama.\nJean Plaidy's novel \"The Courts of Love\", fifth in the 'Queens of England' series, is a fictionalised autobiography of Eleanor of Aquitaine.\nAlso Norah Lofts wrote a fictionalized biography of her, entitled in various editions \"Queen in Waiting\" or \"Eleanor the Queen\", and including some romanticized episodes \u2014 starting off with the young Eleanor planning to elope with a young knight, who is killed out of hand by her guardian, in order to facilitate her marriage to the King's son. \nThe character Queen Elinor appears in William Shakespeare's \"The Life and Death of King John\", with other members of the family. On television, she has been portrayed in this play by Una Venning in the \"BBC Sunday Night Theatre\" version (1952) and by Mary Morris in the BBC Shakespeare version (1984).\nEleanor features in the novel \"Via Crucis\" (1899) by F. Marion Crawford.\nIn Sharon Kay Penman's Plantagenet novels, she figures prominently in \"When Christ and His Saints Slept\", \"Time and Chance\", and \"Devil's Brood\", and also appears in \"Lionheart\" and \"A King's Ransom\", both of which focus on the reign of her son, Richard, as king of England. Eleanor also appears briefly in the first novel of Penman's Welsh trilogy, \"Here Be Dragons\". In Penman's historical mysteries, Eleanor, as Richard's regent, sends squire Justin de Quincy on various missions, often an investigation of a situation involving Prince John. The four published mysteries are the \"Queen's Man\", \"Cruel as the Grave\", \"Dragon's Lair\", and \"Prince of Darkness\".\nEleanor is the subject of \"A Proud Taste for Scarlet and Miniver\", a children's novel by E.L. Konigsburg.\nHistorical fiction author Elizabeth Chadwick wrote a three-volume series about Eleanor: \"The Summer Queen\" (2013), \"The Winter Crown\" (2014) and \"The Autumn Throne\" (2016).\nShe has also been introduced in \"The Royal Diaries\" series in the book \"Crown Jewel of Aquitaine\" by Kristiana Gregory.\nFilm, radio and television.\nEleanor has featured in a number of screen versions of the \"Ivanhoe\" and \"Robin Hood\" stories. She has been played by Martita Hunt in \"The Story of Robin Hood and His Merrie Men\" (1952), Jill Esmond in the British TV adventure series \"The Adventures of Robin Hood\" (1955\u20131960), Phyllis Neilson-Terry in the British TV adventure series \"Ivanhoe\" (1958), Yvonne Mitchell in the BBC TV drama series \"The Legend of Robin Hood\" (1975), Si\u00e2n Phillips in the TV series \"Ivanhoe\" (1997), and Tusse Silberg in the TV series \"The New Adventures of Robin Hood\" (1997). She was portrayed by Lynda Bellingham in the BBC series \"Robin Hood\". Most recently, she was portrayed by Eileen Atkins in \"Robin Hood (2010)\".\nIn the 1964 film \"Becket\", Eleanor is briefly played by Pamela Brown to Peter O'Toole's first performance as a young Henry II.\nIn the 1968 film \"The Lion in Winter\", Eleanor is played by Katharine Hepburn, who won the third of her four Academy Awards for Best Actress for her portrayal, and Henry again is portrayed by O'Toole. The film is about the difficult relationship between them and the struggle of their three sons Richard, Geoffrey, and John for their father's favor and the succession. In the 2003 television film version, Eleanor was played by Glenn Close alongside Patrick Stewart as Henry.\nShe was portrayed by Mary Clare in the silent film \"Becket\" (1923), by Prudence Hyman in \"Richard the Lionheart\" (1962), and twice by Jane Lapotaire in the BBC TV drama series \"The Devil's Crown\" (1978) and again in Mike Walker's BBC Radio 4 series \"Plantagenet\" (2010). In the 2014 film \"\", Eleanor is played by Debbie Rochon.\nHer life was portrayed on BBC Radio 4 in the drama series \"Eleanor Rising\", with Rose Basista as Eleanor and Joel MacCormack as King Louis. The first series of five 15-minute episodes was broadcast in November 2020 and the second series in April 2021.\nMusic.\nEleanor and Rosamund Clifford, as well as Henry IIand Rosamund's father, appear in Gaetano Donizetti's opera \"Rosmonda d'Inghilterra\" (libretto by Felice Romani), which was premiered in Florence, at the Teatro Pergola, in 1834.\nEleanor of Aquitaine is thought to be the queen of England mentioned in the poem \"Were diu werlt alle min,\" used as the tenth movement of Carl Orff's famous cantata, \"Carmina Burana\".\n\"Flower and Hawk\" is a monodrama for soprano and orchestra, written by American composer, Carlisle Floyd that premiered in 1972, in which the soprano (Eleanor of Aquitaine) relives past memories of her time as queen, and at the end of the monodrama, hears the bells that toll for Henry II's death, and in turn, her freedom.\nVideo games.\nIn the 2019 video game expansion \"\", Eleanor is a playable leader for the English and French civilizations."}
{"id": "9963", "revid": "1273126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9963", "title": "Epistle to Philemon", "text": "The Epistle of Paul to Philemon, known simply as Philemon, is one of the books of the Christian New Testament. It is a prison letter, co-authored by Paul the Apostle with Timothy, to Philemon, a leader in the Colossian church. It deals with the themes of forgiveness and reconciliation. Paul does not identify himself as an apostle with authority, but as \"a prisoner of Jesus Christ\", calling Timothy \"our brother\", and addressing Philemon as \"fellow labourer\" and \"brother.\" () Onesimus, a slave that had departed from his master Philemon, was returning with this epistle wherein Paul asked Philemon to receive him as a \"brother beloved.\"()\nPhilemon was a wealthy Christian, possibly a bishop of the house church that met in his home () in Colossae. This letter is now generally regarded as one of the undisputed works of Paul. It is the shortest of Paul's extant letters, consisting of only 335 words in the Greek text.\nComposition.\nThe Epistle to Philemon was composed around 57-62 A.D by Paul while in prison at Caesarea Maritima (early date) or more likely from Rome (later date) in conjunction with the composition of Colossians.\nAuthorship.\nThe epistle of Philemon is attributed to the apostle Paul, and this attribution has rarely been questioned by scholars. Along with six others, it is numbered among the \"undisputed letters\", which are widely considered to be authentically Pauline. The main challenge to the letter's authenticity came from a group of German scholars in the nineteenth century known as the T\u00fcbingen School. Their leader, Ferdinand Christian Baur, only accepted four New Testament epistles as genuinely written by Paul: Romans, 1 and 2 Corinthians and Galatians. Commenting on Philemon, Baur described the subject matter as \"so very singular as to arouse our suspicions,\" and concluded that it is perhaps a \"Christian romance serving to convey a genuine Christian idea.\"\nThe opening verse of the salutation also names Timothy alongside Paul. This, however, does not mean that Timothy was the epistle's co-author. Rather, Paul regularly mentions others in the address if they have a particular connection with the recipient. In this case, Timothy may have encountered Philemon while accompanying Paul in his work in Ephesus.\nOccasion.\nAccording to the majority interpretation, Paul wrote this letter on behalf of Onesimus, a runaway slave who had wronged his owner Philemon. The details of the offence are unstated, although it is often assumed that Onesimus had fled after stealing money, as Paul states in verse 18 that if Onesimus owes anything, Philemon should charge this to Paul's account. Sometime after leaving, Onesimus came into contact with Paul, although again the details are unclear. He may have been arrested and imprisoned alongside Paul. Alternatively, he may have previously heard Paul's name (as his owner was a Christian) and so travelled to him for help. After meeting Paul, Onesimus became a Christian believer. An affection grew between them, and Paul would have been glad to keep Onesimus with him. However, he considered it better to send him back to Philemon with an accompanying letter, which aimed to effect reconciliation between them as Christian brothers. The preservation of the letter suggests that Paul's request was granted.\nOnesimus' status as a runaway slave was challenged by Allen Dwight Callahan in an article published in the \"Harvard Theological Review\" and in a later commentary. Callahan argues that, beyond verse 16, \"nothing in the text conclusively indicates that Onesimus was ever the chattel of the letter's chief addressee. Moreover, the expectations fostered by the traditional fugitive slave hypothesis go unrealized in the letter. Modern commentators, even those committed to the prevailing interpretation, have tacitly admitted as much.\" Callahan argues that the earliest commentators on this work \u2013 the homily of Origen and the Anti-Marcion Preface \u2013 are silent about Onesimus' possible servile status, and traces the origins of this interpretation to John Chrysostom, who proposed it in his \"Homiliae in epistolam ad Philemonem\", during his ministry in Antioch, circa 386\u2013398. In place of the traditional interpretation, Callahan suggests that Onesimus and Philemon are brothers both by blood and religion, but who have become estranged, and the intent of this letter was to reconcile the two men. Ben Witherington III has challenged Callahan's interpretation as a misreading of Paul's rhetoric. Further, Margaret M. Mitchell has demonstrated that a number of writers before Chrysostom either argue or assume that Onesimus was a runaway slave, including Athanasius, Basil of Caesarea and Ambrosiaster.\nThe only extant information about Onesimus apart from this letter is found in Paul's epistle to the Colossians 4:7\u20139, where Onesimus is called \"a faithful and beloved brother\":\nRecipient.\nThe letter is addressed to Philemon, Apphia and Archippus, and the church in Philemon's house. Philemon is described as a \"fellow worker\" of Paul. It is generally assumed that he lived in Colossae; in the letter to the Colossians, Onesimus (the slave who fled from Philemon) and Archippus (whom Paul greets in the letter to Philemon) are described as members of the church there. Philemon may have converted to Christianity through Paul's ministry, possibly in Ephesus. Apphia in the salutation is probably Philemon's wife. Some have speculated that Archippus, described by Paul as a \"fellow soldier\", is the son of Philemon and Apphia.\nThe American John Knox proposed that Onesimus' owner was in fact Archippus, and the letter was addressed to him rather than Philemon. In this reconstruction, Philemon would receive the letter first and then encourage Archippus to release Onesimus so that he could work alongside Paul. This view, however, has not found widespread support. In particular, Knox's view has been challenged on the basis of the opening verses. According to O'Brien, the fact that Philemon's name is mentioned first, together with the use of the phrase \"in your house\" in verse 2, makes it unlikely that Archippus was the primary addressee. Knox further argued that the letter was intended to be read aloud in the Colossian church in order to put pressure on Archippus. A number of commentators, however, see this view as contradicting the tone of the letter. J. B. Lightfoot, for example, wrote: \"The tact and delicacy of the Apostle's pleading for Onesimus would be nullified at one stroke by the demand for publication.\"\nContent.\nGreeting and introduction (1\u20133).\nThe opening salutation follows a typical pattern found in other Pauline letters. Paul first introduces himself, with a self-designation as a \"prisoner of Jesus Christ,\" which in this case refers to a physical imprisonment. He also mentions his associate Timothy, as a valued colleague who was presumably known to the recipient. As well as addressing the letter to Philemon, Paul sends greetings to Apphia, Archippus and the church that meets in Philemon's house. Apphia is often presumed to be Philemon's wife and Archippus, a \"fellow labourer\", is sometimes suggested to be their son. Paul concludes his salutation with a prayerful wish for grace and peace.\nThanksgiving and intercession (4\u20137).\nBefore addressing the main topic of the letter, Paul continues with a paragraph of thanksgiving and intercession. This serves to prepare the ground for Paul's central request. He gives thanks to God for Philemon's love and faith and prays for his faith to be effective. He concludes this paragraph by describing the joy and comfort he has received from knowing how Philemon has shown love towards the Christians in Colossae.\nPaul's plea for Onesimus (8\u201320).\nAs a background to his specific plea for Onesimus, Paul clarifies his intentions and circumstances. Although he has the boldness to command Philemon to do what would be right in the circumstances, he prefers to base his appeal on his knowledge of Philemon's love and generosity. He also describes the affection he has for Onesimus and the transformation that has taken place with Onesimus's conversion to the Christian faith. Where Onesimus was \"useless\", now he is \"useful\" \u2013 a wordplay, as Onesimus means \"useful\". Paul indicates that he would have been glad to keep Onesimus with him, but recognised that it was right to send him back. Paul's specific request is for Philemon to welcome Onesimus as he would welcome Paul, namely as a Christian brother. He offers to pay for any debt created by Onesimus' departure and expresses his desire that Philemon might refresh his heart in Christ.\nConclusion and greetings (21\u201325).\nIn the final section of the letter, Paul describes his confidence that Philemon would do even more than he had requested, perhaps indicating his desire for Onesimus to return to work alongside him. He also mentions his wish to visit and asks Philemon to prepare a guest room. Paul sends greetings from five of his co-workers and concludes the letter with a benediction.\nThemes.\nPaul uses slavery vs. freedom language more often in his writings as a metaphor. At this time slavery was common, and can be seen as a theme in the book of Philemon. Slavery was most commonly found in households. This letter, seemingly, provided alleviation of suffering of some slaves due to the fact that Paul placed pastoral focus on the issue.\nAlthough it is a main theme, Paul does not label slavery as negative or positive. Rather than deal with the morality of slavery directly, he undermines the foundation of slavery which is dehumanization of other human beings. Some scholars, but not Paul, see it as unthinkable in the times to even question ending slavery. Because slavery was so ingrained into society that the \u201cabolitionist would have been at the same time an insurrectionist, and the political effects of such a movement would have been unthinkable. \" Paul viewed slavery as an example of a human institution of dehumanization, and believed that all human institutions were about to fade away. This may be because Paul had the perspective that Jesus would return soon. Paul viewed his present world as something that was swiftly passing away. This is a part of Pauline Christianity and theology.\nWhen it comes to Onesimus and his circumstance as a slave, Paul felt that Onesimus should return to Philemon but not as a slave; rather, under a bond of familial love. Paul also was not suggesting that Onesimus be punished, in spite of the fact that Roman law allowed the owner of a runaway slave nearly unlimited privileges of punishment, even execution. This is a concern of Paul and a reason he is writing to Philemon, asking that Philemon accept Onesimus back in a bond of friendship, forgiveness, and reconciliation. Paul is undermining this example of a human institution which dehumanizes people. We see this in many of Paul's other epistles, including his letters to the Corinthians, delivering the message of unity with others and unity with Christ \u2013 a change of identity. As written in Sacra Pagina Philippians and Philemon, the move from slave to freedman has to do with a shift in \u201cstanding under the lordship of Jesus Christ\u201d. So in short, Onesimus\u2019 honor and obedience is not claimed by Philemon, but by Christ.\nVerses 13\u201314 suggest that Paul wants Philemon to send Onesimus back to Paul (possibly freeing him for the purpose). Marshall, Travis and Paul write, \"Paul hoped that it might be possible for [Onesimus] to spend some time with him as a missionary colleague... If that is not a request for Onesimus to join Paul\u2019s circle, I do not know what more would need to be said\".\nSignificance.\nSarah Ruden, in her \"Paul Among the People\" (2010), argues that in the letter to Philemon, Paul created the Western conception of the individual human being, \"unconditionally precious to God and therefore entitled to the consideration of other human beings.\" Before Paul, Ruden argues, a slave was considered subhuman, and entitled to no more consideration than an animal.\nDiarmaid MacCulloch, in his \"A History of Christianity\", described the epistle as \"a Christian foundation document in the justification of slavery\".\nIn order to better appreciate the Book of Philemon, it is necessary to be aware of the situation of the early Christian community in the Roman Empire; and the economic system of Classical Antiquity based on slavery. According to the Epistle to Diognetus: \"For the Christians are distinguished from other men neither by country, nor language, nor the customs which they observe... They are in the flesh, but they do not live after the flesh. They pass their days on earth, but they are citizens of heaven. They obey the prescribed laws, and at the same time surpass the laws by their lives\".\nPope Benedict XVI refers to this letter in the Encyclic, \"Spe salvi\", highlighting the power of Christianity as power of the transformation of society. In fact Christianity was decisive to the virtual disappearance of slavery during the Middle Ages:"}
{"id": "9966", "revid": "41753249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9966", "title": "Elliptic-curve cryptography", "text": "Elliptic-curve cryptography (ECC) is an approach to public-key cryptography based on the algebraic structure of elliptic curves over finite fields. ECC allows smaller keys compared to non-EC cryptography (based on plain Galois fields) to provide equivalent security.\nElliptic curves are applicable for key agreement, digital signatures, pseudo-random generators and other tasks. Indirectly, they can be used for encryption by combining the key agreement with a symmetric encryption scheme. They are also used in several integer factorization algorithms based on elliptic curves that have applications in cryptography, such as Lenstra elliptic-curve factorization.\nRationale.\nPublic-key cryptography is based on the intractability of certain mathematical problems. Early public-key systems based their security on the assumption that it is difficult to factor a large integer composed of two or more large prime factors. For later elliptic-curve-based protocols, the base assumption is that finding the discrete logarithm of a random elliptic curve element with respect to a publicly known base point is infeasible: this is the \"elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem\" (ECDLP). The security of elliptic curve cryptography depends on the ability to compute a point multiplication and the inability to compute the multiplicand given the original and product points. The size of the elliptic curve, measured by the total number of discrete integer pairs satisfying the curve equation, determines the difficulty of the problem.\nThe U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has endorsed elliptic curve cryptography in its Suite B set of recommended algorithms, specifically elliptic-curve Diffie\u2013Hellman (ECDH) for key exchange and Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) for digital signature. The U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) allows their use for protecting information classified up to top secret with 384-bit keys. However, in August 2015, the NSA announced that it plans to replace Suite B with a new cipher suite due to concerns about quantum computing attacks on ECC.\nWhile the RSA patent expired in 2000, there may be patents in force covering certain aspects of ECC technology. However some argue that the US government elliptic curve digital signature standard (ECDSA; NIST FIPS 186-3) and certain practical ECC-based key exchange schemes (including ECDH) can be implemented without infringing them, including RSA Laboratories and Daniel J. Bernstein.\nThe primary benefit promised by elliptic curve cryptography is a smaller key size, reducing storage and transmission requirements, i.e. that an elliptic curve group could provide the same level of security afforded by an RSA-based system with a large modulus and correspondingly larger key: for example, a 256-bit elliptic curve public key should provide comparable security to a 3072-bit RSA public key.\nHistory.\nThe use of elliptic curves in cryptography was suggested independently by Neal Koblitz and Victor S. Miller in 1985. Elliptic curve cryptography algorithms entered wide use in 2004 to 2005.\nTheory.\nFor current cryptographic purposes, an \"elliptic curve\" is a plane curve over a finite field (rather than the real numbers) which consists of the points satisfying the equation:\nalong with a distinguished point at infinity, denoted \u221e. The coordinates here are to be chosen from a fixed finite field of characteristic not equal to 2 or 3, or the curve equation will be somewhat more complicated.\nThis set together with the group operation of elliptic curves is an abelian group, with the point at infinity as an identity element. The structure of the group is inherited from the divisor group of the underlying algebraic variety:\nCryptographic schemes.\nSeveral discrete logarithm-based protocols have been adapted to elliptic curves, replacing the group formula_3 with an elliptic curve:\nAt the RSA Conference 2005, the National Security Agency (NSA) announced Suite B which exclusively uses ECC for digital signature generation and key exchange. The suite is intended to protect both classified and unclassified national security systems and information.\nRecently, a large number of cryptographic primitives based on bilinear mappings on various elliptic curve groups, such as the Weil and Tate pairings, have been introduced. Schemes based on these primitives provide efficient identity-based encryption as well as pairing-based signatures, signcryption, key agreement, and proxy re-encryption.\nImplementation.\nSome common implementation considerations include:\nDomain parameters.\nTo use ECC, all parties must agree on all the elements defining the elliptic curve, that is, the \"domain parameters\" of the scheme. The field is defined by \"p\" in the prime case and the pair of \"m\" and \"f\" in the binary case. The elliptic curve is defined by the constants \"a\" and \"b\" used in its defining equation. Finally, the cyclic subgroup is defined by its \"generator\" (a.k.a. \"base point\") \"G\". For cryptographic application the order of \"G\", that is the smallest positive number \"n\" such that formula_4 (the point at infinity of the curve, and the identity element), is normally prime. Since \"n\" is the size of a subgroup of formula_5 it follows from Lagrange's theorem that the number formula_6 is an integer. In cryptographic applications this number \"h\", called the \"cofactor\", must be small (formula_7) and, preferably, formula_8. To summarize: in the prime case, the domain parameters are formula_9; in the binary case, they are formula_10.\nUnless there is an assurance that domain parameters were generated by a party trusted with respect to their use, the domain parameters \"must\" be validated before use.\nThe generation of domain parameters is not usually done by each participant because this involves computing the number of points on a curve which is time-consuming and troublesome to implement. As a result, several standard bodies published domain parameters of elliptic curves for several common field sizes. Such domain parameters are commonly known as \"standard curves\" or \"named curves\"; a named curve can be referenced either by name or by the unique object identifier defined in the standard documents:\nSECG test vectors are also available. NIST has approved many SECG curves, so there is a significant overlap between the specifications published by NIST and SECG. EC domain parameters may be either specified by value or by name.\nIf one (despite the above) wants to construct one's own domain parameters, one should select the underlying field and then use one of the following strategies to find a curve with appropriate (i.e., near prime) number of points using one of the following methods:\nSeveral classes of curves are weak and should be avoided:\nKey sizes.\nBecause all the fastest known algorithms that allow one to solve the ECDLP (baby-step giant-step, Pollard's rho, etc.), need formula_19 steps, it follows that the size of the underlying field should be roughly twice the security parameter. For example, for 128-bit security one needs a curve over formula_18, where formula_21. This can be contrasted with finite-field cryptography (e.g., DSA) which requires 3072-bit public keys and 256-bit private keys, and integer factorization cryptography (e.g., RSA) which requires a 3072-bit value of \"n\", where the private key should be just as large. However, the public key may be smaller to accommodate efficient encryption, especially when processing power is limited.\nThe hardest ECC scheme (publicly) broken to date had a 112-bit key for the prime field case and a 109-bit key for the binary field case. For the prime field case, this was broken in July 2009 using a cluster of over 200 PlayStation 3 game consoles and could have been finished in 3.5 months using this cluster when running continuously. The binary field case was broken in April 2004 using 2600 computers over 17 months.\nA current project is aiming at breaking the ECC2K-130 challenge by Certicom, by using a wide range of different hardware: CPUs, GPUs, FPGA.\nProjective coordinates.\nA close examination of the addition rules shows that in order to add two points, one needs not only several additions and multiplications in formula_18 but also an inversion operation. The inversion (for given formula_23 find formula_24 such that formula_25) is one to two orders of magnitude slower than multiplication. However, points on a curve can be represented in different coordinate systems which do not require an inversion operation to add two points. Several such systems were proposed: in the \"projective\" system each point is represented by three coordinates formula_26 using the following relation: formula_27, formula_28; in the \"Jacobian system\" a point is also represented with three coordinates formula_26, but a different relation is used: formula_30, formula_31; in the \"L\u00f3pez\u2013Dahab system\" the relation is formula_27, formula_33; in the \"modified Jacobian\" system the same relations are used but four coordinates are stored and used for calculations formula_34; and in the \"Chudnovsky Jacobian\" system five coordinates are used formula_35. Note that there may be different naming conventions, for example, IEEE P1363-2000 standard uses \"projective coordinates\" to refer to what is commonly called Jacobian coordinates. An additional speed-up is possible if mixed coordinates are used.\nFast reduction (NIST curves).\nReduction modulo \"p\" (which is needed for addition and multiplication) can be executed much faster if the prime \"p\" is a pseudo-Mersenne prime, that is formula_36; for example, formula_37 or formula_38 Compared to Barrett reduction, there can be an order of magnitude speed-up. The speed-up here is a practical rather than theoretical one, and derives from the fact that the moduli of numbers against numbers near powers of two can be performed efficiently by computers operating on binary numbers with bitwise operations.\nThe curves over formula_14 with pseudo-Mersenne \"p\" are recommended by NIST. Yet another advantage of the NIST curves is that they use \"a\"\u00a0=\u00a0\u22123, which improves addition in Jacobian coordinates.\nAccording to Bernstein and Lange, many of the efficiency-related decisions in NIST FIPS 186-2 are sub-optimal. Other curves are more secure and run just as fast.\nApplications.\nElliptic curves are applicable for encryption, digital signatures, pseudo-random generators and other tasks. They are also used in several integer factorization algorithms that have applications in cryptography, such as Lenstra elliptic-curve factorization.\nIn 1999, NIST recommended fifteen elliptic curves. Specifically, FIPS 186-4 has ten recommended finite fields:\nThe NIST recommendation thus contains a total of five prime curves and ten binary curves. The curves were ostensibly chosen for optimal security and implementation efficiency.\nIn 2013, \"The New York Times\" stated that Dual Elliptic Curve Deterministic Random Bit Generation (or Dual_EC_DRBG) had been included as a NIST national standard due to the influence of NSA, which had included a deliberate weakness in the algorithm and the recommended elliptic curve. RSA Security in September 2013 issued an advisory recommending that its customers discontinue using any software based on Dual_EC_DRBG. In the wake of the exposure of Dual_EC_DRBG as \"an NSA undercover operation\", cryptography experts have also expressed concern over the security of the NIST recommended elliptic curves, suggesting a return to encryption based on non-elliptic-curve groups.\nElliptic curve cryptography is used by the cryptocurrency Bitcoin.\nEthereum version 2.0 makes extensive use of elliptic curve pairs using BLS signatures\u2014as specified in the IETF draft BLS specification\u2014for cryptographically assuring that a specific Eth2 validator has actually verified a particular transaction.\nSecurity.\nSide-channel attacks.\nUnlike most other DLP systems (where it is possible to use the same procedure for squaring and multiplication), the EC addition is significantly different for doubling (\"P\" = \"Q\") and general addition (\"P\" \u2260 \"Q\") depending on the coordinate system used. Consequently, it is important to counteract side-channel attacks (e.g., timing or simple/differential power analysis attacks) using, for example, fixed pattern window (a.k.a. comb) methods (note that this does not increase computation time). Alternatively one can use an Edwards curve; this is a special family of elliptic curves for which doubling and addition can be done with the same operation. Another concern for ECC-systems is the danger of fault attacks, especially when running on smart cards.\nBackdoors.\nCryptographic experts have expressed concerns that the National Security Agency has inserted a kleptographic backdoor into at least one elliptic curve-based pseudo random generator. Internal memos leaked by former NSA contractor, Edward Snowden, suggest that the NSA put a backdoor in the Dual EC DRBG standard. One analysis of the possible backdoor concluded that an adversary in possession of the algorithm's secret key could obtain encryption keys given only 32 bytes of PRNG output.\nThe SafeCurves project has been launched in order to catalog curves that are easy to securely implement and are designed in a fully publicly verifiable way to minimize the chance of a backdoor.\nQuantum computing attacks.\nShor's algorithm can be used to break elliptic curve cryptography by computing discrete logarithms on a hypothetical quantum computer. The latest quantum resource estimates for breaking a curve with a 256-bit modulus (128-bit security level) are 2330 qubits and 126 billion Toffoli gates. In comparison, using Shor's algorithm to break the RSA algorithm requires 4098 qubits and 5.2 trillion Toffoli gates for a 2048-bit RSA key, suggesting that ECC is an easier target for quantum computers than RSA. All of these figures vastly exceed any quantum computer that has ever been built, and estimates place the creation of such computers as a decade or more away.\nSupersingular Isogeny Diffie\u2013Hellman Key Exchange provides a post-quantum secure form of elliptic curve cryptography by using isogenies to implement Diffie\u2013Hellman key exchanges. This key exchange uses much of the same field arithmetic as existing elliptic curve cryptography and requires computational and transmission overhead similar to many currently used public key systems.\nIn August 2015, the NSA announced that it planned to transition \"in the not distant future\" to a new cipher suite that is resistant to quantum attacks. \"Unfortunately, the growth of elliptic curve use has bumped up against the fact of continued progress in the research on quantum computing, necessitating a re-evaluation of our cryptographic strategy.\"\nInvalid curve attack.\nWhen ECC is used in virtual machines, an attacker may use an invalid curve to get a complete PDH private key.\nPatents.\nAt least one ECC scheme (ECMQV) and some implementation techniques are covered by patents.\nAlternative representations.\nAlternative representations of elliptic curves include:"}
{"id": "9967", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9967", "title": "EDM", "text": "EDM or E-DM may refer to:"}
{"id": "9970", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9970", "title": "Eightfold path (policy analysis)", "text": "The eightfold path is a method of policy analysis assembled by Eugene Bardach, a professor at the Goldman School of Public Policy at the University of California, Berkeley. It is outlined in his book \"A Practical Guide for Policy Analysis: The Eightfold Path to More Effective Problem Solving\", which is now in its fourth edition. The book is commonly referenced in public policy and public administration scholarship.\nBardach's procedure is as follows:\nA possible ninth step, based on Bardach's own writing, might be \"repeat steps 1 - 8 as necessary.\"\nThe New York taxi driver test.\nThe New York taxi driver test is a technique for evaluating the effectiveness of communication between policy makers and analysts. Bardach contends that policy explanations must be clear and down-to-earth enough for a taxi driver to be able to understand the premise during a trip through city streets. The New York taxi driver is presumed to be both a non-specialist and a tough customer."}
{"id": "9971", "revid": "1022133207", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9971", "title": "Eden Project", "text": "The Eden Project () is a visitor attraction in Cornwall, England, UK. The project is located in a reclaimed china clay pit, located from the town of St Blazey and from the larger town of St Austell.\nThe complex is dominated by two huge enclosures consisting of adjoining domes that house thousands of plant species, and each enclosure emulates a natural biome. The biomes consist of hundreds of hexagonal and pentagonal ethylene tetrafluoroethylene (ETFE) inflated cells supported by Geodesic tubular steel domes. The largest of the two biomes simulates a rainforest environment (and is the largest indoor rainforest in the world) and the second, a Mediterranean environment. The attraction also has an outside botanical garden which is home to many plants and wildlife native to Cornwall and the UK in general; it also has many plants that provide an important and interesting backstory, for example, those with a prehistoric heritage.\nThere are plans to build an Eden Project North in the seaside town of Morecambe, Lancashire, with a focus on the marine environment.\nHistory.\nThe clay pit in which the project is sited was in use for over 160 years. In 1981, the pit was used by the BBC as the planet surface of Magrathea in the TV series \"the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\". By the mid-1990s the pit was all but exhausted.\nThe initial idea for the project dates back to 1996, with construction beginning in 1998. The work was hampered by torrential rain in the first few months of the project, and parts of the pit flooded as it sits below the water table.\nThe first part of the Eden Project, the visitor centre, opened to the public in May 2000. The first plants began arriving in September of that year, and the full site opened on 17 March 2001.\nTo counter criticism from environmental groups, the Eden Project committed to investigate a rail link to the site. The rail link was never built, and car parking on the site is still funded from revenue generated from general admission ticket sales, meaning that those who do not drive to the site also pay for the car park.\nThe Eden Project was used as a filming location for the 2002 James Bond film, \"Die Another Day\". On 2 July 2005 The Eden Project hosted the \"Africa Calling\" concert of the Live 8 concert series. It has also provided some plants for the British Museum's Africa garden.\nIn 2005, the Project launched \"A Time of Gifts\" for the winter months, November to February. This features an ice rink covering the lake, with a small caf\u00e9/bar attached, as well as a Christmas market. Cornish choirs regularly perform in the biomes.\nIn 2007, the Eden Project campaigned unsuccessfully for \u00a350\u00a0million in Big Lottery Fund money for a proposed desert biome. It received just 12.07% of the votes, the lowest for the four projects being considered. As part of the campaign, the Eden Project invited people all over Cornwall to try to break the world record for the biggest ever pub quiz as part of its campaign to bring \u00a350\u00a0million of lottery funds to Cornwall.\nIn December 2009, much of the project, including both greenhouses, became available to navigate through Google Street View.\nThe Eden Trust revealed a trading loss of \u00a31.3\u00a0million for 2012\u201313, on a turnover of \u00a325.4\u00a0million. The Eden Project had posted a surplus of \u00a3136,000 for the previous year. In 2014 Eden accounts showed a surplus of \u00a32\u00a0million.\nThe World Pasty Championships have been held at the Eden Project since 2012, an international competition to find the best Cornish pasties and other pasty-type savoury snacks.\nThe Eden Project is said to have contributed over \u00a31\u00a0billion to the Cornish economy. In 2016, Eden became home to Europe's second largest Redwood forest (after the Giants Grove at Birr Castle, Birr Castle Ireland) when forty saplings of coast redwoods, Sequoia sempervirens, which could live for 4,000 years and reach 115 metres in height, were planted there.\nThe Eden Project received 1,010,095 visitors in 2019.\nIn December 2020 the project was closed after heavy rain caused several landslips at the site. Managers at the site are assessing the damage and will announce when the project will reopen on the company's website. Reopening became irrelevant as Covid lockdown measures in the UK indefinitely closed the venue from early 2021.\nDesign and construction.\nThe project was conceived by Tim Smit and designed by Grimshaw Architects and engineering firm Anthony Hunt and Associates (now part of Sinclair Knight Merz). Davis Langdon carried out the project management, Sir Robert McAlpine and Alfred McAlpine did the construction, MERO designed and built the biomes, and Arup was the services engineer, economic consultant, environmental engineer and transportation engineer. Land Use Consultants led the masterplan and landscape design. The project took 2\u00bd years to construct and opened to the public on 17 March 2001.\nSite.\nLayout.\nOnce into the attraction, there is a meandering path with views of the two biomes, planted landscapes, including vegetable gardens, and sculptures that include a giant bee and previously The WEEE Man (removed in 2016), a towering figure made from old electrical appliances and was meant to represent the average electrical waste used by one person in a lifetime.\nBiomes.\nAt the bottom of the pit are two covered biomes:\nThe Tropical Biome, covers and measures high, wide, and long. It is used for tropical plants, such as fruiting banana plants, coffee, rubber and giant bamboo, and is kept at a tropical temperature and moisture level.\nThe Mediterranean Biome covers and measures high, wide, and long. It houses familiar warm temperate and arid plants such as olives and grape vines and various sculptures.\nThe Outdoor Gardens represent the temperate regions of the world with plants such as tea, lavender, hops, hemp, and sunflowers, as well as local plant species.\nThe covered biomes are constructed from a tubular steel (hex-tri-hex) with mostly hexagonal external cladding panels made from the thermoplastic ETFE. Glass was avoided due to its weight and potential dangers. The cladding panels themselves are created from several layers of thin UV-transparent ETFE film, which are sealed around their perimeter and inflated to create a large cushion. The resulting cushion acts as a thermal blanket to the structure. The ETFE material is resistant to most stains, which simply wash off in the rain. If required, cleaning can be performed by abseilers. Although the ETFE is susceptible to punctures, these can be easily fixed with ETFE tape. The structure is completely self-supporting, with no internal supports, and takes the form of a geodesic structure. The panels vary in size up to across, with the largest at the top of the structure.\nThe ETFE technology was supplied and installed by the firm Vector Foiltec, which is also responsible for ongoing maintenance of the cladding. The steel spaceframe and cladding package (with Vector Foiltec as ETFE subcontractor) was designed, supplied and installed by MERO (UK) PLC, who also jointly developed the overall scheme geometry with the architect, Nicholas Grimshaw &amp; Partners.\nThe entire build project was managed by McAlpine Joint Venture.\nThe Core.\nThe Core is the latest addition to the site and opened in September 2005. It provides the Eden Project with an education facility, incorporating classrooms and exhibition spaces designed to help communicate Eden's central message about the relationship between people and plants. Accordingly, the building has taken its inspiration from plants, most noticeable in the form of the soaring timber roof, which gives the building its distinctive shape.\nGrimshaw developed the geometry of the copper-clad roof in collaboration with a sculptor, Peter Randall-Page, and Mike Purvis of structural engineers SKM Anthony Hunts. It is derived from phyllotaxis, which is the mathematical basis for nearly all plant growth; the \"opposing spirals\" found in many plants such as the seeds in a sunflower's head, pine cones and pineapples. The copper was obtained from traceable sources, and the Eden Project is working with Rio Tinto Group to explore the possibility of encouraging further traceable supply routes for metals, which would enable users to avoid metals mined unethically. The services and acoustic, mechanical, and electrical engineering design was carried out by Buro Happold.\nArt at The Core.\nThe Core is also home to art exhibitions throughout the year. A permanent installation entitled \"Seed\", by Peter Randall-Page, occupies the anteroom. \"Seed\" is a large, 70 tonne egg-shaped stone installation standing some tall and displaying a complex pattern of protrusions that are based upon the geometric and mathematical principles that underlie plant growth.\nEnvironmental aspects.\nThe biomes provide diverse growing conditions, and many plants are on display.\nThe Eden Project includes environmental education focusing on the interdependence of plants and people; plants are labelled with their medicinal uses. The massive amounts of water required to create the humid conditions of the Tropical Biome, and to serve the toilet facilities, are all sanitised rain water that would otherwise collect at the bottom of the quarry. The only mains water used is for hand washing and for cooking. The complex also uses Green Tariff Electricity \u2013 the energy comes from one of the many wind turbines in Cornwall, which were among the first in Europe.\nIn December 2010 the Eden Project received permission to build a geothermal electricity plant which will generate approx 4MWe, enough to supply Eden and about 5000 households. The project will involve geothermal heating as well as geothermal electricity. Cornwall Council and the European Union came up with the greater part of \u00a316.8m required to start the project. First a well will be sunk nearly 3 miles (4.5\u00a0km) into the granite crust underneath Eden. Funding has been secured and drilling is set to begin in summer 2020. Eden co-founder, Sir Tim Smit said, \"Since we began, Eden has had a dream that the world should be powered by renewable energy. The sun can provide massive solar power and the wind has been harnessed by humankind for thousands of years, but because both are intermittent and battery technology cannot yet store all we need there is a gap. We believe the answer lies beneath our feet in the heat underground that can be accessed by drilling technology that pumps water towards the centre of the Earth and brings it back up superheated to provide us with heat and electricity\".\nOther projects.\nEden Project North.\nIn 2018, the Eden Project revealed its design for a new version of the project, located on the seafront in Morecambe, Lancashire. There will be biomes shaped like mussels and a focus on the marine environment. There will also be reimagined lidos, gardens, performance spaces, immersive experiences and observatories.\nGrimshaw are the architects for the project, which is expected to cost \u00a380 million. The project is a partnership with the Lancashire Enterprise Partnership, Lancaster University, Lancashire County Council and Lancaster City Council. In December 2018, the four local partners agreed to provide \u00a31 million to develop the idea, which will allow the development of an outline planning application for the project. It is expected that there will be 500 jobs created and 8,000 visitors a day to the site.\nSouth Downs.\nIn 2020 Eastbourne Borough Council and the Eden Project announced a joint project to explore the viability of a new Eden site in the South Downs National Park.\nEden Sessions.\nSince 2002, the Project has hosted a series of musical performances, called the Eden Sessions. Artists have included Amy Winehouse, James Morrison, Muse, Lily Allen, Snow Patrol, Pulp, Brian Wilson, and The Magic Numbers. Oasis were also set to play in the summer of 2008, but the concert was postponed because Noel Gallagher was unable to perform after breaking three ribs in a stage invasion incident several weeks before. The concert was instead played in the summer of 2009.\nPerformance headliners.\nMy Chemical Romance were to play the 2020 Eden Sessions in their first UK shows after a six-year hiatus, as part of their reunion tour. The 2020 Sessions were postponed until 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the closing of the Eden Project.\nThe 2021 sessions will be headlined by Diana Ross, Lionel Richie, The Script and My Chemical Romance."}
{"id": "9974", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9974", "title": "European Commission", "text": "The European Commission (EC) is the executive branch of the European Union, responsible for proposing legislation, implementing decisions, upholding the EU treaties and managing the day-to-day business of the EU. Commissioners swear an oath at the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg City, pledging to respect the treaties and to be completely independent in carrying out their duties during their mandate. The Commissioners are proposed by the Council of the European Union, on the basis of suggestions made by the national governments, and then appointed by the European Council after the approval of the European Parliament. It is common, although not a formal requirement, that the commissioners have previously held senior political positions, such as being a member of the European Parliament or a government minister.\nThis EU institution operates as a cabinet government, with 27 members of the Commission (informally known as \"commissioners\"). There is one member per member state, but members are bound by their oath of office to represent the general interest of the EU as a whole rather than their home state. One of the 27 is the Commission President (currently Ursula von der Leyen) proposed by the European Council and elected by the European Parliament. The Council of the European Union then nominates the other members of the Commission in agreement with the nominated President, and the 27 members as a single body are then subject to a vote of approval by the European Parliament. The current Commission is the Von der Leyen Commission, which took office in December 2019, following the European Parliament elections in May of the same year.\nThe term \"Commission\" is variously used, either in the narrow sense of the 27-member College of Commissioners (or College) or to also include the administrative body of about 32,000 European civil servants who are split into departments called directorates-general and services. The procedural languages of the commission are English, French and German.\nThe Members of the Commission and their \"cabinets\" (immediate teams) are based in the Berlaymont building in Brussels.\nHistory.\nThe European Commission derives from one of the five key institutions created in the supranational European Community system, following the proposal of Robert Schuman, French Foreign Minister, on 9 May 1950. Originating in 1951 as the High Authority in the European Coal and Steel Community, the commission has undergone numerous changes in power and composition under various presidents, involving three Communities.\nEstablishment.\nThe first Commission originated in 1951 as the nine-member \"High Authority\" under President Jean Monnet (see Monnet Authority). The High Authority was the supranational administrative executive of the new European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC). It took office first on 10 August 1952 in Luxembourg City. In 1958, the Treaties of Rome had established two new communities alongside the ECSC: the European Economic Community (EEC) and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom). However their executives were called \"Commissions\" rather than \"High Authorities\". The reason for the change in name was the new relationship between the executives and the Council. Some states, such as France, expressed reservations over the power of the High Authority, and wished to limit it by giving more power to the Council rather than the new executives.\nLouis Armand led the first Commission of Euratom. Walter Hallstein led the first Commission of the EEC, holding the first formal meeting on 16 January 1958 at the Ch\u00e2teau of Val-Duchesse. It achieved agreement on a contentious cereal price accord, as well as making a positive impression upon third countries when it made its international debut at the Kennedy Round of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations. Hallstein notably began the consolidation of European law and started to have a notable impact on national legislation. Little heed was taken of his administration at first but, with help from the European Court of Justice, his Commission stamped its authority solidly enough to allow future Commissions to be taken more seriously. In 1965, however, accumulating differences between the French government of Charles de Gaulle and the other member states on various subjects (British entry, direct elections to Parliament, the Fouchet Plan and the budget) triggered the \"empty chair\" crisis, ostensibly over proposals for the Common Agricultural Policy. Although the institutional crisis was solved the following year, it cost \u00c9tienne Hirsch his presidency of Euratom and later Walter Hallstein the EEC presidency, despite his otherwise being viewed as the most 'dynamic' leader until Jacques Delors.\nEarly development.\nThe three bodies, collectively named the European Executives, co-existed until 1 July 1967 when, under the Merger Treaty, they were combined into a single administration under President Jean Rey. Owing to the merger, the Rey Commission saw a temporary increase to 14 members\u2014although subsequent Commissions were reduced back to nine, following the formula of one member for small states and two for larger states. The Rey Commission completed the Community's customs union in 1968, and campaigned for a more powerful, elected, European Parliament. Despite Rey being the first President of the combined communities, Hallstein is seen as the first President of the modern Commission.\nThe Malfatti and Mansholt Commissions followed with work on monetary co-operation and the first enlargement to the north in 1973. With that enlargement, the College of Commissioners membership increased to thirteen under the Ortoli Commission (the United Kingdom as a large member was granted two Commissioners), which dealt with the enlarged community during economic and international instability at that time. The external representation of the Community took a step forward when President Roy Jenkins, recruited to the presidency in January 1977 from his role as Home Secretary of the United Kingdom's Labour government, became the first President to attend a G8 summit on behalf of the Community. Following the Jenkins Commission, Gaston Thorn's Commission oversaw the Community's enlargement to the south, in addition to beginning work on the Single European Act.\nJacques Delors.\nThe Commission headed by Jacques Delors was seen as giving the Community a sense of direction and dynamism. Delors and his College are also considered as the \"founding fathers of the euro\". The \"International Herald Tribune\" noted the work of Delors at the end of his second term in 1992: \"Mr. Delors rescued the European Community from the doldrums. He arrived when Europessimism was at its worst. Although he was a little-known former French finance minister, he breathed life and hope into the EC and into the dispirited Brussels Commission. In his first term, from 1985 to 1988, he rallied Europe to the call of the single market, and when appointed to a second term he began urging Europeans toward the far more ambitious goals of economic, monetary and political union\".\nJacques Santer.\nThe successor to Delors was Jacques Santer. As a result of a fraud and corruption scandal, the entire Santer Commission was forced by the Parliament to resign in 1999; a central role was played by \u00c9dith Cresson. These frauds were revealed by an internal auditor, Paul van Buitenen.\nThat was the first time a College of Commissioners had been forced to resign \"en masse\", and represented a shift of power towards the Parliament. However, the Santer Commission did carry out work on the Treaty of Amsterdam and the euro. In response to the scandal, the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) was created.\nRomano Prodi.\nFollowing Santer, Romano Prodi took office. The Amsterdam Treaty had increased the commission's powers and Prodi was dubbed by the press as something akin to a Prime Minister. Powers were strengthened again; the Treaty of Nice, signed in 2001, gave the Presidents more power over the composition of the College of Commissioners.\nJos\u00e9 Manuel Barroso.\nJos\u00e9 Manuel Barroso became president in 2004: the Parliament once again asserted itself in objecting to the proposed membership of the Barroso Commission. Owing to this opposition, Barroso was forced to reshuffle his College before taking office. The Barroso Commission was also the first full Commission since the enlargement in 2004 to 25 members; hence, the number of Commissioners at the end of the Prodi Commission had reached 30. As a result of the increase in the number of states, the Amsterdam Treaty triggered a reduction in the number of Commissioners to one per state, rather than two for the larger states.\nAllegations of fraud and corruption were again raised in 2004 by former chief auditor Jules Muis. A Commission officer, Guido Strack, reported alleged fraud and abuses in his department in the years 2002\u20132004 to OLAF, and was fired as a result. In 2008, Paul van Buitenen (the former auditor known from the Santer Commission scandal) accused the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) of a lack of independence and effectiveness.\nBarroso's first Commission term expired on 31 October 2009. Under the Treaty of Nice, the first Commission to be appointed after the number of member states reached 27 would have to be reduced to \"less than the number of Member States\". The exact number of Commissioners was to be decided by a unanimous vote of the European Council, and membership would rotate equally between member states. Following the accession of Romania and Bulgaria in January 2007, this clause took effect for the next Commission. The Treaty of Lisbon, which came into force on 1 December 2009, mandated a reduction of the number of commissioners to two-thirds of member-states from 2014 unless the Council decided otherwise. Membership would rotate equally and no member state would have more than one Commissioner. However, the treaty was rejected by voters in Ireland in 2008 with one main concern being the loss of their Commissioner. Hence a guarantee given for a rerun of the vote was that the council would use its power to amend the number of Commissioners upwards. However, according to the treaties it still has to be fewer than the total number of members, thus it was proposed that the member state that does not get a Commissioner would get the post of High Representative\u00a0\u2013 the so-called 26+1 formula. This guarantee (which may find its way into the next treaty amendment, probably in an accession treaty) contributed to the Irish approving the treaty in a second referendum in 2009.\nLisbon also combined the posts of European Commissioner for External Relations with the council's High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy. This post, also a Vice-President of the Commission, would chair the Council of the European Union's foreign affairs meetings as well as the commission's external relations duties. The treaty further provides that the most recent European elections should be \"\"taken into account\" when appointing the President of the European Commission, and although they are still proposed by the European Council; the European Parliament \"elects\" candidates to the office, rather than \"approves\"\" them as under the Treaty of Nice.\nJean-Claude Juncker.\nIn 2014, Jean-Claude Juncker became President of the European Commission.\nJuncker appointed his previous campaign director and head of the transition team, Martin Selmayr, as his chief of cabinet. During the Juncker presidency Selmayr has been described as \"the most powerful EU chief of staff ever.\"\nUrsula von der Leyen.\nIn 2019, Ursula von der Leyen was appointed as the next President of the European Commission. She submitted the guidelines of her policy for 2019\u20132024 to the European Parliament on 16 July 2019, following her confirmation. She had not been considered a likely candidate (in general, the elected candidate is determined, according to the results of the European election, as winner of internal election into the dominant European party known as \"spitzenkandidat\"). Her appointment was consensual between European Council Members (Manfred Weber was not considered the most suitable candidate). On 9 September, the European Council declared a list of candidate-commissioners which has to be officially approved by the parliament.\nPowers and functions.\nThe commission was set up from the start to act as an independent supranational authority separate from governments; it has been described as \"the only body paid to think European\". The members are proposed by their member state governments, one from each. However, they are bound to act independently\u00a0\u2013 free from other influences such as those governments which appointed them. This is in contrast to the Council of the European Union, which represents governments, the European Parliament, which represents citizens, the Economic and Social Committee, which represents organised civil society, and the Committee of the Regions, which represents local and regional authorities.\nThrough the commission has several responsibilities: to develop medium-term strategies; to draft legislation and arbitrate in the legislative process; to represent the EU in trade negotiations; to make rules and regulations, for example in competition policy; to draw up the budget of the European Union; and to scrutinise the implementation of the treaties and legislation. The rules of procedure of the European Commission set out the commission's operation and organisation.\nExecutive power.\nBefore the Treaty of Lisbon came into force, the executive power of the EU was held by the council: it conferred on the Commission such powers for it to exercise. However, the council was allowed to withdraw these powers, exercise them directly, or impose conditions on their use. This aspect has been changed by the Treaty of Lisbon, after which the Commission exercises its powers just by virtue of the treaties. Powers are more restricted than most national executives, in part due to the commission's lack of power over areas like foreign policy\u00a0\u2013 that power is held by the European Council, which some analysts have described as another executive.\nConsidering that under the Treaty of Lisbon, the European Council has become a formal institution with the power of appointing the commission, it could be said that the two bodies hold the executive power of the EU (the European Council also holds individual national executive powers). However, it is the Commission that currently holds executive powers over the European Union. The governmental powers of the Commission have been such that some, including former Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt, have suggested changing its name to the \"European Government\", calling the present name of the Commission \"ridiculous\".\nLegislative initiative.\nThe Commission differs from the other institutions in that it alone has legislative initiative in the EU. Only the commission can make formal proposals for legislation: they cannot originate in the legislative branches. Under the Treaty of Lisbon, no legislative act is allowed in the field of the Common Foreign and Security Policy. In the other fields, the Council and Parliament are able to request legislation; in most cases the Commission initiates on the basis of these proposals. This monopoly is designed to ensure coordinated and coherent drafting of EU law. This monopoly has been challenged by some who claim the Parliament should also have the right, with most national parliaments holding the right in some respects. However, the Council and Parliament may request the commission to draft legislation, though the Commission does have the power to refuse to do so as it did in 2008 over transnational collective conventions. Under the Lisbon Treaty, EU citizens are also able to request the commission to legislate in an area via a petition carrying one million signatures, but this is not binding.\nThe commission's powers in proposing law have usually centred on economic regulation. It has put forward a large number of regulations based on a \"precautionary principle\". This means that pre-emptive regulation takes place if there is a credible hazard to the environment or human health: for example on tackling climate change and restricting genetically modified organisms. The European Commission has committed EU member states to carbon neutrality by 2050. This is opposed to weighting regulations for their effect on the economy. Thus, the Commission often proposes stricter legislation than other countries. Owing to the size of the European market, this has made EU legislation an important influence in the global market.\nRecently the commission has moved into creating European criminal law. In 2006, a toxic waste spill off the coast of C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, from a European ship, prompted the commission to look into legislation against toxic waste. Some EU states at that time did not even have a crime against shipping toxic waste; this led the Commissioners Franco Frattini and Stavros Dimas to put forward the idea of \"ecological crimes\". Their right to propose criminal law was challenged in the European Court of Justice but upheld. As of 2007, the only other criminal law proposals which have been brought forward are on the intellectual property rights directive, and on an amendment to the 2002 counter-terrorism framework decision, outlawing terrorism\u2011related incitement, recruitment (especially via the internet) and training.\nEnforcement.\nOnce legislation is passed by the Council and Parliament, it is the commission's responsibility to ensure it is implemented. It does this through the member states or through its agencies. In adopting the necessary technical measures, the commission is assisted by committees made up of representatives of member states and of the public and private lobbies (a process known in jargon as \"comitology\"). Furthermore, the commission is responsible for the implementation of the EU budget, ensuring, along with the Court of Auditors, that EU funds are correctly spent.\nIn particular the commission has a duty to ensure the treaties and law are upheld, potentially by taking member states or other institutions to the Court of Justice in a dispute. In this role it is known informally as the \"guardian of the treaties\". Finally, the Commission provides some external representation for the Union, alongside the member states and the Common Foreign and Security Policy, representing the Union in bodies such as the World Trade Organization. It is also usual for the President to attend meetings of the G8.\nCollege.\nThe commission is composed of a College of \"Commissioners\" of members, including the President and vice-presidents. Even though each member is nominated on the basis of the suggestions made by the national governments, one per state, they do not represent their state in the commission. In practice, however, they do occasionally press for their national interest. Once proposed, the President delegates portfolios among each of the members. The power of a Commissioner largely depends upon their portfolio, and can vary over time. For example, the Education Commissioner has been growing in importance, in line with the rise in the importance of education and culture in European policy-making. Another example is the Competition Commissioner, who holds a highly visible position with global reach. Before the commission can assume office, the College as a whole must be approved by the Parliament. Commissioners are supported by their personal cabinet who give them political guidance, while the Civil Service (the DGs, see below) deal with technical preparation.\nAppointment.\nThe President of the Commission is first proposed by the European Council, following a Qualified Majority Vote (QMV), taking into account the latest Parliamentary elections; that candidate then faces a formal election in the European Parliament. If the European Parliament fails to elect the candidate, the European Council shall propose another within one month.\nFollowing the selection of the President, and the appointment of the High Representative by the European Council, each Commissioner is nominated by their member state (except for those states who provided the President and High Representative) in consultation with the Commission President, who is responsible for the allocation of portfolios. The President's proposed College of Commissioners is then subject to hearings at the European Parliament which will question them and then vote on their suitability as a whole. If the European Parliament submits a negative opinion of a candidate, the President must either reshuffle them or request a new candidate from the member state to avoid the College's outright rejection by the European Parliament. Once the College is approved by parliament, it is formally appointed following a QMV vote by the European Council.\nFollowing the College's appointment, the President appoints a number of Vice-Presidents (the High Representative is mandated to be one of them) from among the commissioners. For the most part, the position grants little extra power to Vice-Presidents, except the first Vice-President who stands in for the President when he or she is away.\nDismissal.\nThe European Parliament can dissolve the College of Commissioners as a whole following a vote of no-confidence but only the President can request the resignation of an individual Commissioner. However, individual Commissioners, by request of the council or Commission, can be compelled to retire on account of a breach of obligation(s) and if so ruled by the European Court of Justice (Art. 245 and 247, Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union).\nPolitical styles.\nThe Barroso Commission took office in late 2004 after being delayed by objections from the Parliament, which forced a reshuffle. In 2007 the Commission increased from 25 to 27 members with the accession of Romania and Bulgaria who each appointed their own Commissioners. With the increasing size of the commission, Barroso adopted a more presidential style of control over the college, which earned him some criticism.\nHowever, under Barroso, the commission began to lose ground to the larger member states as countries such as France, the UK and Germany sought to sideline its role. This has increased with the creation of the President of the European Council under the Treaty of Lisbon. There has also been a greater degree of politicisation within the Commission.\nAdministration.\nThe commission is divided into departments known as Directorates-General (DGs) that can be likened to departments or ministries. Each covers a specific policy area such as agriculture or justice and citizens' rights or internal services such as human resources and translation and is headed by a director-general who is responsible to a commissioner. A commissioner's portfolio can be supported by numerous DGs; they prepare proposals for them and if approved by a majority of commissioners proposals go forward to the Parliament and Council for consideration. The Commission's civil service is headed by a Secretary General. The position is currently held by Ilze Juhansone. The rules of procedure of the European Commission set out the commission's operation and organisation.\nThere has been criticism from a number of people that the highly fragmented DG structure wastes a considerable amount of time in turf wars as the different departments and Commissioners compete with each other. Furthermore, the DGs can exercise considerable control over a Commissioner with the Commissioner having little time to learn to assert control over their staff.\nAccording to figures published by the commission, 23,803 persons were employed by the commission as officials and temporary agents in September 2012. In addition to these, 9230 \"external staff\" (e.g. Contractual agents, detached national experts, young experts, trainees etc.) were employed. The single largest DG is the Directorate-General for Translation, with a 2309-strong staff, while the largest group by nationality is Belgian (18.7%), probably due to a majority (17,664) of staff being based in the country.\nPress.\nCommunication with the press is handled by the Directorate-General Communication. The Commission's chief spokesperson is Eric Mamer who holds the midday press briefings, commonly known as the \"Midday Presser\". It takes place every weekday in the Commission's press room at the Berlaymont where journalists may ask questions to the Commission officials on any topic and legitimately expect to get an \"on the record\" answer for live TV. Such a situation is unique in the world.\nAs an integral part of the Directorate-General for Communication, the Spokesperson's Service, in coordination with the Executive Communication Adviser in the President\u2019s Cabinet, supports the President and Commissioners so that they can communicate effectively. On political communication matters, the chief spokesperson reports directly to the President of the European Commission.\nIt has been noted by one researcher that the press releases issued by the commission are uniquely political. A release often goes through several stages of drafting which emphasises the role of the commission and is used \"for justifying the EU and the commission\" increasing their length and complexity. Where there are multiple departments involved a press release can also be a source of competition between areas of the Commission and Commissioners themselves. This also leads to an unusually high number of press releases, and is seen as a unique product of the EU's political set-up. \nThere is a larger press corps in Brussels than Washington, D.C.; in 2020, media outlets in every Union member-state had a Brussels correspondent. Although there has been a worldwide cut in journalists, the considerable press releases and operations such as Europe by Satellite and EuroparlTV leads many news organisations to believe they can cover the EU from these source and news agencies. In the face of high-level criticism, the Commission shut down Presseurop on 20 December 2013.\nLegitimacy and criticism.\nAs the commission is the executive branch, candidates are chosen individually by the national governments. Within the EU, the legitimacy of the commission is mainly drawn from the vote of approval that is required from the European Parliament, along with its power to dismiss the body. Eurosceptics have therefore raised the concern of the relatively low turnout (often less than 50%) in elections for the European Parliament since 1999. While that figure may be higher than that of some national elections, including the off-year elections of the United States Congress, the fact that there are no direct elections for the position of commission president calls the position's legitimacy into question in the eyes of some Eurosceptics. The fact that the commission can directly decide (albeit with oversight from specially formed 'comitology committees') on the shape and character of implementing legislation further raises concerns about democratic legitimacy.\nEven though democratic structures and methods are changing there is not such a mirror in creating a European civil society. The Treaty of Lisbon may go some way to resolving the perceived deficit in creating greater democratic controls on the commission, including enshrining the procedure of linking elections to the selection of the Commission president. Historically, the commission had indeed been seen as a technocratic expert body which, akin with institutions such as independent central banks, deals with technical areas of policy and therefore ought to be removed from party politics. From this viewpoint, electoral pressures would undermine the commission's role as an independent regulator. Defenders of the Commission point out that legislation must be approved by the Council in all areas (the ministers of member states) and the European Parliament in most areas before it can be adopted, thus the amount of legislation which is adopted in any one country without the approval of its government is limited.\nIn 2009 the European ombudsman published statistics of citizens' complaints against EU institutions, with most of them filed against the commission (66%) and concerning lack of transparency (36%). In 2010 the commission was sued for blocking access to documents on EU biofuel policy. This happened after media accused the Commission of blocking scientific evidence against biofuel subsidies. Lack of transparency, unclear lobbyist relations, conflicts of interests and excessive spending of the commission was highlighted in a number of reports by internal and independent auditing organisations. It has also been criticised on IT-related issues, particularly with regard to Microsoft.\nIn September 2020, the European Commission put forward an Anti-Racism Action Plan to tackle the structural racism in the European Union, including measures to address the lack of racial diversity among the European decision makers in Brussels, as denounced by #BrusselsSoWhite.\nInitiatives.\nAnti-terrorism.\nThe European Commission has an Action Plan to enhance preparedness against chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) security risks as part of its anti-terrorism package released in October 2017. In recent times Europe has seen an increased threat level of CBRN attacks. As such, the European Commission's preparedness plan is important, said Steven Neville Chatfield, a director for the Centre for Emergency Preparedness and Response in the United Kingdom's Health Protection Agency. For the first time, the European Commission proposed that medical preparedness for CBRN attack threats is a high priority. \"The European Commission\u2019s (EC) Action Plan to enhance preparedness against CBRN security risks is part of its anti-terrorism package released in October 2017, a strategy aimed at better protecting the more than 511 million citizens across the 27 member states of the European Union (EU).\u201d\nCOVID-19 response.\nThe European Commission organized a video conference of world leaders on 4 May 2020 to raise funds for coronavirus vaccine development. US$8 billion was raised. The United States declined to join this video conference or to contribute funds.\nLocation.\nThe commission is primarily based in Brussels, with the President's office and the commission's meeting room on the 13th floor of the Berlaymont building. The commission also operates out of numerous other buildings in Brussels and Luxembourg City. When the Parliament is meeting in Strasbourg, the Commissioners also meet there in the Winston Churchill building to attend the Parliament's debates. Additionally, the European Commission has facilities that support it in Alicante, Spain; Munich, Germany; and Varese, Italy."}
{"id": "9975", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9975", "title": "Linear filter", "text": "Linear filters process time-varying input signals to produce output signals, subject to the constraint of linearity. In most cases these linear filters are also time invariant (or shift invariant) in which case they can be analyzed exactly using LTI (\"linear time-invariant\") system theory revealing their transfer functions in the frequency domain and their impulse responses in the time domain. Real-time implementations of such linear signal processing filters in the time domain are inevitably causal, an additional constraint on their transfer functions. An analog electronic circuit consisting only of linear components (resistors, capacitors, inductors, and linear amplifiers) will necessarily fall in this category, as will comparable mechanical systems or digital signal processing systems containing only linear elements. Since linear time-invariant filters can be completely characterized by their response to sinusoids of different frequencies (their frequency response), they are sometimes known as frequency filters.\nNon real-time implementations of linear time-invariant filters need not be causal. Filters of more than one dimension are also used such as in Image processing. The general concept of linear filtering also extends into other fields and technologies such as statistics, data analysis, and mechanical engineering.\nImpulse response and transfer function.\nA linear time-invariant (LTI) filter can be uniquely specified by its impulse response \"h\", and the output of any filter is mathematically expressed as the convolution of the input with that impulse response. The frequency response, given by the filter's transfer function formula_1, is an alternative characterization of the filter. Typical filter design goals are to realize a particular frequency response, that is, the magnitude of the transfer function formula_2; the importance of the phase of the transfer function varies according to the application, inasmuch as the shape of a waveform can be distorted to a greater or lesser extent in the process of achieving a desired (amplitude) response in the frequency domain. The frequency response may be tailored to, for instance, eliminate unwanted frequency components from an input signal, or to limit an amplifier to signals within a particular band of frequencies.\nThe impulse response \"h\" of a linear time-invariant causal filter specifies the output that the filter would produce if it were to receive an input consisting of a single impulse at time 0. An \"impulse\" in a continuous time filter means a Dirac delta function; in a discrete time filter the Kronecker delta function would apply. The impulse response completely characterizes the response of any such filter, inasmuch as any possible input signal can be expressed as a (possibly infinite) combination of weighted delta functions. Multiplying the impulse response shifted in time according to the arrival of each of these delta functions by the amplitude of each delta function, and summing these responses together (according to the superposition principle, applicable to all linear systems) yields the output waveform.\nMathematically this is described as the convolution of a time-varying input signal \"x(t)\" with the filter's impulse response \"h\", defined as:\nThe first form is the continuous-time form, which describes mechanical and analog electronic systems, for instance. The second equation is a discrete-time version used, for example, by digital filters implemented in software, so-called \"digital signal processing\". The impulse response \"h\" completely characterizes any linear time-invariant (or shift-invariant in the discrete-time case) filter. The input \"x\" is said to be \"convolved\" with the impulse response \"h\" having a (possibly infinite) duration of time \"T\" (or of \"N\" sampling periods).\nFilter design consists of finding a possible transfer function that can be implemented within certain practical constraints dictated by the technology or desired complexity of the system, followed by a practical design that realizes that transfer function using the chosen technology. The complexity of a filter may be specified according to the order of the filter.\nAmong the time-domain filters we here consider, there are two general classes of filter transfer functions that can approximate a desired frequency response. Very different mathematical treatments apply to the design of filters termed infinite impulse response (IIR) filters, characteristic of mechanical and analog electronics systems, and finite impulse response (FIR) filters, which can be implemented by discrete time systems such as computers (then termed \"digital signal processing\").\nInfinite impulse response filters.\nConsider a physical system that acts as a linear filter, such as a system of springs and masses, or an analog electronic circuit that includes capacitors and/or inductors (along with other linear components such as resistors and amplifiers). When such a system is subject to an impulse (or any signal of finite duration) it responds with an output waveform that lasts past the duration of the input, eventually decaying exponentially in one or another manner, but never completely settling to zero (mathematically speaking). Such a system is said to have an infinite impulse response (IIR). The convolution integral (or summation) above extends over all time: T (or N) must be set to infinity.\nFor instance, consider a damped harmonic oscillator such as a pendulum, or a resonant L-C tank circuit. If the pendulum has been at rest and we were to strike it with a hammer (the \"impulse\"), setting it in motion, it would swing back and forth (\"resonate\"), say, with an amplitude of 10\u00a0cm. After 10 minutes, say, the pendulum would still be swinging but the amplitude would have decreased to 5\u00a0cm, half of its original amplitude. After another 10 minutes its amplitude would be only 2.5\u00a0cm, then 1.25\u00a0cm, etc. However it would never come to a complete rest, and we therefore call that response to the impulse (striking it with a hammer) \"infinite\" in duration.\nThe complexity of such a system is specified by its order \"N\". N is often a constraint on the design of a transfer function since it specifies the number of reactive components in an analog circuit; in a digital IIR filter the number of computations required is proportional to N.\nFinite impulse response filters.\nA filter implemented in a computer program (or a so-called digital signal processor) is a discrete-time system; a different (but parallel) set of mathematical concepts defines the behavior of such systems. Although a digital filter can be an IIR filter if the algorithm implementing it includes feedback, it is also possible to easily implement a filter whose impulse truly goes to zero after N time steps; this is called a finite impulse response (FIR) filter.\nFor instance, suppose one has a filter that, when presented with an impulse in a time series:\noutputs a series that responds to that impulse at time 0 until time 4, and has no further response, such as:\nAlthough the impulse response has lasted 4 time steps after the input, starting at time 5 it has truly gone to zero. The extent of the impulse response is \"finite\", and this would be classified as a fourth-order FIR filter.\nThe convolution integral (or summation) above need only extend to the full duration of the impulse response T, or the order N in a discrete time filter.\nImplementation issues.\nClassical analog filters are IIR filters, and classical filter theory centers on the determination of transfer functions given by low order rational functions, which can be synthesized using the same small number of reactive components. Using digital computers, on the other hand, both FIR and IIR filters are straightforward to implement in software.\nA digital IIR filter can generally approximate a desired filter response using less computing power than a FIR filter, however this advantage is more often unneeded given the increasing power of digital processors. The ease of designing and characterizing FIR filters makes them preferable to the filter designer (programmer) when ample computing power is available. Another advantage of FIR filters is that their impulse response can be made symmetric, which implies a response in the frequency domain that has zero phase at all frequencies (not considering a finite delay), which is absolutely impossible with any IIR filter.\nFrequency response.\nThe frequency response or transfer function formula_2 of a filter can be obtained if the impulse response is known, or directly through analysis using Laplace transforms, or in discrete-time systems the Z-transform. The frequency response also includes the phase as a function of frequency, however in many cases the phase response is of little or no interest. FIR filters can be made to have zero phase, but with IIR filters that is generally impossible. With most IIR transfer functions there are related transfer functions having a frequency response with the same magnitude but a different phase; in most cases the so-called minimum phase transfer function is preferred.\nFilters in the time domain are most often requested to follow a specified frequency response. Then, a mathematical procedure finds a filter transfer function that can be realized (within some constraints), and approximates the desired response to within some criterion. Common filter response specifications are described as follows:\nFIR transfer functions.\nMeeting a frequency response requirement with an FIR filter uses relatively straightforward procedures. In the most basic form, the desired frequency response itself can be sampled with a resolution of formula_6 and Fourier transformed to the time domain. This obtains the filter coefficients \"hi\", which implements a zero phase FIR filter that matches the frequency response at the sampled frequencies used. To better match a desired response, formula_6 must be reduced. However the duration of the filter's impulse response, and the number of terms that must be summed for each output value (according to the above discrete time convolution) is given by formula_8 where \"T\" is the sampling period of the discrete time system (N-1 is also termed the \"order\" of an FIR filter). Thus the complexity of a digital filter and the computing time involved, grows inversely with formula_6, placing a higher cost on filter functions that better approximate the desired behavior. For the same reason, filter functions whose critical response is at lower frequencies (compared to the sampling frequency \"1/T\") require a higher order, more computationally intensive FIR filter. An IIR filter can thus be much more efficient in such cases.\nElsewhere the reader may find further discussion of design methods for practical FIR filter design.\nIIR transfer functions.\nSince classical analog filters are IIR filters, there has been a long history of studying the range of possible transfer functions implementing various of the above desired filter responses in continuous time systems. Using transforms it is possible to convert these continuous time frequency responses to ones that are implemented in discrete time, for use in digital IIR filters. The complexity of any such filter is given by the \"order\" N, which describes the order of the rational function describing the frequency response. The order N is of particular importance in analog filters, because an Nth order electronic filter requires N reactive elements (capacitors and/or inductors) to implement. If a filter is implemented using, for instance, biquad stages using op-amps, N/2 stages are needed. In a digital implementation, the number of computations performed per sample is proportional to N. Thus the mathematical problem is to obtain the best approximation (in some sense) to the desired response using a smaller N, as we shall now illustrate.\nBelow are the frequency responses of several standard filter functions that approximate a desired response, optimized according to some criterion. These are all fifth-order low-pass filters, designed for a cutoff frequency of .5 in normalized units. Frequency responses are shown for the Butterworth, Chebyshev, inverse Chebyshev, and elliptic filters.\nAs is clear from the image, the elliptic filter is sharper than the others, but at the expense of ripples in both its passband and stopband. The Butterworth filter has the poorest transition but has a more even response, avoiding ripples in either the passband or stopband. A Bessel filter (not shown) has an even poorer transition in the frequency domain, but maintains the best phase fidelity of a waveform. Different applications emphasize different design requirements, leading to different choices among these (and other) optimizations, or requiring a filter of a higher order.\nExample implementations.\nA popular circuit implementing a second order active R-C filter is the Sallen-Key design, whose schematic diagram is shown here. This topology can be adapted to produce low-pass, band-pass, and high pass filters.\nAn Nth order FIR filter can be implemented in a discrete time system using a computer program or specialized hardware in which the input signal is subject to N delay stages. The output of the filter is formed as the weighted sum of those delayed signals, as is depicted in the accompanying signal flow diagram. The response of the filter depends on the weighting coefficients denoted \"b0\", \"b1\", ... \"bN\". For instance, if all of the coefficients were equal to unity, a so-called boxcar function, then it would implement a low-pass filter with a low frequency gain of N+1 and a frequency response given by the sinc function. Superior shapes for the frequency response can be obtained using coefficients derived from a more sophisticated design procedure.\nMathematics of filter design.\nLTI system theory describes linear \"time-invariant\" (LTI) filters of all types. LTI filters can be completely described by their frequency response and phase response, the specification of which uniquely defines their impulse response, and \"vice versa\". From a mathematical viewpoint, continuous-time IIR LTI filters may be described in terms of linear differential equations, and their impulse responses considered as Green's functions of the equation. Continuous-time LTI filters may also be described in terms of the Laplace transform of their impulse response, which allows all of the characteristics of the filter to be analyzed by considering the pattern of zeros and poles of their Laplace transform in the complex plane. Similarly, discrete-time LTI filters may be analyzed via the Z-transform of their impulse response.\nBefore the advent of computer filter synthesis tools, graphical tools such as Bode plots and Nyquist plots were extensively used as design tools. Even today, they are invaluable tools to understanding filter behavior. Reference books had extensive plots of frequency response, phase response, group delay, and impulse response for various types of filters, of various orders. They also contained tables of values showing how to implement such filters as RLC ladders - very useful when amplifying elements were expensive compared to passive components. Such a ladder can also be designed to have minimal sensitivity to component variation a property hard to evaluate without computer tools.\nMany different analog filter designs have been developed, each trying to optimise some feature of the system response. For practical filters, a custom design is sometimes desirable, that can offer the best tradeoff between different design criteria, which may include component count and cost, as well as filter response characteristics.\nThese descriptions refer to the \"mathematical\" properties of the filter (that is, the frequency and phase response). These can be \"implemented\" as analog circuits (for instance, using a Sallen Key filter topology, a type of active filter), or as algorithms in digital signal processing systems.\nDigital filters are much more flexible to synthesize and use than analog filters, where the constraints of the design permits their use. Notably, there is no need to consider component tolerances, and very high Q levels may be obtained.\nFIR digital filters may be implemented by the direct convolution of the desired impulse response with the input signal.\nThey can easily be designed to give a matched filter for any arbitrary pulse shape.\nIIR digital filters are often more difficult to design, due to problems including dynamic range issues, quantization noise and instability.\nTypically digital IIR filters are designed as a series of digital biquad filters.\nAll low-pass second-order continuous-time filters have a transfer function given by\nAll band-pass second-order continuous-time filters have a transfer function given by\nwhere"}
{"id": "9976", "revid": "1018097278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9976", "title": "Ergative case", "text": "In grammar, the ergative case (abbreviated ) is the grammatical case that identifies the noun as a subject of a transitive verb in ergative\u2013absolutive languages.\nCharacteristics.\nIn such languages, the ergative case is typically marked (most salient), while the absolutive case is unmarked. Recent work in case theory has vigorously supported the idea that the ergative case identifies the agent (the intentful performer of an action) of a verb (Woolford 2004).\nIn Kalaallisut (Greenlandic) for example, the ergative case is used to mark subjects of transitive verbs and possessors of nouns.\nNez Perce has a three-way nominal case system with both ergative (\"-nim\") and accusative (\"-ne\") plus an absolute (unmarked) case for intransitive subjects: \"hip\u00e1ayna q\u00ediwn\" \u2018the old man arrived\u2019; \"hip\u00e1ayna wew\u00fakiye\" \u2018the elk arrived\u2019; \"wew\u00fakiyene p\u00e9exne q\u00ediwnim\" \u2018the old man saw an elk\u2019.\nSahaptin has an ergative noun case (with suffix \"-n\u0268m\") that is limited to transitive constructions only when the direct object is 1st or 2nd person: \"iwap\u00e1atayaa\u0161 \u0142m\u00e1man\u0268m\" \u2018the old woman helped me\u2019; \"paan\u00e1y iwap\u00e1ataya \u0142m\u00e1ma\" \u2018the old woman helped him/her\u2019 (direct); \"p\u00e1wapaataya \u0142m\u00e1mayin\" \u2018the old woman helped him/her\u2019 (inverse).\nOther languages that use the ergative case are Georgian, Chechen, and other Caucasian languages, Mayan languages, Mixe\u2013Zoque languages, Wagiman and other Australian Aboriginal languages as well as Basque, Burushaski and Tibetan. Among all Indo-European languages only, Yaghnobi, Kurdish language varieties (including Kurmanji, Zazaki and Sorani) and Pashto from Iranian languages and Hindi/Urdu, along with some other Indo-Aryan languages are ergative.\nThe ergative case is also a feature of some constructed languages such as Na'vi, Ithkuil and Black Speech."}
{"id": "9977", "revid": "978390409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9977", "title": "Ewe", "text": "A ewe is a female sheep. \nEwe or EWE may also refer to:"}
{"id": "9978", "revid": "9929111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9978", "title": "Essenes", "text": "The Essenes (; Modern Hebrew: , \"Isiyim\"; Greek: \u1f18\u03c3\u03c3\u03b7\u03bd\u03bf\u03af, \u1f18\u03c3\u03c3\u03b1\u1fd6\u03bf\u03b9, or \u1f48\u03c3\u03c3\u03b1\u1fd6\u03bf\u03b9, \"Essenoi, Essaioi, Ossaioi\") were a Jewish sect during the Second Temple period that flourished from the 2nd century BCE to the 1st century CE.\nThe Jewish historian Josephus records that Essenes existed in large numbers, and thousands lived throughout Roman Judaea, but they were fewer in number than the Pharisees and the Sadducees, the other two major sects at the time. The Essenes lived in various cities but congregated in communal life dedicated to voluntary poverty, daily immersion, and asceticism (their priestly class practiced celibacy). Most scholars claim they seceded from the Zadokite priests.\nThe Essenes have gained fame in modern times as a result of the discovery of an extensive group of religious documents known as the Dead Sea Scrolls, which are commonly believed to be the Essenes' library. These documents preserve multiple copies of parts of the Hebrew Bible untouched from possibly as early as 300\u00a0BCE until their discovery in 1946. Most scholars dispute the notion that the Essenes wrote the Dead Sea Scrolls. Rachel Elior questions even the existence of the Essenes.\nThe first reference to the sect is by the Roman writer Pliny the Elder (died ) in his \"Natural History\". Pliny relates in a few lines that the Essenes possess no money, had existed for thousands of generations, and that their priestly class (\u201ccontemplatives\u201d) do not marry. Unlike Philo, who did not mention any particular geographical location of the Essenes other than the whole land of Israel, Pliny places them somewhere above Ein Gedi, next to the Dead Sea.\nJosephus later gave a detailed account of the Essenes in \"The Jewish War\" (), with a shorter description in \"Antiquities of the Jews\" () and \"The Life of Flavius Josephus\" (). Claiming firsthand knowledge, he lists the \"Essenoi\" as one of the three sects of Jewish philosophy alongside the Pharisees and the Sadducees. He relates the same information concerning piety, celibacy, the absence of personal property and of money, the belief in communality, and commitment to a strict observance of Sabbath. He further adds that the Essenes ritually immersed in water every morning, ate together after prayer, devoted themselves to charity and benevolence, forbade the expression of anger, studied the books of the elders, preserved secrets, and were very mindful of the names of the angels kept in their sacred writings.\nPliny, also a geographer, located them in the desert near the northwestern shore of the Dead Sea, where the Dead Sea Scrolls were discovered.\nEtymology.\nJosephus uses the name \"Essenes\" in his two main accounts, \"The Jewish War\" 2.119, 158, 160 and \"Antiquities of the Jews\", 13.171\u20132, but some manuscripts read here \"Essaion\" (\"holding the Essenes in honour\"; \"a certain Essene named Manaemus\"; \"to hold all Essenes in honor\"; \"the Essenes\").\nIn several places, however, Josephus has \"Essaios\", which is usually assumed to mean \"Essene\" (\"Judas of the \"Essaios\" race\"; \"Simon of the \"Essaios\" race\"; \"John the \"Essaios\"\"; \"those who are called by us \"Essaioi\"\"; \"Simon a man of the \"Essaios\" race\"). Josephus identified the Essenes as one of the three major Jewish sects of that period.\nPhilo's usage is \"Essaioi\", although he admits this Greek form of the original name, that according to his etymology signifies \"holiness\", to be inexact. Pliny's Latin text has \"Esseni\".\nGabriele Boccaccini implies that a convincing etymology for the name Essene has not been found, but that the term applies to a larger group within Palestine that also included the Qumran community.\nIt was proposed before the Dead Sea Scrolls were discovered that the name came into several Greek spellings from a Hebrew self-designation later found in some Dead Sea Scrolls, \"\u02bbosey haTorah\", \"'doers' or 'makers' of Torah\". Although dozens of etymology suggestions have been published, this is the only etymology published before 1947 that was confirmed by Qumran text self-designation references, and it is gaining acceptance among scholars. It is recognized as the etymology of the form \"Ossaioi\" (and note that Philo also offered an O spelling) and \"Essaioi\" and \"Esseni\" spelling variations have been discussed by VanderKam, Goranson, and others. In medieval Hebrew (e.g. \"Sefer Yosippon\") \"Hassidim\" \"the Pious\" replaces \"Essenes\". While this Hebrew name is not the etymology of \"Essaioi\"/\"Esseni\", the Aramaic equivalent \"Hesi'im\" known from Eastern Aramaic texts has been suggested. Others suggest that Essene is a transliteration of the Hebrew word \"\u1e25i\u1e63onim\" (\"\u1e25i\u1e63on\" \"outside\"), which the Mishnah (e.g. Megillah 4:8) uses to describe various sectarian groups. Another theory is that the name was borrowed from a cult of devotees to Artemis in Anatolia, whose demeanor and dress somewhat resembled those of the group in Judea.\nFlavius Josephus in Chapter 8 of \"The Jewish War\" states:\nLocation.\nAccording to Josephus, the Essenes had settled \"not in one city\" but \"in large numbers in every town\". Philo speaks of \"more than four thousand\" \"Essaioi\" living in \"Palestine and Syria\", more precisely, \"in many cities of Judaea and in many villages and grouped in great societies of many members\".\nPliny locates them \"on the west side of the Dead Sea, away from the coast... [above] the town of Engeda\".\nSome modern scholars and archaeologists have argued that Essenes inhabited the settlement at Qumran, a plateau in the Judean Desert along the Dead Sea, citing Pliny the Elder in support, and giving credence that the Dead Sea Scrolls are the product of the Essenes. This theory, though not yet conclusively proven, has come to dominate the scholarly discussion and public perception of the Essenes.\nRules, customs, theology, and beliefs.\nThe accounts by Josephus and Philo show that the Essenes led a strictly communal life\u2014often compared to later Christian monasticism. Many of the Essene groups appear to have been celibate, but Josephus speaks also of another \"\"order\" of Essenes\" that observed the practice of being engaged for three years and then becoming married. According to Josephus, they had customs and observances such as collective ownership, electing a leader to attend to the interests of the group, and obedience to the orders from their leader. Also, they were forbidden from swearing oaths and from sacrificing animals. They controlled their tempers and served as channels of peace, carrying weapons only for protection against robbers. The Essenes chose not to possess slaves but served each other and, as a result of communal ownership, did not engage in trading. Josephus and Philo provide lengthy accounts of their communal meetings, meals and religious celebrations. This communal living has led some scholars to view the Essenes as a group practicing social and material egalitarianism.\nAfter a three-year probationary period, newly joining members would take an oath that included the commitment to practice piety towards God (\u03c4\u03bf \u03b8\u03b5\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd) and righteousness towards humanity, to maintain a pure lifestyle, to abstain from criminal and immoral activities, to transmit their rules uncorrupted and to preserve the books of the Essenes and the names of the angels. Their theology included belief in the immortality of the soul and that they would receive their souls back after death. Part of their activities included purification by water rituals, which was supported by rainwater catchment and storage. According to the Community Rules, repentance was a prerequisite to baptism: \"They shall not enter the water... for they will not be cleansed unless they have turned from their evil.\"\nRitual purification was a common practice among the peoples of Judea during this period and was thus not specific to the Essenes. A ritual bath or mikveh was found near many synagogues of the period continuing into modern times. Purity and cleanliness was considered so important to the Essenes that they would refrain from defecation on the Sabbath.\nAccording to Joseph Lightfoot, the Church Father Epiphanius (writing in the 4th century CE) seems to make a distinction between two main groups within the Essenes: \"Of those that came before his [Elxai, an Ossaean prophet] time and during it, the Ossaeans and the Nasaraeans.\"Part 18 Epiphanius describes each group as following:\nThe Nasaraeans or Nasoraeans may be the same as the Mandaeans of today. Epiphanius says (29:6) that they existed before Christ. That is questioned by some, but others accept the pre-Christian origin of this group.\nScholarly discussion.\nJosephus and Philo discuss the Essenes in detail. Most scholars believe that the community at Qumran that allegedly produced the Dead Sea Scrolls was an offshoot of the Essenes. However, this theory has been disputed by some; for example, Norman Golb argues that the primary research on the Qumran documents and ruins (by Father Roland de Vaux, from the \"\u00c9cole Biblique et Arch\u00e9ologique de J\u00e9rusalem\") lacked scientific method, and drew wrong conclusions that comfortably entered the academic canon. For Golb, the number of documents is too extensive and includes many different writing styles and calligraphies; the ruins seem to have been a fortress, used as a military base for a very long period of time\u2014including the 1st century\u2014so they therefore could not have been inhabited by the Essenes; and the large graveyard excavated in 1870, just east of the Qumran ruins, was made of over 1200 tombs that included many women and children; Pliny clearly wrote that the Essenes who lived near the Dead Sea \"had not one woman, had renounced all pleasure... and no one was born in their race\". Golb's book presents observations about de Vaux's premature conclusions and their uncontroverted acceptance by the general academic community. He states that the documents probably stemmed from various libraries in Jerusalem, kept safe in the desert from the Roman invasions. Other scholars refute these arguments\u2014particularly since Josephus describes some Essenes as allowing marriage.\nAnother issue is the relationship between the \"Essaioi\" and Philo's \"Therapeutae\" and \"Therapeutrides\". He regarded the \"Therapeutae\" as a contemplative branch of the \"Essaioi\" who, he said, pursued an active life.\nOne theory on the formation of the Essenes suggests that the movement was founded by a Jewish high priest, dubbed by the Essenes the Teacher of Righteousness, whose office had been usurped by Jonathan (of priestly but not of Zadokite lineage), labeled the \"man of lies\" or \"false priest\". Others follow this line and a few argue that the Teacher of Righteousness was not only the leader of the Essenes at Qumran, but was also identical to the original Messianic figure about 150 years before the time of the Gospels. Fred Gladstone Bratton notes that\n Lawrence Schiffman has argued that the Qumran community may be called Sadducean, and not Essene, since their legal positions retain a link with Sadducean tradition."}
{"id": "9979", "revid": "1023405627", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9979", "title": "Eyes Wide Shut", "text": "Eyes Wide Shut is a 1999 erotic mystery psychological drama film directed, produced and co-written by Stanley Kubrick. Based on the 1926 novella \"Traumnovelle\" (\"Dream Story\") by Arthur Schnitzler, the movie transfers the story from early 20th-century Vienna to 1990s New York City. The film follows the sexually charged adventures of Dr. Bill Harford, who is shocked when his wife, Alice, reveals that she had contemplated having an affair a year earlier. He then embarks on a night-long adventure, during which he infiltrates a masked orgy of an unnamed secret society.\nKubrick obtained the filming rights for \"Dream Story\" in the 1960s, considering it a perfect text for a film adaptation about sexual relations. He revived the project in the 1990s when he hired writer Frederic Raphael to help him with the adaptation. The film, which was mostly shot in the United Kingdom, apart from some exterior establishing shots, includes a detailed recreation of exterior Greenwich Village street scenes made at Pinewood Studios. The film's production, at 400 days, holds the Guinness World Record for the longest continuous film shoot.\nKubrick died six days after showing his final cut to Warner Bros. Pictures, making this the final film he directed. In order to ensure a theatrical R rating in the United States, Warner Bros. digitally altered several sexually explicit scenes during post-production. This version was released on July 16, 1999, to moderately positive reactions from film critics. Box office receipts for the film worldwide were about $162 million. The uncut version has since been released in DVD, HD DVD and Blu-ray Disc formats.\nPlot.\nDoctor Bill and Alice Harford live in New York City with their daughter Helena. They attend a Christmas party hosted by wealthy patient Victor Ziegler, where Bill is reunited with Nick Nightingale, a medical school drop-out who now plays the piano professionally. An older Hungarian guest attempts to seduce Alice, and two young models attempt to seduce Bill. He is interrupted by his host, who had been having sex with Mandy, a young woman who has overdosed on a speedball. Mandy recovers with Bill's aid.\nThe following evening, while smoking marijuana, Alice and Bill discuss their episodes of unfulfilled temptation. Bill tells Alice he is not jealous of other men's attraction to her because he deems women naturally inclined to fidelity. She then discloses that during their vacation on Cape Cod, she encountered a naval officer and fantasized about him enough that she considered leaving Bill and their daughter. Bill is disturbed by Alice's revelation before being called to the house of a patient who has just died. The patient's distraught daughter, Marion, unsuccessfully tries to seduce Bill.\nUpon leaving, he engages with a sex worker named Domino. Alice phones when they start kissing, prompting Bill to have a change of heart. He pays Domino for the sexless encounter and meets Nick at a jazz club. Nick describes an engagement where he must play piano blindfolded in events featuring beautiful women. Invitees require a costume, a mask and a password. Bill goes to a costume shop and offers the owner, Milich, a generous amount of money to rent a costume. Inside the shop, Milich is outraged when he catches his young daughter with two men.\nBill takes a taxi to the country mansion mentioned by Nick. He gives the password and discovers a sexual ritual is taking place. One of the masked women warns him he is in terrible danger. Bill is ushered to a crowded room and unmasked by the master of ceremonies. The woman who had tried to warn Bill intervenes and insists on redeeming him, at an undisclosed personal cost. Bill is let off with a warning not to tell anyone about what happened.\nBill arrives home guilty and confused. He finds Alice laughing in her sleep and awakens her. She tearfully explains a dream in which she was having sex with the naval officer and many other men, and laughing at the idea of Bill witnessing the scene. The next morning, Bill goes to Nick's hotel. The desk clerk explains that a bruised and frightened Nick checked out hours earlier escorted by two dangerous-looking men. Bill returns the costume but seems to have misplaced the mask, and learns that Milich has sold his teenage daughter into sex slavery.\nBill heads to Domino's apartment, apparently having decided to consummate his affair. However, he is greeted by a woman who claims that she is Domino's roommate, Sally. There is obvious sexual tension between Bill and Sally but she then reveals that Domino had received just that morning the results of a test that indicated that she was HIV-positive. Bill leaves.\nHaving left the apartment, Bill sees the news about a beauty queen's death from an overdose, goes to the morgue, and identifies her as Mandy. He is then summoned by Ziegler, who reveals he was a guest in the orgy and identified Bill through his connection with Nick. Ziegler claims the secret society's warnings are only intended to scare Bill from speaking about the orgy. However, he implies that the society is capable of acting on its threats. Bill asks about Nick's disappearance and Mandy's death, correctly identifying her as the masked orgy participant who sacrificed herself for him. Ziegler insists that Nick is safely back home in Seattle, and the punishment was part of the same charade of intimidation and had nothing to do with Mandy's death. He also says that Mandy was an addict who had died from another accidental drug overdose. Bill does not know whether Ziegler is telling the truth about Nick's whereabouts or Mandy's death.\nReturning home, Bill finds the rented mask on his pillow next to his sleeping wife. He breaks down in tears and tells Alice the whole truth of the past two days. The next morning, they go Christmas shopping with their daughter. Bill apologizes to Alice, and Alice muses that they should be grateful that their marriage and mutual love survived. She suggests that there is something they need to do \"as soon as possible\". When Bill asks what, she simply responds, \"Fuck.\"\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\n\"Eyes Wide Shut\" developed after Stanley Kubrick read Arthur Schnitzler's \"Dream Story\" in 1968, when Kubrick was looking for a project to follow \"\". Kubrick was interested in adapting the story, and with the help of journalist Jay Cocks, bought the filming rights to the novel. For the following decade, Kubrick considered making the \"Dream Story\" adaptation a sex comedy \"with a wild and somber streak running through it\", starring Steve Martin or Woody Allen in the main role. The project was revived in 1994 when Kubrick hired Frederic Raphael to work on the script, updating the setting from early 20th century Vienna to late 20th century New York City. Kubrick invited his friend Michael Herr, who helped write \"Full Metal Jacket\", to make revisions, but Herr declined for fear he would be underpaid and have to commit to a long production.\nAdaptation.\nArthur Schnitzler's 1926 novella \"Dream Story\" is set around Vienna after the turn of the century. The main characters are a couple named Fridolin and Albertina. The couple's home is a typical suburban middle-class home. Like the protagonist of the novel, Schnitzler was Jewish, lived in Vienna, and was a medical doctor, although he left medicine to write.\nKubrick frequently removed references to the Jewishness of characters in the novels he adapted. In \"Eyes Wide Shut\", Frederic Raphael, who is Jewish, wanted to keep the Jewish background of the protagonists, but Kubrick disagreed and removed details that would identify characters as Jewish. Kubrick determined Bill should be a \"Harrison Ford-ish goy\" and created the surname of Harford as an allusion to the actor. In the film, Bill is taunted with homophobic slurs. In the novella, the taunters are members of an anti-Semitic college fraternity. In an introduction to a Penguin Classics edition of \"Dream Story\", Raphael wrote that \"Fridolin is not declared to be a Jew, but his feelings of cowardice, for failing to challenge his aggressor, echo the uneasiness of Austrian Jews in the face of Gentile provocation.\"\nThe novella is set during the Carnival, when people often wear masks to parties. The party that both husband and wife attend at the opening of the story is a Carnival Masquerade ball, whereas the film's story begins at Christmas time.\nIn the novella, the party (which is sparsely attended) uses \"Denmark\" as the password for entrance; that is significant in that Albertina had her infatuation with her soldier in Denmark; the film's password is \"Fidelio\". In early drafts of the screenplay, the password was \"Fidelio Rainbow\". Jonathan Rosenbaum noted that both passwords echo elements of one member of the couple's behaviour, though in opposite ways. The party in the novella consists mostly of nude ballroom dancing.\nIn the novella, the woman who \"redeems\" Fridolin at the party, saving him from punishment, is costumed as a nun, and most of the characters at the party are dressed as nuns or monks; Fridolin himself used a monk costume. This aspect was retained in the film's original screenplay, but was deleted in the filmed version.\nThe novella makes it clear that Fridolin at this point hates Albertina more than ever, thinking they are now lying together \"like mortal enemies\". It has been argued that the dramatic climax of the novella is actually Albertina's dream, and the film has shifted the focus to Bill's visit to the secret society's orgy, whose content is more shocking in the film.\nThe adaptation created a character with no counterpart in the novella: Ziegler, who represents both the high wealth and prestige to which Bill Harford aspires, and a connection between Bill's two worlds (his regular life, and the secret society organizing the ball). Critic Randy Rasmussen interprets Ziegler as representing Bill's worst self, much as in other Kubrick films; the title character in \"Dr. Strangelove\" represents the worst of the American national security establishment, Charles Grady represents the worst of Jack Torrance in \"The Shining\", and Clare Quilty represents the worst of Humbert Humbert in \"Lolita\".\nMore significantly, in the film, Ziegler gives a commentary on the whole story to Bill, including an explanation that the party incident, where Bill is apprehended, threatened, and ultimately redeemed by the woman's sacrifice, was staged. Whether this is to be believed or not, it is an exposition of Ziegler's view of the ways of the world as a member of the power elite.\nCasting.\nWhen Warner Bros. president Terry Semel approved production, he asked Kubrick to cast a movie star as \"you haven't done that since Jack Nicholson [in \"The Shining\"]\". Cruise was in England because his wife Nicole Kidman was there shooting \"The Portrait of a Lady\", and eventually Cruise decided to visit Kubrick's estate with Kidman. After that meeting, the director awarded them the roles. Kubrick also managed to make both not commit to other projects until \"Eyes Wide Shut\" was completed. Jennifer Jason Leigh and Harvey Keitel each were cast and filmed by Kubrick. Due to scheduling conflicts, both had to drop out \u2013 first Keitel with \"Finding Graceland\", then Leigh with \"eXistenZ\" \u2013 and they were replaced by Sydney Pollack and Marie Richardson in the final cut.\nIn 2019, it was revealed that Cate Blanchett had provided the voice of the mysterious masked woman at the orgy party. Actress Abigail Good could not do a convincing American accent, and Cruise and Kidman ended up suggesting Blanchett for the dubbing, which occurred after Kubrick's death.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography began in November 1996. Kubrick's perfectionism led to script pages being rewritten on the set with most scenes requiring numerous takes. The shoot went on for much longer than expected; the actress Vinessa Shaw was initially contracted for two weeks but ended up working for two months whilst the actor Alan Cumming who appears in one scene as a hotel clerk, auditioned six times before the filming process. Due to the relentless nature of the production, the crew became exhausted and were reported to have been impacted by low morale. Filming finally wrapped in June 1998. The \"Guinness World Records\" recognized \"Eyes Wide Shut\" as the longest constant movie shoot that ran \"...for over 15 months, a period that included an unbroken shoot of 46 weeks\".\nGiven Kubrick's fear of flying, the entire film was shot in England. Sound-stage works were completed at London's Pinewood Studios which included a detailed recreation of Greenwich Village. Kubrick's perfectionism went as far as sending workmen to Manhattan to measure street widths and note newspaper vending machine locations. Real New York footage was also shot to be rear projected behind Cruise. Production was followed by a strong campaign of secrecy helped by Kubrick always working with a short team on set. Outdoor locations included Hatton Garden for a Greenwich Village street, Hamleys for the toy store from the film's ending, and Mentmore Towers and Elveden Hall in Elveden, Suffolk, England for the mansion. Larry Smith, who had first served as a gaffer on both \"Barry Lyndon\" and \"The Shining\" was chosen by Kubrick to be the film's cinematographer. Wherever possible, Smith made use of available light sources visible in the shots such as lamps and Christmas tree lights, but when this was insufficient he used Chinese paper ball lamps to softly brighten the scene and/or other types of film lighting. The color was enhanced by push processing the film reels (emulsion) which helped bring out the intensity of the color.\nKubrick's perfectionism led him to oversee every visual element that would appear in a given frame, from props and furniture to the color of walls and other objects. One such element were the masks used in the orgy which were inspired by the masked carnival balls visited by the protagonists in the novel. Costume designer Marit Allen explained that Kubrick felt they fit in that scene for being part of the imaginary world and ended up \"creat[ing] the impression of menace, but without exaggeration\". As many masks as were used in the Venetian carnival were sent to London and Kubrick chose who would wear each piece. The paintings of Kubrick's wife Christiane and his daughter Katherina are featured as decorations.\nAfter shooting had been completed, Kubrick entered a prolonged post-production process and on March 1, 1999, Kubrick showed a cut to Cruise, Kidman and the Warner Bros. executives. The director died six days later.\nMusic.\nJocelyn Pook wrote the original music for \"Eyes Wide Shut\" but, like other Kubrick movies, the film was noted for its use of classical music. The opening title music is Shostakovich's Waltz No. 2 from \"Suite for Variety Stage Orchestra\", misidentified as \"Waltz 2 from Jazz Suite\". One recurring piece is the second movement of Gy\u00f6rgy Ligeti's piano cycle \"Musica ricercata\". Kubrick originally intended to feature \"Im Treibhaus\" from Wagner's \"Wesendonck Lieder\", but the director eventually replaced it with Ligeti's tune feeling Wagner's song was \"too beautiful\". In the morgue scene, Franz Liszt's late solo piano piece, \"Nuages Gris\" (\"Grey Clouds\") (1881), is heard. \"Rex tremendae\" from Mozart's \"Requiem\" plays as Bill walks into the cafe and reads of Mandy's death.\nPook was hired after choreographer Yolande Snaith rehearsed the masked ball orgy scene using Pook's composition \"Backwards Priests\" \u2013 which features a Romanian Orthodox Divine Liturgy recorded in a church in Baia Mare, played backwards \u2013 as a reference track. Kubrick then called the composer and asked if she had anything else \"weird\" like that song, which was reworked for the final cut of the scene, with the title \"Masked Ball\". Pook ended up composing and recording four pieces of music, many times based on her previous work, totaling 24 minutes. The composer's work ended up having mostly string instruments \u2013 including a viola played by Pook herself \u2013 with no brass or woodwinds as Pook \"just couldn't justify these other textures\", particularly as she wanted the tracks played on dialogue-heavy scenes to be \"subliminal\" and felt such instruments would be intrusive.\nAnother track in the orgy, \"Migrations\", features a Tamil song sung by Manickam Yogeswaran, a Carnatic singer. The original cut featured a scriptural recitation from the \"Bhagavad Gita\", which Pook took from a previous Yogeswaran recording. As a result of various fringe Hindu groups protesting against the scripture being used, Warner Bros. issued a public apology, and hired the singer to record a similar track to replace the chant.\nThe party at Ziegler's house features rearrangements of love songs such as \"When I Fall in Love\" and \"It Had to Be You\", used in increasingly ironic ways considering how Alice and Bill flirt with other people in the scene. As Kidman was nervous about doing nude scenes, Kubrick stated she could bring music to liven up. When Kidman brought a Chris Isaak CD, Kubrick approved it, and incorporated Isaak's song \"Baby Did a Bad, Bad Thing\" to both an early romantic embrace of Bill and Alice and the film's trailer.\nThemes and interpretations.\nGenre.\nThe film was described by some reviewers, and partially marketed, as an erotic thriller, a categorization disputed by others. It is classified as such in the book \"The Erotic Thriller in Contemporary Cinema\", by Linda Ruth Williams, and was described as such in news articles about Cruise and Kidman's lawsuit over assertions that they saw a sex therapist during filming. The positive review in \"Combustible Celluloid\" describes it as an erotic thriller upon first viewing, but actually a \"complex story about marriage and sexuality\". High-Def Digest also called it an erotic thriller.\nHowever, reviewing the film at AboutFilm.com, Carlo Cavagna regards this as a misleading classification, as does Leo Goldsmith, writing at notcoming.com, and the review on Blu-ray.com. Writing in \"TV Guide\", Maitland McDonagh writes \"No one familiar with the cold precision of Kubrick's work will be surprised that this isn't the steamy erotic thriller a synopsis (or the ads) might suggest.\" Writing in general about the genre of 'erotic thriller' for CineAction in 2001, Douglas Keesey states that \"whatever [Eyes Wide Shut's] actual type, [it] was at least marketed as an erotic thriller\". Michael Koresky, writing in the 2006 issue of film journal \"Reverse Shot\", writes \"this director, who defies expectations at every turn and brings genre to his feet, was\u00a0 ... setting out to make neither the 'erotic thriller' that the press maintained nor an easily identifiable 'Kubrick film'\". \"DVD Talk\" similarly dissociates the film from this genre.\nChristmas setting.\nIn addition to relocating the story from Vienna in the 1900s to New York City in the 1990s, Kubrick changed the time-frame of Schnitzler's story from Mardi Gras to Christmas. Michael Koresky believed Kubrick did this because of the rejuvenating symbolism of Christmas. Mario Falsetto, on the other hand, notes that Christmas lights allow Kubrick to employ some of his distinct methods of shooting including using source location lighting, as he also did in \"Barry Lyndon\". The \"New York Times\" notes that the film \"gives an otherworldly radiance and personality to Christmas lights\", and critic Randy Rasmussen notes that \"colorful Christmas lights\u00a0 ... illuminate almost every location in the film.\" \"Harper\"'s film critic, Lee Siegel, believes that the film's recurring motif is the Christmas tree, because it symbolizes the way that \"Compared with the everyday reality of sex and emotion, our fantasies of gratification are\u00a0 ... pompous and solemn in the extreme\u00a0 ... For desire is like Christmas: it always promises more than it delivers.\" Author Tim Kreider notes that the \"Satanic\" mansion-party at Somerton is the only set in the film without a Christmas tree, stating that \"Almost every set is suffused with the dreamlike, hazy glow of colored lights and tinsel.\" Furthermore, he argues that \"Eyes Wide Shut, though it was released in summer, was \"the\" Christmas movie of 1999.\" Noting that Kubrick has shown viewers the dark side of Christmas consumerism, Louise Kaplan states that the film illustrates ways in which the \"material reality of money\" is shown replacing the spiritual values of Christmas, charity and compassion. While virtually every scene has a Christmas tree, there is \"no Christmas music or cheery Christmas spirit.\" Critic Alonso Duralde, in his book \"Have Yourself a Movie Little Christmas\", categorized the film as a \"Christmas movie for grownups\", arguing that \"Christmas weaves its way through the film from start to finish\".\nUse of Venetian masks.\nHistorians, travel guide authors, novelists, and merchants of Venetian masks have noted that these have a long history of being worn during promiscuous activities. Authors Tim Kreider and Thomas Nelson have linked the film's usage of these to Venice's reputation as a center of both eroticism and mercantilism. Nelson notes that the sex ritual combines elements of Venetian Carnival and Catholic rites, in particular, the character of \"Red Cloak\" who simultaneously serves as Grand Inquisitor and King of Carnival. As such, Nelson argues that the sex ritual is a symbolic mirror of the darker truth behind the fa\u00e7ade of Victor Ziegler's earlier Christmas party. Carolin Ruwe, in her book \"Symbols in Stanley Kubrick's Movie 'Eyes Wide Shut\"', argues that the mask is the prime symbol of the film. Its symbolic meaning is represented through its connection to the characters in the film; as Tim Kreider points out, this can be seen through the masks in the prostitute's apartment and her being renamed as \"Domino\" in the film, which is a type of Venetian Mask. Unused early poster designs for the film by Kubrick's daughter Katharina used the motif of Venetian masks, but were rejected by the studio because they obscured the faces of the film's two stars.\nRelease.\nMarketing.\nWarner Bros. heavily promoted \"Eyes Wide Shut\", while following Kubrick's secrecy campaign \u2013 to the point that the film's press kits contained no production notes, nor even the director's suggestions to Semel regarding the marketing campaign, given one week prior to Kubrick's death. The first footage was shown to theater owners attending the 1999 ShoWest convention in Las Vegas. TV spots featured both Isaak and Ligeti's music from the soundtrack, while revealing little about the movie's plot. The film also appeared on the cover of \"Time\" magazine, and on show business programs such as \"Entertainment Tonight\" and \"Access Hollywood\".\nBox office.\n\"Eyes Wide Shut\" opened on July 16, 1999, in the United States. The film topped the weekend box office, with $21.7 million from 2,411 screens. These numbers surpassed the studio's expectations of $20 million, and became both Cruise's sixth consecutive chart topper and Kubrick's highest opening weekend as well as the highest featuring Kidman and Cruise together. \"Eyes Wide Shut\" ended up grossing a total of $55,691,208 in the US. The numbers put it as Kubrick's second highest-grossing film in the country, behind \"2001: A Space Odyssey\", but were considered a box office disappointment.\nShortly after its screening at the Venice Film Festival, \"Eyes Wide Shut\" had a British premiere on September 3, 1999, at the Warner Village cinema in Leicester Square. The film's wide opening occurred the following weekend, and topped the UK charts with \u00a31,189,672.\nThe international performances for \"Eyes Wide Shut\" were more positive, with Kubrick's long-time assistant and brother-in-law Jan Harlan stating that \"It was badly received in the Anglo-Saxon world, but it was very well received in the Latin world and Japan. In Italy, it was a huge hit.\" Overseas earnings of over $105 million led to a $162,091,208 box office run worldwide, turning it into the highest-grossing Kubrick film.\nReception.\n\"Eyes Wide Shut\" received generally positive reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 75% based on 158 reviews, with an average rating of 7.50/10. The website's critical consensus reads, \"Kubrick's intense study of the human psyche yields an impressive cinematic work.\" Metacritic gives the film a weighted average score of 68 out of 100 based on 34 reviews, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\". Over 50 critics listed the film among the best of 1999. French magazine \"Cahiers du Cinema\" named it the best film of the year in its annual \"top ten\" list.\nIn the \"Chicago Tribune\", Michael Wilmington declared the film a masterpiece, lauding it as \"provocatively conceived, gorgeously shot and masterfully executed ... Kubrick's brilliantly choreographed one-take scenes create a near-hypnotic atmosphere of commingled desire and dread.\" Nathan Rabin of \"The A.V. Club\" was also highly positive, arguing that \"the film's primal, almost religious intensity and power is primarily derived from its multifaceted realization that disobeying the dictates of society and your conscience can be both terrifying and exhilarating. ... The film's depiction of sexual depravity and amorality could easily venture into the realm of camp in the hands of a lesser filmmaker, but Kubrick depicts primal evil in a way that somehow makes it seem both new and deeply terrifying.\"\nCritic Roger Ebert gave the film a positive 3.5/4 stars, writing, \"Kubrick's great achievement in the film is to find and hold an odd, unsettling, sometimes erotic tone for the doctor's strange encounters.\" He praised the individual dream-like atmosphere of the separate scenes, and called the choice of Christmas-themed lighting \"garish, like an urban sideshow\".\nReviewer James Berardinelli stated that it was arguably one of Kubrick's best films. Along with considering Kidman \"consistently excellent\", he wrote that Kubrick \"has something to say about the causes and effects of depersonalized sex\", and praised the work as \"thought-provoking and unsettling\". Writing for \"The New York Times\", reviewer Janet Maslin commented, \"This is a dead-serious film about sexual yearnings, one that flirts with ridicule yet sustains its fundamental eeriness and gravity throughout. The dreamlike intensity of previous Kubrick visions is in full force here.\"\nSome reviewers were unfavorable. One complaint was that the movie's pacing was too slow; while this may have been intended to convey a dream state, critics objected that it made actions and decisions seem laboured. Another complaint was that it did not live up to the expectation of it being a \"sexy film\" which is what it had been marketed as, thus defying audiences' expectations. Many critics, such as Manohla Dargis of \"LA Weekly\" found the prolific orgy scene to be \"banal\" and \"surprisingly tame\". While Kubrick's \"pictorial talents\" were described as \"striking\" by Rod Dreher of the \"New York Post\", the pivotal scene was deemed by Stephen Hunter, writing for \"The Washington Post\", as the \"dullest orgy [he'd] ever seen\". Hunter elaborates on his criticism, and states that \"Kubrick is annoyingly offhand while at the same time grindingly pedantic; plot points are made over and over again, things are explained till the dawn threatens to break in the east, and the movie stumbles along at a glacial pace\". Owen Gleiberman of \"Entertainment Weekly\" complained about the inauthenticity of the New York setting, claiming that the soundstage used for the film's production didn't have \"enough bustle\" to capture the reality of New York. Paul Tatara of \"CNN\" described the film as a \"slow-motion morality tale full of hot female bodies and thoroughly uneventful 'mystery'\", while Andrew Sarris writing for the \"New York Observer\" criticised the film's \"feeble attempts at melodramatic tension and suspense\". David Edelstein of \"Slate\" dismissed it as \"estranged from any period I recognize. Who are these people played by Cruise and Kidman, who act as if no one has ever made a pass at them and are so deeply traumatized by their newfound knowledge of sexual fantasies\u2014the kind that mainstream culture absorbed at least half a century ago? Who are these aristocrats whose limos take them to secret masked orgies in Long Island mansions? Even dream plays need some grounding in the real world.\" J. Hoberman wrote that the film \"feels like a rough draft at best.\"\nLee Siegel from \"Harper's\" felt that most critics responded mainly to the marketing campaign and did not address the film on its own terms. Others felt that American censorship took an esoteric film and made it even harder to understand. In his article \"Grotesque Caricature\", Stefan Mattesich of Loyola Marymount University praises the film's nuanced caricatured elements, and states that the film's negation of conventional narrative elements is what resulted in its subsequent negative reception.\nFor the introduction to Michel Ciment's \"Kubrick: The Definitive Edition\", Martin Scorsese wrote: \"When \"Eyes Wide Shut\" came out a few months after Stanley Kubrick's death in 1999, it was severely misunderstood, which came as no surprise. If you go back and look at the contemporary reactions to any Kubrick picture (except the earliest ones), you'll see that all his films were initially misunderstood. Then, after five or ten years came the realization that \"\" or \"Barry Lyndon\" or \"The Shining\" was like nothing else before or since.\" In 2012, \"Slant Magazine\" ranked the film as the second greatest of the 1990s. The BBC listed it number 61 in its list of the 100 greatest American films of all time.\nHome media.\n\"Eyes Wide Shut\" was first released in VHS and DVD on March 7, 2000. The original DVD release corrects technical gaffes, including a reflected crew member, and altering a piece of Alice Harford's dialogue. Most home videos remove the verse that was claimed to be cited from the sacred Hindu scripture Bhagavad Gita (although it was Pook's reworking of \"Backwards Priests\" as stated above.) In the UK, Warners' 'rated 18' [no video altering] 1999 DVD release was in 4:3 full frame aspect ratio, with a note at the beginning that this was as Kubrick intended to be shown [ratio as shot]. However, the film's length on this UK DVD is only 153 minutes, as opposed to the 159 minutes of other available DVD and Blu-Ray versions. This is due to the transfer being transferred at 25 f.p.s rather than 24 as shot; no actual footage was cut.\nOn October 23, 2007, Warner Home Video released \"Eyes Wide Shut\" in a special edition DVD, plus the HD DVD and Blu-ray Disc formats. This is the first home video release that presents the film in anamorphic 1.78:1 (16:9) format (the film was shown theatrically as soft matted 1.66:1 in Europe and 1.85:1 in the US and Japan). The previous DVD release used a 1.33:1 (4:3) aspect ratio. It is also the first American home video release to feature the uncut version. Although the earliest American DVD of the uncut version states on the cover that it includes both the R-rated and unrated editions, in actuality only the unrated edition is on the DVD.\nControversies.\nDebate over the film's state of completion.\nThough Warner Bros. insisted that Kubrick had turned in his final cut before his death, the film was still in the final stages of post-production, which was therefore completed by the studio in collaboration with Kubrick's estate. Some have argued that the work which remained was minor and exclusively technical in nature, allowing the estate to faithfully complete the film based on the director's notes. However, decisions regarding sound mixing, scoring and color-correction would have necessarily been made without Kubrick's input. Furthermore, Kubrick had a history of continuing to edit his films up until the last minute, and in some cases even after initial public screenings, as had been the case with \"2001: A Space Odyssey\" and \"The Shining\".\nWriting for \"Vanity Fair\", Kubrick collaborator Michael Herr recalled a phone call from the director regarding the cut that would be screened for the Warner Bros. executives four days before his death:\nGarrett Brown, inventor of the Steadicam, has expressed that he considers \"Eyes Wide Shut\" to be an unfinished film:\nNicole Kidman, one of the stars of the film, briefly wrote about the completion of the film and the release of the film being at the same time of John F. Kennedy Jr.'s death from her perspective:\nKubrick's opinion.\nJan Harlan, Kubrick's brother-in-law and executive producer, reported that Kubrick was \"very happy\" with the film and considered it to be his \"greatest contribution to the art of cinema\".\nR. Lee Ermey, an actor in Kubrick's film \"Full Metal Jacket\", stated that Kubrick phoned him two weeks before his death to express his despondency over \"Eyes Wide Shut\". \"He told me it was a piece of shit\", Ermey said in \"Radar\" magazine, \"and that he was disgusted with it and that the critics were going to 'have him for lunch'. He said Cruise and Kidman had their way with him \u2013 exactly the words he used.\"\nAccording to Todd Field, Kubrick's friend and an actor in \"Eyes Wide Shut\", Ermey's claims do not accurately reflect Kubrick's essential attitude. Field's response appeared in an October 18, 2006 interview with Grouch Reviews:\nThe polite thing would be to say 'No comment'. But the truth is that\u00a0 ... let's put it this way, you've never seen two actors more completely subservient and prostrate themselves at the feet of a director. Stanley was absolutely thrilled with the film. He was still working on the film when he died. And he probably died because he finally relaxed. It was one of the happiest weekends of his life, right before he died, after he had shown the first cut to Terry, Tom and Nicole. He would have kept working on it, like he did on all of his films. But I know that from people around him personally, my partner who was his assistant for thirty years. And I thought about R. Lee Ermey for \"In the Bedroom\". And I talked to Stanley a lot about that film, and all I can say is Stanley was adamant that I shouldn't work with him for all kinds of reasons that I won't get into because there is no reason to do that to anyone, even if they are saying slanderous things that I know are completely untrue.\nIn a reddit \"Ask Me Anything\" session, Stanley Kubrick's daughter, Katharina Kubrick, claimed that her father was very proud of the film. She also discredited Ermey's claims, saying to a user who asked about Kubrick's alleged comments, \"[not to] believe that for a second.\"\nStudio censorship and classification.\nCiting contractual obligations to deliver an R rating, Warner Bros. digitally altered the orgy for the film's American release by blocking out graphic sexuality using additional figures to obscure the view in order to avoid an adults-only NC-17 rating that would have limited distribution, as some large American theaters and video store operators banned films with that rating. This alteration antagonized both film critics and cinephiles, who argued that Kubrick had never been shy about ratings (\"A Clockwork Orange\" was originally given an X-rating). The unrated version of \"Eyes Wide Shut\" was released in the United States on October 23, 2007, on DVD, HD DVD and Blu-ray formats.\nRoger Ebert heavily criticized the technique of using digital images to mask the action. In his positive review of the film, he said it \"should not have been done at all\" and it is \"symbolic of the moral hypocrisy of the rating system that it would force a great director to compromise his vision, while by the same process making his adult film more accessible to young viewers.\" Although Ebert has been frequently cited as calling the standard North American R-rated version the \"Austin Powers\" version of \"Eyes Wide Shut\" \u2013 referencing two scenes in \"\" in which, through camera angles and coincidences, full frontal nudity is blocked from view in a comical way \u2013 his review stated that this joke referred to an early rough draft of the altered scene, never publicly released."}
{"id": "9980", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9980", "title": "Extreme unction", "text": ""}
{"id": "9981", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9981", "title": "Extreme Unction", "text": ""}
{"id": "9984", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9984", "title": "Earth Sciences basic topics", "text": ""}
{"id": "9986", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9986", "title": "Outline of education", "text": "The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to education:\nEducation \u2013 in the general sense is any act or experience that has a formative effect on the mind, character, or physical ability of an individual. In its technical sense, education is the process by which society deliberately transmits its accumulated knowledge, skills, and values from one generation to another. Education can also be defined as the process of becoming an educated person.\nHistory of education.\nHistory of education"}
{"id": "9987", "revid": "1023967716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9987", "title": "Outline of engineering", "text": "The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to engineering:\nEngineering is the scientific discipline and profession that applies scientific theories, mathematical methods, and empirical evidence to design, create, and analyze technological solutions cognizant of safety, human factors, physical laws, regulations, practicality, and cost.\nHistory of Engineering.\nHistory of engineering"}
{"id": "9988", "revid": "1012623085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9988", "title": "Outline of entertainment", "text": "The following outline provides an overview of and topical guide to entertainment and the entertainment industry:\nEntertainment is any activity which provides a diversion or permits people to amuse themselves in their leisure time, and may also provide fun, enjoyment, and laughter. People may create their own entertainment, such as when they spontaneously invent a game; participate actively in an activity they find entertaining, such as when they play sport as a hobby; or consume an entertainment product passively, such as when they attend a performance.\nThe entertainment industry (informally known as show business or show biz) is part of the tertiary sector of the economy and includes many sub-industries devoted to entertainment. However, the term is often used in the mass media to describe the mass media companies that control the distribution and manufacture of mass media entertainment. In the popular parlance, the term \"show biz\" in particular connotes the commercially popular performing arts, especially musical theatre, vaudeville, comedy, film, fun, and music. It applies to every aspect of entertainment including cinema, television, radio, theatre, and music."}
{"id": "9992", "revid": "41385307", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9992", "title": "List of contemporary ethnic groups", "text": "The following is a list of contemporary ethnic groups. There has been constant debate over the classification of ethnic groups. Membership of an ethnic group tends to be associated with shared ancestry, history, homeland, language or dialect and cultural heritage; where the term \"culture\" specifically includes aspects such as religion, mythology and ritual, cuisine, dressing (clothing) style and other factors.\nBy the nature of the concept, ethnic groups tend to be divided into subgroups, which may themselves be or not be identified as independent ethnic groups depending on the source consulted.\nEthnic groups.\nThe groups commonly identified as \"ethnic groups\" (as opposed to ethno-linguistic phyla, national groups, racial groups or similar). Smaller groups (i.e. less than 100,000) are often indigenous peoples and are not usually listed."}
{"id": "9993", "revid": "4904587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9993", "title": "Edda", "text": "\"Edda\" (; Old Norse \"Edda\", plural \"Eddur\") is an Old Norse term that has been attributed by modern scholars to the collective of two Medieval Icelandic literary works: what is now known as the \"Prose Edda\" and an older collection of poems without an original title now known as the \"Poetic Edda\". The term historically referred only to the \"Prose Edda\", but this since has fallen out of use because of the confusion with the other work. Both works were written down in Iceland during the 13th century in Icelandic, although they contain material from earlier traditional sources, reaching into the Viking Age. The books are the main sources of medieval skaldic tradition in Iceland and Norse mythology.\nEtymology.\nThere are several hypotheses concerning the origins of the word \"edda\". One hypothesis holds that it is identical to a word that means \"great-grandmother\" appearing in the Eddic poem \"R\u00edgs\u00feula.\" Another hypothesis holds that \"edda\" derives from Old Norse \"\u00f3\u00f0r\", \"poetry\". A third, proposed in 1895 by Eir\u00edkr Magn\u00fasson, is that it derives from the Icelandic place name \"Oddi\", site of the church and school where students, including Snorri Sturluson, were educated. A fourth hypothesis\u2014the derivation of the word \"Edda\" as the name of Snorri Sturluson's treatise on poetry from the Latin \"edo\", \"I compose (poetry)\", by analogy with \"kredda\", \"superstition\", from Latin \"credo\", \"creed\"\u2014is now widely accepted, though this acceptance may stem from its agreement with modern usage rather than historical accuracy. The fifth hypothesis is based on the fact that there was a fashion of giving Icelandic manuscripts bird titles. (Such are the legal codes \"Gr\u00e1g\u00e1s\" \u2018grey goose\u2019, \"Gullfj\u01eb\u00f0r\" \u2018gold feather (quill?)\u2019, and \"Hryggjar-stykki\" \u2018a kind of duck\u2019.) Perhaps Edda was also one of such titles: \"Edda\" would be an appropriate \u2018pet name\u2019 of \"\u00e6\u00f0r\" (pronounced as [\u00e6:\u00f0r] f.) \u2018eider duck\u2019. Then, \"Edda\" meant \u2018little eider duck\u2019 (an analog of \"Gr\u00e1g\u00e1s\").\nThe \"Poetic Edda\".\nThe \"Poetic Edda\", also known as \"S\u00e6mundar Edda\" or the \"Elder Edda\", is a collection of Old Norse poems from the Icelandic medieval manuscript Codex Regius (\"Royal Book\"). Along with the \"Prose Edda\", the \"Poetic Edda\" is the most expansive source on Norse mythology. The first part of the Codex Regius preserves poems that narrate the creation and foretold destruction and rebirth of the Old Norse mythological world as well as individual myths about gods concerning Norse deities. The poems in the second part narrate legends about Norse heroes and heroines, such as Sigurd, Brynhildr and Gunnar.\nThe Codex Regius was written in the 13th century, but nothing is known of its whereabouts until 1643, when it came into the possession of Brynj\u00f3lfur Sveinsson, then the Church of Iceland's Bishop of Sk\u00e1lholt. At that time, versions of the \"Prose Edda\" were well known in Iceland, but scholars speculated that there once was another \"Edda\"\u2014an \"Elder Edda\"\u2014which contained the pagan poems Snorri quotes in his book. When the Codex Regius was discovered, it seemed that this speculation had proven correct. Brynj\u00f3lfur attributed the manuscript to S\u00e6mundr the Learned, a larger-than-life 12th century Icelandic priest. While this attribution is rejected by modern scholars, the name \"S\u00e6mundar Edda\" is still sometimes encountered.\nBishop Brynj\u00f3lfur sent the Codex Regius as a present to King Christian IV of Denmark, hence the name \"Codex Regius\". For centuries it was stored in the Royal Library in Copenhagen but in 1971 it was returned to Iceland.\nThe \"Prose Edda\".\nThe \"Prose Edda\", sometimes referred to as the \"Younger Edda\" or \"Snorri's Edda\", is an Icelandic manual of poetics which also contains many mythological stories. Its purpose was to enable Icelandic poets and readers to understand the subtleties of alliterative verse, and to grasp the mythological allusions behind the many \"kennings\" that were used in skaldic poetry.\nIt was written by the Icelandic scholar and historian Snorri Sturluson around 1220. It survives in four known manuscripts and three fragments, written down from about 1300 to about 1600.\nThe \"Prose Edda\" consists of a Prologue and three separate books: \"Gylfaginning\", concerning the creation and foretold destruction and rebirth of the Norse mythical world; \"Sk\u00e1ldskaparm\u00e1l\", a dialogue between \u00c6gir, a Norse god connected with the sea, and Bragi, the skaldic god of poetry; and \"H\u00e1ttatal\", a demonstration of verse forms used in Norse mythology."}
{"id": "9994", "revid": "11677590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9994", "title": "Ephemeris time", "text": "The term ephemeris time (often abbreviated ET) can in principle refer to time in association with any ephemeris (itinerary of the trajectory of an astronomical object). In practice it has been used more specifically to refer to:\nMost of the following sections relate to the ephemeris time of the 1952 standard.\nAn impression has sometimes arisen that ephemeris time was in use from 1900: this probably arose because ET, though proposed and adopted in the period 1948\u20131952, was defined in detail using formulae that made retrospective use of the epoch date of 1900 January 0 and of Newcomb's \"Tables of the Sun\".\nThe ephemeris time of the 1952 standard leaves a continuing legacy, through its ephemeris second which became closely duplicated in the length of the current standard SI second (see below: Redefinition of the second).\nHistory (1952 standard).\nEphemeris time (ET), adopted as standard in 1952, was originally designed as an approach to a uniform time scale, to be freed from the effects of irregularity in the rotation of the earth, \"for the convenience of astronomers and other scientists\", for example for use in ephemerides of the Sun (as observed from the Earth), the Moon, and the planets. It was proposed in 1948 by G M Clemence.\nFrom the time of John Flamsteed (1646\u20131719) it had been believed that the Earth's daily rotation was uniform. But in the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, with increasing precision of astronomical measurements, it began to be suspected, and was eventually established, that the rotation of the Earth (\"i.e.\" the length of the day) showed irregularities on short time scales, and was slowing down on longer time scales. The evidence was compiled by W de Sitter (1927) who wrote \"If we accept this hypothesis, then the 'astronomical time', given by the earth's rotation, and used in all practical astronomical computations, differs from the 'uniform' or 'Newtonian' time, which is defined as the independent variable of the equations of celestial mechanics\". De Sitter offered a correction to be applied to the mean solar time given by the Earth's rotation to get uniform time.\nOther astronomers of the period also made suggestions for obtaining uniform time, including A Danjon (1929), who suggested in effect that observed positions of the Moon, Sun and planets, when compared with their well-established gravitational ephemerides, could better and more uniformly define and determine time.\nThus the aim developed, to provide a new time scale for astronomical and scientific purposes, to avoid the unpredictable irregularities of the mean solar time scale, and to replace for these purposes Universal Time (UT) and any other time scale based on the rotation of the Earth around its axis, such as sidereal time.\nThe American astronomer G M Clemence (1948) made a detailed proposal of this type based on the results of the English Astronomer Royal H Spencer Jones (1939). Clemence (1948) made it clear that his proposal was intended \"for the convenience of astronomers and other scientists only\" and that it was \"logical to continue the use of mean solar time for civil purposes\".\nDe Sitter and Clemence both referred to the proposal as 'Newtonian' or 'uniform' time. D Brouwer suggested the name 'ephemeris time'.\nFollowing this, an astronomical conference held in Paris in 1950 recommended \"that in all cases where the mean solar second is unsatisfactory as a unit of time by reason of its variability, the unit adopted should be the sidereal year at 1900.0, that the time reckoned in this unit be designated \"ephemeris time\"\", and gave Clemence's formula (see Definition of ephemeris time (1952)) for translating mean solar time to ephemeris time.\nThe International Astronomical Union approved this recommendation at its 1952 general assembly. Practical introduction took some time (see Use of ephemeris time in official almanacs and ephemerides); ephemeris time (ET) remained a standard until superseded in the 1970s by further time scales (see Revision).\nDuring the currency of ephemeris time as a standard, the details were revised a little. The unit was redefined in terms of the tropical year at 1900.0 instead of the sidereal year; and the standard second was defined first as 1/31556925.975 of the tropical year at 1900.0, and then as the slightly modified fraction 1/31556925.9747 instead, finally being redefined in 1967/8 in terms of the cesium atomic clock standard (see below).\nAlthough ET is no longer directly in use, it leaves a continuing legacy. Its successor time scales, such as TDT, as well as the atomic time scale IAT (TAI), were designed with a relationship that \"provides continuity with ephemeris time\". ET was used for the calibration of atomic clocks in the 1950s. Close equality between the ET second with the later SI second (as defined with reference to the cesium atomic clock) has been verified to within 1 part in 1010.\nIn this way, decisions made by the original designers of ephemeris time influenced the length of today's standard SI second, and in turn, this has a continuing influence on the number of leap seconds which have been needed for insertion into current broadcast time scales, to keep them approximately in step with mean solar time.\nDefinition (1952).\nEphemeris time was defined in principle by the orbital motion of the Earth around the Sun, (but its practical implementation was usually achieved in another way, see below).\nIts detailed definition depended on Simon Newcomb's \"Tables of the Sun\" (1895), interpreted in a new way to accommodate certain observed discrepancies:\nIn the introduction to \"Tables of the Sun\" the basis of the tables (p.\u00a09) includes a formula for the Sun's mean longitude, at a time indicated by interval T (in Julian centuries of 36525 mean solar days) reckoned from Greenwich Mean Noon on 0 January 1900:\nSpencer Jones' work of 1939 showed that the positions of the Sun actually observed, when compared with those obtained from Newcomb's formula, show the need for the following correction to the formula to represent the observations:\n(where \"the times of observation are in Universal time, not corrected to Newtonian time\", and 0.0748B represents an irregular fluctuation calculated from lunar observations).\nThus a conventionally corrected form of Newcomb's formula, to incorporate the corrections on the basis of mean solar time, would be the sum of the two preceding expressions:\nClemence's 1948 proposal did not adopt a correction of this kind in terms of mean solar time: instead, the same numbers were used as in Newcomb's original uncorrected formula (1), but now in a reverse sense, to define the time and time scale implicitly, based on the real position of the Sun:\nwhere the time variable, here represented as E, now represents time in ephemeris centuries of 36525 ephemeris days of 86400 ephemeris seconds each. The 1961 official reference put it this way: \"The origin and rate of ephemeris time are defined to make the Sun's mean longitude agree with Newcomb's expression\"\nFrom the comparison of formulae (2) and (3), both of which express the same real solar motion in the same real time but on different time scales, Clemence arrived at an explicit expression, estimating the difference in seconds of time between ephemeris time and mean solar time, in the sense (ET-UT):\nClemence's formula, now superseded by more modern estimations, was included in the original conference decision on ephemeris time. In view of the fluctuation term, practical determination of the difference between ephemeris time and UT depended on observation. Inspection of the formulae above shows that the (ideally constant) unit of ephemeris time such as the ephemeris second has been for the whole of the twentieth century very slightly shorter than the corresponding (but not precisely constant) unit of mean solar time (which besides its irregular fluctuations tends gradually to increase), consistently also with the modern results of Morrison and Stephenson (see article \u0394T).\nImplementations.\nSecondary realizations by lunar observations.\nAlthough ephemeris time was defined in principle by the orbital motion of the Earth around the Sun, it was usually measured in practice by the orbital motion of the Moon around the Earth. These measurements can be considered as secondary realizations (in a metrological sense) of the primary definition of ET in terms of the solar motion, after a calibration of the mean motion of the Moon with respect to the mean motion of the Sun.\nReasons for the use of lunar measurements were practically based: the Moon moves against the background of stars about 13 times as fast as the Sun's corresponding rate of motion, and the accuracy of time determinations from lunar measurements is correspondingly greater.\nWhen ephemeris time was first adopted, time scales were still based on astronomical observation, as they always had been. The accuracy was limited by the accuracy of optical observation, and corrections of clocks and time signals were published in arrear.\nSecondary realizations by atomic clocks.\nA few years later, with the invention of the cesium atomic clock, an alternative offered itself. Increasingly, after the calibration in 1958 of the cesium atomic clock by reference to ephemeris time, cesium atomic clocks running on the basis of ephemeris seconds began to be used and kept in step with ephemeris time. The atomic clocks offered a further secondary realization of ET, on a quasi-real time basis that soon proved to be more useful than the primary ET standard: not only more convenient, but also more precisely uniform than the primary standard itself. Such secondary realizations were used and described as 'ET', with an awareness that the time scales based on the atomic clocks were not identical to that defined by the primary ephemeris time standard, but rather, an improvement over it on account of their closer approximation to uniformity. The atomic clocks gave rise to the atomic time scale, and to what was first called Terrestrial Dynamical Time and is now Terrestrial Time, defined to provide continuity with ET.\nThe availability of atomic clocks, together with the increasing accuracy of astronomical observations (which meant that relativistic corrections were at least in the foreseeable future no longer going to be small enough to be neglected), led to the eventual replacement of the ephemeris time standard by more refined time scales including terrestrial time and barycentric dynamical time, to which ET can be seen as an approximation.\nRevision of time scales.\nIn 1976, the IAU resolved that the theoretical basis for its current (1952) standard of Ephemeris Time was non-relativistic, and that therefore, beginning in 1984, Ephemeris Time would be replaced by two relativistic timescales intended to constitute dynamical timescales: Terrestrial Dynamical Time (TDT) and Barycentric Dynamical Time (TDB). Difficulties were recognized, which led to these being in turn superseded in the 1990s by time scales Terrestrial Time (TT), Geocentric Coordinate Time GCT (TCG) and Barycentric Coordinate Time BCT (TCB).\nJPL ephemeris time argument Teph.\nHigh-precision ephemerides of sun, moon and planets were developed and calculated at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) over a long period, and the latest available were adopted for the ephemerides in the Astronomical Almanac starting in 1984. Although not an IAU standard, the ephemeris time argument Teph has been in use at that institution since the 1960s. The time scale represented by Teph has been characterized as a relativistic coordinate time that differs from Terrestrial Time only by small periodic terms with an amplitude not exceeding 2 milliseconds of time: it is linearly related to, but distinct (by an offset and constant rate which is of the order of 0.5\u00a0s/a) from the TCB time scale adopted in 1991 as a standard by the IAU. Thus for clocks on or near the geoid, Teph (within 2 milliseconds), but not so closely TCB, can be used as approximations to Terrestrial Time, and via the standard ephemerides Teph is in widespread use.\nPartly in acknowledgement of the widespread use of Teph via the JPL ephemerides, IAU resolution 3 of 2006 (re-)defined Barycentric Dynamical Time (TDB) as a current standard. As re-defined in 2006, TDB is a linear transformation of TCB. The same IAU resolution also stated (in note 4) that the \"independent time argument of the JPL ephemeris DE405, which is called Teph\" (here the IAU source cites), \"is for practical purposes the same as TDB defined in this Resolution\". Thus the new TDB, like Teph, is essentially a more refined continuation of the older ephemeris time ET and (apart from the periodic fluctuations) has the same mean rate as that established for ET in the 1950s.\nUse in official almanacs and ephemerides.\nEphemeris time based on the standard adopted in 1952 was introduced into the Astronomical Ephemeris (UK) and the American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac, replacing UT in the main ephemerides in the issues for 1960 and after. (But the ephemerides in the Nautical Almanac, by then a separate publication for the use of navigators, continued to be expressed in terms of UT.) The ephemerides continued on this basis through 1983 (with some changes due to adoption of improved values of astronomical constants), after which, for 1984 onwards, they adopted the JPL ephemerides.\nPrevious to the 1960 change, the 'Improved Lunar Ephemeris' had already been made available in terms of ephemeris time for the years 1952\u20141959 (computed by W J Eckert from Brown's theory with modifications recommended by Clemence (1948)).\nRedefinition of the second.\nSuccessive definitions of the unit of ephemeris time are mentioned above (History). The value adopted for the 1956/1960 standard second:\nwas obtained from the linear time-coefficient in Newcomb's expression for the solar mean longitude (above), taken and applied with the same meaning for the time as in formula (3) above. The relation with Newcomb's coefficient can be seen from:\nCaesium atomic clocks became operational in 1955, and quickly confirmed the evidence that the rotation of the earth fluctuated randomly. This confirmed the unsuitability of the mean solar second of Universal Time as a measure of time interval for the most precise purposes. After three years of comparisons with lunar observations, Markowitz et al. (1958) determined that the ephemeris second corresponded to 9 192 631 770 \u00b1 20 cycles of the chosen cesium resonance.\nFollowing this, in 1967/68, the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) replaced the definition of the SI second by the following:\nThe second is the duration of 9\u2009192\u2009631\u2009770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state of the caesium 133 atom.\nAlthough this is an independent definition that does not refer to the older basis of ephemeris time, it uses the same quantity as the value of the ephemeris second measured by the cesium clock in 1958. This SI second referred to atomic time was later verified by Markowitz (1988) to be in agreement, within 1 part in 1010, with the second of ephemeris time as determined from lunar observations.\nFor practical purposes the length of the ephemeris second can be taken as equal to the length of the second of Barycentric Dynamical Time (TDB) or Terrestrial Time (TT) or its predecessor TDT.\nThe difference between ET and UT is called \u0394T; it changes irregularly, but the long-term trend is parabolic, decreasing from ancient times until the nineteenth century, and increasing since then at a rate corresponding to an increase in the solar day length of 1.7\u00a0ms per century (see leap seconds).\nInternational Atomic Time (TAI) was set equal to UT2 at 1 January 1958 0:00:00. At that time, \u0394T was already about 32.18 seconds. The difference between Terrestrial Time (TT) (the successor to ephemeris time) and atomic time was later defined as follows:\nThis difference may be assumed constant\u2014the rates of TT and TAI are designed to be identical."}
{"id": "9995", "revid": "34532625", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9995", "title": "EastEnders", "text": "EastEnders is a British soap opera created by Julia Smith and Tony Holland which has been broadcast on BBC One since 1985. Set in Albert Square in the East End of London in the fictional borough of Walford, the programme follows the stories of local residents and their families as they go about their daily lives. Initially there were two 30-minute episodes per week, later increasing to three, but since 2001, episodes have been broadcast on every weekday except Wednesday (outside of special occasions). The three-month suspension of production in 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, led to broadcasts of the show being reduced to two 30-minute episodes per week, and eventually, the show going on a transmission break. Restrictions to filming resulted in the programme returning to transmission, with four 20-minute episodes per week resuming on 7 September 2020.\nWithin eight months of the show's original launch, it had reached the number one spot in BARB's TV ratings and has consistently remained among the top rated series in Britain. In 2013, the average audience share for an episode was around 30 per cent. Today, \"EastEnders\" remains a significant programme in terms of the BBC's success and audience share. It has also been important in the history of British television drama, tackling many subjects that are considered to be controversial or taboo in British culture, and portraying a social life previously unseen on UK mainstream television.\n, \"EastEnders\" has won ten BAFTA Awards and the \"Inside Soap\" Award for Best Soap for 14 years running (from 1997 to 2012), as well as twelve National Television Awards for Most Popular Serial Drama and 11 awards for Best British Soap at The British Soap Awards. It has also won 13 TV Quick and TV Choice Awards for Best Soap, six TRIC Awards for Soap of The Year, four Royal Television Society Awards for Best Continuing Drama and has been inducted into the Rose d'Or Hall of Fame.\nHistory.\nConception and preparations for broadcast.\nIn March 1983, under two years before \"EastEnders\" first episode was broadcast, the show was a vague idea in the mind of a handful of BBC executives, who decided that what BBC1 needed was a popular bi-weekly drama series that would attract the kind of mass audiences that ITV was getting with \"Coronation Street\". The first people to whom David Reid, then head of series and serials, turned were Julia Smith and Tony Holland, a well established producer/script editor team who had first worked together on \"Z-Cars\". The outline that Reid presented was vague: two episodes a week, 52 weeks a year. After the concept was put to them on 14 March 1983, Smith and Holland then went about putting their ideas down on paper; they decided it would be set in the East End of London. Granada Television gave Smith unrestricted access to the \"Coronation Street\" production for a month so that she could get a sense how a continuing drama was produced.\nThere was anxiety at first that the viewing public would not accept a new soap set in the south of England, though research commissioned by lead figures in the BBC revealed that southerners would accept a northern soap, northerners would accept a southern soap and those from the Midlands, as Julia Smith herself pointed out, did not mind where it was set as long as it was somewhere else. This was the beginning of a close and continuing association between \"EastEnders\" and audience research, which, though commonplace today, was something of a revolution in practice.\nThe show's creators were both Londoners, but when they researched Victorian squares, they found massive changes in areas they thought they knew well. However, delving further into the East End of London, they found exactly what they had been searching for: a real East End spirit\u2014an inward-looking quality, a distrust of strangers and authority figures, a sense of territory and community that the creators summed up as \"Hurt one of us and you hurt us all\".\nWhen developing \"EastEnders\", both Smith and Holland looked at influential models like \"Coronation Street\", but they found that it offered a rather outdated and nostalgic view of working-class life. Only after \"EastEnders\" began, and featured the characters of Tony Carpenter and Kelvin Carpenter, did \"Coronation Street\" start to feature black characters, for example. They came to the conclusion that \"Coronation Street\" had grown old with its audience, and that \"EastEnders\" would have to attract a younger, more socially extensive audience, ensuring that it had the longevity to retain it for many years thereafter. They also looked at \"Brookside\" but found there was a lack of central meeting points for the characters, making it difficult for the writers to intertwine different storylines, so \"EastEnders\" was set in Albert Square.\nA previous UK soap set in an East End market was ATV's \"Market in Honey Lane\" between 1967 and 1969. However this show, which graduated from one showing a week to two in three separate series (the latter series being shown in different time slots across the ITV network) was very different in style and approach from \"EastEnders\". The British Film Institute described \"Market in Honey Lane\" thus: \"It was not an earth-shaking programme, and certainly not pioneering in any revolutionary ideas in technique and production, but simply proposed itself to the casual viewer as a mildly pleasant affair.\" \"EastEnders\", while also featuring an East End street market, would be very different in its approach and impact.\nThe target launch date was originally January 1985. Smith and Holland had eleven months in which to write, cast and shoot the whole thing. However, in February 1984, they did not even have a title or a place to film. Both Smith and Holland were unhappy about the January 1985 launch date, favouring November or even September 1984 when seasonal audiences would be higher, but the BBC stayed firm, and Smith and Holland had to concede that, with the massive task of getting the Elstree Studios operational, January was the most realistic date. However, this was later to be changed to February.\nThe project had a number of working titles\u2014\"Square Dance\", \"Round the Square\", \"Round the Houses\", \"London Pride\" and \"East 8\". It was the latter that stuck (E8 is the postcode for Hackney) in the early months of creative process. However, the show was renamed after many casting agents mistakenly thought the show was to be called \"Estate\", and the fictional postcode E20 was created, instead of using E8. Julia Smith came up with the name \"Eastenders\" after she and Holland had spent months telephoning theatrical agents and asking \"Do you have any real East Enders on your books?\" However, Smith thought \"Eastenders\" \"looked ugly written down\" and was \"hard to say\", so decided to capitalise the second 'e'.\nInitial character creation and casting.\nAfter they decided on the filming location of BBC Elstree Centre in Hertfordshire, Smith and Holland set about creating the 23 characters needed, in just 14 days. They took a holiday in Playa de los Pocillos, Lanzarote, and started to create the characters. Holland created the Beale and Fowler family, drawing on his own background. His mother, Ethel Holland, was one of four sisters raised in Walthamstow. Her eldest sister, Lou, had married a man named Albert Beale and had two children, named Peter and Pauline. These family members were the basis for Lou Beale, Pete Beale and Pauline Fowler. Holland also created Pauline's unemployed husband Arthur Fowler, their children Mark and Michelle, Pete's wife Kathy and their son Ian. Smith used her personal memories of East End residents she met when researching Victorian squares. Ethel Skinner was based on an old woman she met in a pub, with ill-fitting false teeth, and a \"face to rival a neon sign\", holding a Yorkshire Terrier in one hand and a pint of Guinness in the other.\nOther characters created included Jewish doctor Harold Legg, the Anglo-Cypriot Osman family (Ali, Sue and baby Hassan), black father and son Tony and Kelvin Carpenter, single mother Mary Smith and Bangladeshi couple Saeed and Naima Jeffery. Jack, Pearl and Tracey Watts were created to bring \"flash, trash, and melodrama\" to the Square (they were later renamed Den, Angie and Sharon). The characters of Andy O'Brien and Debbie Wilkins were created to show a modern couple with outwardly mobile pretensions, and Lofty Holloway to show an outsider; someone who did not fit in with other residents. It was decided that he would be a former soldier, as Holland's personal experiences of ex-soldiers were that they had trouble fitting into society after being in the army. When they compared the characters they had created, Smith and Holland realised they had created a cross-section of East End residents. The Beale and Fowler family represented the old families of the East End, who had always been there. The Osmans, Jefferys and Carpenters represented the more modern diverse ethnic community of the East End. Debbie, Andy and Mary represented more modern-day individuals.\nOnce they had decided on their 23 characters, they returned to London for a meeting with the BBC. Everyone agreed that \"EastEnders\" would be tough, violent on occasion, funny and sharp\u2014set in Margaret Thatcher's Britain\u2014and it would start with a bang (namely the death of Reg Cox). They decided that none of their existing characters were wicked enough to have killed Reg, so a 24th character, Nick Cotton was added to the line-up. He was a racist thug, who often tried to lead other young characters astray. When all the characters had been created, Smith and Holland set about casting the actors, which also involved the input of lead director Matthew Robinson, who supervised auditions with the other directors at the outset, Vivienne Cozens and Peter Edwards.\nFinal preparations.\nThrough the next few months, the set was growing rapidly at Elstree, and a composer and designer had been commissioned to create the title sequence. Simon May wrote the theme music and Alan Jeapes created the visuals. The visual images were taken from an aircraft flying over the East End of London at 1000 feet. Approximately 800 photographs were taken and pieced together to create one big image. The credits were later updated when the Millennium Dome was built.\nThe launch was delayed until February 1985 due to a delay in the chat show \"Wogan\", that was to be a part of the major revamp in BBC1's schedules. Smith was uneasy about the late start as \"EastEnders\" no longer had the winter months to build up a loyal following before the summer ratings lull. The press were invited to Elstree to meet the cast and see the lot, and stories immediately started circulating about the show, about a rivalry with ITV (who were launching their own market-based soap, \"Albion Market\") and about the private lives of the cast. Anticipation and rumour grew in equal measure until the first transmission at 7p.m. on 19 February 1985. Both Holland and Smith could not watch; they both instead returned to the place where it all began, Albertine's Wine Bar on Wood Lane. The next day, viewing figures were confirmed at 17million. The reviews were largely favourable, although, after three weeks on air, BBC1's early evening share had returned to the pre-\"EastEnders\" figure of seven million, though \"EastEnders\" then climbed to highs of up to 23million later on in the year. Following the launch, both group discussions and telephone surveys were conducted to test audience reaction to early episodes. Detailed reactions were taken after six months and since then regular monitoring was conducted.\n1980s broadcast history.\nPress coverage of \"EastEnders\", which was already intense, went into overdrive once the show was broadcast. With public interest so high, the media began investigating the private lives of the show's popular stars. Within days, a scandalous headline appeared \u2013 \"EASTENDERS STAR IS A KILLER\". This referred to Leslie Grantham, and his prison sentence for the murder of a taxi driver in an attempted robbery nearly 20 years earlier. This shocking tell-all style set the tone for relations between Albert Square and the press for the next 20 years.\nThe show's first episode attracted some 17million viewers, and it continued to attract high viewing figures from then on. By Christmas 1985, the tabloids could not get enough of the soap. 'Exclusives' about \"EastEnders\" storylines and the actors on the show became a staple of tabloid buyers\u2019 daily reading.\nWriter Colin Brake suggested that 1989 was a year of big change for \"EastEnders\", both behind the cameras and in front of them. Original production designer, Keith Harris, left the show, and Holland and Smith both decided that the time had come to move on too; their final contribution coinciding with the exit of one of \"EastEnders\"' most successful characters, Den Watts (Leslie Grantham). Producer Mike Gibbon was given the task of running the show and he enlisted the most experienced writers to take over the storylining of the programme, including Charlie Humphreys, Jane Hollowood and Tony McHale.\nAccording to Brake, the departure of two of the soap's most popular characters, Den and Angie Watts (Anita Dobson), left a void in the programme, which needed to be filled. In addition, several other long-running characters left the show that year including Sue and Ali Osman (Sandy Ratcliff and Nejdet Salih) and their family; Donna Ludlow (Matilda Ziegler); Carmel Jackson (Judith Jacob) and Colin Russell (Michael Cashman). Brake indicated that the production team decided that 1989 was to be a year of change in Walford, commenting, \"it was almost as if Walford itself was making a fresh start\".\nBy the end of 1989 \"EastEnders\" had acquired a new executive producer, Michael Ferguson, who had previously been a successful producer on ITV's \"The Bill\". Brake suggested that Ferguson was responsible for bringing in a new sense of vitality and creating a programme that was more in touch with the real world than it had been over the previous year.\nChanges in the 1990s.\nA new era began in 1990 with the introduction of Phil Mitchell (Steve McFadden) and Grant Mitchell (Ross Kemp)\u2014the Mitchell brothers\u2014successful characters who would go on to dominate the soap thereafter. As the new production team cleared the way for new characters and a new direction, all of the characters introduced under Gibbon were axed from the show at the start of the year. Ferguson introduced other characters and was responsible for storylines including HIV, Alzheimer's disease and murder. After a successful revamp of the soap, Ferguson decided to leave \"EastEnders\" in July 1991. Ferguson was succeeded by both Leonard Lewis and Helen Greaves who initially shared the role as Executive Producer for \"EastEnders\". Lewis and Greaves formulated a new regime for \"EastEnders\", giving the writers of the serial more authority in storyline progression, with the script department providing \"guidance rather than prescriptive episode storylines\". By the end of 1992, Greaves left and Lewis became executive and series producer. He left \"EastEnders\" in 1994 after the BBC controllers demanded an extra episode a week, taking its weekly airtime from 60 to 90 minutes. Lewis felt that producing an hour of \"reasonable quality drama\" a week was the maximum that any broadcasting system could generate without loss of integrity. Having set up the transition to the new schedule, the first trio of episodes\u2014dubbed The Vic siege\u2014marked Lewis's departure from the programme. Barbara Emile then became the Executive Producer of \"EastEnders\", remaining with \"EastEnders\" until early 1995. She was succeeded by Corinne Hollingworth.\nHollingworth's contributions to the soap were awarded in 1997 when \"EastEnders\" won the BAFTA for Best Drama Series. Hollingworth shared the award with the next Executive Producer, Jane Harris. Harris was responsible for the critically panned Ireland episodes and Cindy Beale's attempted assassination of Ian Beale, which brought in an audience of 23 million in 1996, roughly four million more than \"Coronation Street\". In 1998 Matthew Robinson was appointed as the Executive Producer of \"EastEnders\". During his reign, \"EastEnders\" won the BAFTA for \"Best Soap\" in consecutive years 1999 and 2000 and many other awards. Robinson also earned tabloid soubriquet \"Axeman of Albert Square\" after sacking a large number of characters in one hit, and several more thereafter. In their place, Robinson introduced new long-running characters including Melanie Healy, Jamie Mitchell, Lisa Shaw, Steve Owen and Billy Mitchell.\n2000s.\nJohn Yorke became the Executive Producer of \"EastEnders\" in 2000. Yorke was given the task of introducing the soap's fourth weekly episode. He axed the majority of the Di Marco family and helped introduce popular characters such as the Slater family. As what Mal Young described as \"two of \"EastEnders\"' most successful years\", Yorke was responsible for highly rated storylines such as \"Who Shot Phil?\", Ethel Skinner's death, Jim Branning and Dot Cotton's marriage, Trevor Morgan's domestic abuse of his wife Little Mo Morgan, and Kat Slater's revelation to her daughter Zoe Slater that she was her mother.\nIn 2002, Louise Berridge succeeded Yorke as the Executive Producer. During her time at \"EastEnders\", Berridge introduced popular characters such as Alfie Moon, Dennis Rickman, Chrissie Watts, Jane Beale, Stacey Slater and the critically panned Indian Ferreira family.\nBerridge was responsible for some ratings success stories, such as Alfie and Kat Slater's relationship, Janine Butcher getting her comeuppance, Trevor Morgan and Jamie Mitchell's death storylines and the return of one of the greatest soap icons, Den Watts, who had been presumed dead for 14 years. His return in late 2003 was watched by over 16 million viewers, putting \"EastEnders\" back at number one in the rating war with the \"Coronation Street\". However, other storylines, such as one about a kidney transplant involving the Ferreiras, were not well received, and although Den Watts's return proved to be a ratings success, the British press branded the plot unrealistic and felt that it questioned the show's credibility. A severe press backlash followed after Den's actor, Leslie Grantham, was outed in an internet sex scandal, which coincided with a swift decline in viewer ratings. The scandal led to Grantham's departure from the soap, but the occasion was used to mark the 20th anniversary of \"EastEnders\", with an episode showing Den's murder at the Queen Vic pub.\nOn 21 September 2004, Berridge quit as executive producer of \"EastEnders\" following continued criticism of the show. Kathleen Hutchison was swiftly appointed as the Executive Producer of \"EastEnders\", and was tasked with quickly turning the fortunes of the soap. During her time at the soap Hutchison axed multiple characters, and reportedly ordered the rewriting of numerous scripts. Newspapers reported on employee dissatisfaction with Hutchison's tenure at \"EastEnders\". In January 2005, Hutchison left the soap and John Yorke (who by this time, was the BBC Controller of Continuing Drama Series) took total control of the show himself and became acting Executive Producer for a short period, before appointing Kate Harwood to the role. Harwood stayed at \"EastEnders\" for 20 months before being promoted by the BBC. The highly anticipated return of Ross Kemp as Grant Mitchell in October 2005 proved to be a sudden major ratings success, with the first two episodes consolidating to ratings of 13.21 to 13.34\u00a0million viewers. On Friday 11 November 2005, \"EastEnders\" was the first British drama to feature a two-minute silence. This episode later went on to win the British Soap Award for 'Best Single Episode'. In October 2006, Diederick Santer took over as Executive Producer of \"EastEnders\". He introduced several characters to the show, including ethnic minority and homosexual characters to make the show 'feel more 21st Century'. Santer also reintroduced past and popular characters to the programme.\nOn 2 March 2007, BBC signed a deal with Google to put videos on YouTube. A behind the scenes video of \"EastEnders\", hosted by Matt Di Angelo, who played Deano Wicks on the show, was put on the site the same day, and was followed by another on 6 March 2007. In April 2007, \"EastEnders\" became available to view on mobile phones, via 3G technology, for 3, Vodafone and Orange customers. On 21 April 2007, the BBC launched a new advertising campaign using the slogan \"There's more to \"EastEnders\"\". The first television advert showed Dot Branning with a refugee baby, Tomas, whom she took in under the pretence of being her grandson. The second and third featured Stacey Slater and Dawn Swann, respectively. There have also been adverts in magazines and on radio.\nIn 2009, producers introduced a limit on the number of speaking parts in each episode due to budget cuts, with an average of 16 characters per episode. The decision was criticised by Martin McGrath of Equity, who said: \"Trying to produce quality TV on the cheap is doomed to fail.\" The BBC responded by saying they had been working that way for some time and it had not affected the quality of the show.\n2010s.\nFrom 4 February 2010, CGI was used in the show for the first time, with the addition of computer-generated trains.\n\"EastEnders\" celebrated its 25th anniversary on 19 February 2010. Santer came up with several plans to mark the occasion, including the show's first episode to be broadcast live, the second wedding between Ricky Butcher and Bianca Jackson and the return of Bianca's relatives, mother Carol Jackson, and siblings Robbie Jackson, Sonia Fowler and Billie Jackson. He told entertainment website Digital Spy, \"It's really important that the feel of the week is active and exciting and not too reflective. There'll be those moments for some of our longer-serving characters that briefly reflect on themselves and how they've changed. The characters don't know that it's the 25th anniversary of anything, so it'd be absurd to contrive too many situations in which they're reflective on the past. The main engine of that week is great stories that'll get people talking.\" The live episode featured the death of Bradley Branning (Charlie Clements) at the conclusion of the \"Who Killed Archie?\" storyline, which saw Bradley's wife Stacey Slater (Lacey Turner) reveal that she was the murderer. Viewing figures peaked at 16.6\u00a0million, which was the highest viewed episode in seven years. Other events to mark the anniversary were a spin-off DVD, \"EastEnders: Last Tango in Walford\", and an Internet spin-off, \"\".\nSanter officially left \"EastEnders\" in March 2010, and was replaced by Bryan Kirkwood. Kirkwood's first signing was the reintroduction of characters Alfie Moon (Shane Richie) and Kat Moon (Jessie Wallace), and his first new character was Vanessa Gold, played by Z\u00f6e Lucker. In April and May 2010, Kirkwood axed eight characters from the show, Barbara Windsor left her role of Peggy Mitchell, which left a hole in the show, which Kirkwood decided to fill by bringing back Kat and Alfie, which he said would \"herald the new era of \"EastEnders\".\" \"EastEnders\" started broadcasting in high definition on 25 December 2010. Old sets had to be rebuilt, so The Queen Victoria set was burnt down in a storyline (and in reality) to facilitate this.\nIn November 2011, a storyline showed character Billy Mitchell, played by Perry Fenwick, selected to be a torch bearer for the 2012 Summer Olympics. In reality, Fenwick carried the torch through the setting of Albert Square, with live footage shown in the episode on 23 July 2012. This was the second live broadcast of \"EastEnders\". In 2012, Kirkwood chose to leave his role as executive producer and was replaced by Lorraine Newman. The show lost many of its significant characters during this period. Newman stepped down as executive producer after 16 months in the job in 2013 after the soap was criticised for its boring storylines and its lowest-ever figures pointing at around 4.8\u00a0million. Dominic Treadwell-Collins was appointed as the new executive producer on 19 August 2013 and was credited on 9 December. He axed multiple characters from the show and introduced the extended Carter family. He also introduced a long-running storyline, \"Who Killed Lucy Beale?\", which peaked during the show's 30th anniversary in 2015 with a week of live episodes. Treadwell-Collins announced his departure from \"EastEnders\" on 18 February 2016.\nSean O'Connor, former \"EastEnders\" series story producer and then-editor on radio soap opera \"The Archers\", was announced to be taking over the role. Treadwell-Collins left on 6 May and O'Connor's first credited episode was broadcast on 11 July Although O'Connor's first credited episode aired in July, his own creative work was not seen onscreen until late September. Additionally, Oliver Kent was brought in as the Head of Continuing Drama Series for BBC Scripted Studios, meaning that Kent would oversee \"EastEnders\" along with O'Connor. O'Connor's approach to the show was to have a firmer focus on realism, which he said was being \"true to \"EastEnders\" DNA and [finding] a way of capturing what it would be like if Julia Smith and Tony Holland were making the show now.\" He said that \"\"EastEnders\" has always had a distinctly different tone from the other soaps but over time we've diluted our unique selling point. I think we need to be ourselves and go back to the origins of the show and what made it successful in the first place. It should be entertaining but it should also be informative\u2014that's part of our unique BBC compact with the audience. It shouldn't just be a distraction from your own life, it should be an exploration of the life shared by the audience and the characters.\" O'Connor planned to stay with \"EastEnders\" until the end of 2017, but announced his departure on 23 June 2017 with immediate effect, saying he wanted to concentrate on a career in film. John Yorke returned as a temporary executive consultant. Kent said, \"John Yorke is a Walford legend and I am thrilled that he will be joining us for a short period to oversee the show and to help us build on Sean's legacy while we recruit a long-term successor.\" Yorke initially returned for three months but his contract was later extended.\nIn July 2018, a special episode was aired as part of a knife crime storyline. This episode, which showed the funeral of Shakil Kazemi (Shaheen Jafargholi) interspersed with real people talking about their true-life experiences of knife crime.\nOn 8 August 2018, it was announced that Kate Oates, who has previously been a producer on the ITV soap operas \"Emmerdale\" and \"Coronation Street\", would become Senior Executive Producer of \"EastEnders\", as well of \"Holby City\" and \"Casualty\". Oates began her role in October, and continued to work with Yorke until the end of the year to \"ensure a smooth handover\". It was also announced that Oates was looking for an Executive Producer to work under her. Jon Sen was announced on 10 December 2018 to be taking on the role of executive producer.\nIn late 2016, popularity and viewership of \"EastEnders\" began to decline, with viewers criticising the storylines during the O'Connor reign, such as the killing of the Mitchell sisters and a storyline centred around the local bin collection. Although, since Yorke and Oates' reigns, opinions towards the storylines have become more favourable, with storylines such as Ruby Allen\u2019s (Louisa Lytton) sexual consent, which featured a special episode which \"broke new ground\" and knife crime, both of which have created \"vital\" discussions. The soap won the award for Best Continuing Drama at the 2019 British Academy Television Awards; its first high-profile award since 2016. However, in June 2019, \"EastEnders\" suffered its lowest ever ratings of 2.4\u00a0million due to its airing at 7\u00a0pm because of the BBC's coverage of the 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup. As of 2019, the soap is one of the most watched series on BBC iPlayer and averages around 5 million viewers per episode. The soap enjoyed a record-breaking year on the streaming platform in 2019, with viewers requesting to stream or download the show 234 million times, up 10% on 2018. The Christmas Day episode in 2019 became \"EastEnders\" biggest ever episode on BBC iPlayer, with 2.14\u00a0million viewer requests.\n2020s.\nIn February 2020, \"EastEnders\" celebrated its 35th anniversary with a stunt on the River Thames leading to the death of Dennis Rickman Jr (Bleu Landau).\nIt was announced on 18 March 2020 that production had been suspended on \"EastEnders\" and other BBC Studios continuing dramas in light of new government guidelines following the COVID-19 pandemic, and that broadcast of the show would be reduced to two 30-minute episodes per week, broadcast on Mondays and Tuesdays, respectively. A spokesperson confirmed that the decision was made to reduce transmission so that \"EastEnders\" could remain on-screen for longer. Two months later, Charlotte Moore, the director of content at the BBC, announced plans for a return to production. She confirmed that \"EastEnders\" would return to filming during June 2020 and that there would be a transmission break between episodes filmed before and after production paused. When production recommences, social distancing measures will be utilised and the show's cast will be required to do their own hair and make-up, which is normally done by a make-up artist.\nIt was announced on 3 June 2020 that \"EastEnders\" would go on a transmission break following the broadcast of episode 6124 on 16 June. A behind-the-scenes show, \"EastEnders: Secrets From The Square\", will air in the show's place during the transmission break and is hosted by television personality Stacey Dooley. The first episode of the week features exclusive interviews with the show's cast, while the second episode will be a repeat of \"iconic\" episodes of the show. Beginning on 22 June 2020, Dooley interviews two cast members together in the show's restaurant set while observing social distancing measures. Kate Phillips, the controller of BBC Entertainment, explained that \"EastEnders: Secrets From The Square\" would be the \"perfect opportunity to celebrate the show\" in the absence of the show. Jon Sen, the show's executive producer, expressed his excitement at the new series, dubbing it \"a unique opportunity to see from the cast themselves just what it is like to be part of \"EastEnders\"\". The \"EastEnders: Iconic Episodes\" series consisted of 9 episodes: Den &amp; Angie, Sharongate, Amira &amp; Syed's Wedding (Part 2), Walford Pride, Pat &amp; Peggy, Who Killed Lucy Beale? 30th Anniversary, Max &amp; Stacey, Shirley Confesses and Pat &amp; Frank's Affair.\nPlans for the show's return to transmission were announced on 12 June 2020. It was confirmed that after the transmission break, the show would temporarily broadcast four 20-minute episodes per week, until it can return to its normal output. Sen explained that the challenges in production and filming of the show has led to the show's reduced output, but also stated that the crew had been \"trialling techniques, filming methods and new ways of working\" to prepare the show for its return. Filming recommenced on 29 June, with episodes airing from 7 September 2020.\nOn 9 April 2021, following the death of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, the episode of \"EastEnders\" that was due to be aired that night was postponed along with the final of \"Masterchef\".\nSetting.\nThe central focus of \"EastEnders\" is the fictional Victorian square Albert Square in the fictional London Borough of Walford. In the show's narrative, Albert Square is a 19th-century street, named after Prince Albert (1819\u20131861), the husband of Queen Victoria (1819\u20131901, reigned 1837\u20131901). Thus, central to Albert Square is The Queen Victoria Public House (also known as The Queen Vic or The Vic). The show's producers based the square's design on Fassett Square in Dalston. There is also a market close to Fassett Square at Ridley Road. The postcode for the area, E8, was one of the working titles for the series. The name \"Walford\" is both a street in Dalston where Tony Holland lived and a blend of Walthamstow and Stratford\u2014the areas of Greater London where the creators were born. Other parts of the Square and set interiors are based on other locations. The bridge is based upon one near BBC Television Centre which carries the Hammersmith &amp; City tube line over Wood Lane W12, the Queen Vic on the former College Park Hotel pub in Willesden at the end of Scrubs Lane at the junction with Harrow Road NW10 just a couple of miles from BBC Television Centre.\nWalford East is a fictional tube station for Walford, and a tube map that was first seen on air in 1996 showed Walford East between Bow Road and West Ham, in the actual location of Bromley-by-Bow on the District and Hammersmith &amp; City lines.\nWalford has the postal district of E20. It was named as if Walford were part of the actual E postcode area which covers much of east London, the \"E\" standing for \"Eastern\". E20 was entirely fictional when it was created, as London East postal districts stopped at E18 at the time. The show's creators opted for E20 instead of E19 as it was thought to sound better.\nIn March 2011, Royal Mail allocated the E20 postal district to the 2012 Olympic Park. In September 2011, the postcode for Albert Square was revealed in an episode as E20 6PQ.\nCharacters.\n\"EastEnders\" is built around the idea of relationships and strong families, with each character having a place in the community. This theme encompasses the whole Square, making the entire community a family of sorts, prey to upsets and conflict, but pulling together in times of trouble. Co-creator Tony Holland was from a large East End family, and such families have typified \"EastEnders\". The first central family was the combination of the Fowler family, consisting of Pauline Fowler (Wendy Richard), her husband Arthur (Bill Treacher), and teenage children Mark (David Scarboro/Todd Carty) and Michelle (Susan Tully). Pauline's family, the Beales, consisted of Pauline's twin brother Pete Beale (Peter Dean), his wife Kathy (Gillian Taylforth) and their teenage son Ian (Adam Woodyatt). Pauline and Pete's domineering mother Lou Beale (Anna Wing) lived with Pauline and her family. Holland drew on the names of his own family for the characters.\nThe Watts and Mitchell families have been central to many notable \"EastEnders\" storylines, the show having been dominated by the Watts in the 1980s, with the 1990s focusing on the Mitchells. The early 2000s saw a shift in attention towards the newly introduced female Slater clan, before a renewal of emphasis upon the restored Watts family beginning in 2003. Since 2006, \"EastEnders\" has largely been dominated by the Mitchell, Ahmed and Branning families, though the early 2010s also saw a renewed focus on the Moon family, and, from 2013 onwards, on the Carters. In 2016, the Fowlers were revived and merged with the Slaters, with Martin Fowler (James Bye) marrying Stacey Slater (Lacey Turner). The Taylor family were introduced in 2017 and have since been central to the show's main storylines. Key people involved in the production of \"EastEnders\" have stressed how important the idea of strong families is to the programme.\n\"EastEnders\" has an emphasis on strong family matriarchs, with examples including Pauline Fowler (Wendy Richard) and Peggy Mitchell (Barbara Windsor), helping to attract a female audience. John Yorke, then the BBC's head of drama production, put this down to Tony Holland's \"gay sensibility, which showed a love for strong women\". The matriarchal role is one that has been seen in various reincarnations since the programme's inception, often depicted as the centre of the family unit. The original matriarch was Lou Beale (Anna Wing), though later examples include Mo Harris (Laila Morse), Pat Butcher (Pam St Clement), Zainab Masood (Nina Wadia), Cora Cross (Ann Mitchell), Kathy Beale (Gillian Taylforth), Jean Slater (Gillian Wright), and Suki Panesar (Balvinder Sopal). These characters are often seen as being loud and interfering but most importantly, responsible for the well-being of the family and usually stressing the importance of family.\nThe show often includes strong, brassy, long-suffering women who exhibit diva-like behaviour and stoically battle through an array of tragedy and misfortune. Such characters include Angie Watts (Anita Dobson), Kathy Beale (Gillian Taylforth), Sharon Watts (Letitia Dean), Pat Butcher (Pam St Clement), Kat Slater (Jessie Wallace), Denise Fox (Diane Parish), Tanya Branning (Jo Joyner) and Linda Carter (Kellie Bright). Conversely there are female characters who handle tragedy less well, depicted as eternal victims and endless sufferers, who include Ronnie Mitchell (Samantha Womack), Little Mo Mitchell (Kacey Ainsworth), Laura Beale (Hannah Waterman), Sue Osman (Sandy Ratcliff), Lisa Fowler (Lucy Benjamin) and Mel Owen (Tamzin Outhwaite). The 'tart with a heart' is another recurring character. Often their promiscuity masks a hidden vulnerability and a desire to be loved. Such characters have included Pat Butcher (Pam St Clement) (though in her latter years, this changed), Tiffany Mitchell (Martine McCutcheon), Kat Slater (Jessie Wallace), Stacey Slater (Lacey Turner), Dawn Swann (Kara Tointon), Roxy Mitchell (Rita Simons), Whitney Dean (Shona McGarty) and Lauren Branning (Jacqueline Jossa).\nA gender balance in the show is maintained via the inclusion of various \"macho\" male personalities such as Mick Carter (Danny Dyer), Phil Mitchell (Steve McFadden), Grant Mitchell (Ross Kemp), Dennis Rickman (Nigel Harman), Jack Branning (Scott Maslen) and Max Branning (Jake Wood), \"bad boys\" such as Den Watts (Leslie Grantham), Sean Slater (Robert Kazinsky), Michael Moon (Steve John Shepherd) and Vincent Hubbard (Richard Blackwood), and \"heartthrobs\" such as Simon Wicks (Nick Berry), Jamie Mitchell (Jack Ryder), Dennis Rickman (Nigel Harman), Joey Branning (David Witts), Kush Kazemi (Davood Ghadami) and Keanu Taylor (Danny Walters). Another recurring male character type is the smartly dressed businessman, often involved in gang culture and crime and seen as a local authority figure. Examples include Steve Owen (Martin Kemp), Jack Dalton (Hywel Bennett), Andy Hunter (Michael Higgs), Johnny Allen (Billy Murray) and Derek Branning (Jamie Foreman). Following criticism aimed at the show's over-emphasis on \"gangsters\" in 2005, such characters have been significantly reduced. Another recurring male character seen in \"EastEnders\" is the 'loser' or 'soft touch', males often comically under the thumb of their female counterparts, which have included Arthur Fowler (Bill Treacher), Ricky Butcher (Sid Owen), Garry Hobbs (Ricky Groves), Lofty Holloway (Tom Watt) and Billy Mitchell (Perry Fenwick). Other recurring character types that have appeared throughout the serial are \"cheeky-chappies\" Pete Beale (Peter Dean), Alfie Moon (Shane Richie), Garry Hobbs (Ricky Groves) and Kush Kazemi (Davood Ghadami), \"lost girls\" such as Mary Smith (Linda Davidson), Donna Ludlow (Matilda Ziegler), Mandy Salter (Nicola Stapleton) and Hayley Slater (Katie Jarvis), delinquents such as Stacey Slater (Lacey Turner), Jay Brown (Jamie Borthwick), Lola Pearce (Danielle Harold), Bobby Beale (Eliot Carrington/Clay Milner Russell) and Keegan Baker (Zack Morris), \"villains\" such as Nick Cotton (John Altman), Trevor Morgan (Alex Ferns), May Wright (Amanda Drew), Yusef Khan (Ace Bhatti), Archie Mitchell (Larry Lamb), Dean Wicks (Matt Di Angelo) and Stuart Highway (Ricky Champ), \"bitches\" such as Cindy Beale (Michelle Collins), Janine Butcher (Charlie Brooks), Sam Mitchell (Danniella Westbrook), Lucy Beale (Melissa Suffield/Hetti Bywater), Abi Branning (Lorna Fitzgerald), Babe Smith (Annette Badland) and Louise Mitchell (Tilly Keeper), \"brawlers\" or \"fighters\" such as Bianca Jackson (Patsy Palmer), Kat Slater (Jessie Wallace), Chelsea Fox (Tiana Benjamin), Dawn Swann (Kara Tointon), Stacey Slater (Lacey Turner) and Karen Taylor (Lorraine Stanley), and cockney \"wide boys\" or \"wheeler dealers\" such as Frank Butcher (Mike Reid), Alfie Moon (Shane Richie), Kevin Wicks (Phil Daniels), Darren Miller (Charlie G. Hawkins), Fatboy (Ricky Norwood) and Jay Brown (Jamie Borthwick).\nOver the years \"EastEnders\" has typically featured a number of elderly residents, who are used to show vulnerability, nostalgia, stalwart-like attributes and are sometimes used for comedic purposes. The original elderly residents included Lou Beale (Anna Wing), Ethel Skinner (Gretchen Franklin) and Dot Cotton (June Brown). Over the years they have been joined by the likes of Mo Butcher (Edna Dor\u00e9), Jules Tavernier (Tommy Eytle), Marge Green (Pat Coombs), Nellie Ellis (Elizabeth Kelly), Jim Branning (John Bardon), Charlie Slater (Derek Martin), Mo Harris (Laila Morse), Patrick Trueman (Rudolph Walker), Cora Cross (Ann Mitchell), Les Coker (Roger Sloman), Rose Cotton (Polly Perkins), Pam Coker (Lin Blakley), Stan Carter (Timothy West), Babe Smith (Annette Badland), Claudette Hubbard (Ellen Thomas), Sylvie Carter (Linda Marlowe), Ted Murray (Christopher Timothy), Joyce Murray (Maggie Steed), Arshad Ahmed (Madhav Sharma) and Mariam Ahmed (Indira Joshi). The programme has more recently included a higher number of teenagers and successful young adults in a bid to capture the younger television audience. This has spurred criticism, most notably from the actress Anna Wing, who portrayed Lou Beale in the show. She commented, \"I don't want to be disloyal, but I think you need a few mature people in a soap because they give it backbone and body... if all the main people are young it gets a bit thin and inexperienced. It gets too lightweight.\"\n\"EastEnders\" has been known to feature a 'comedy double-act', originally demonstrated with the characters of Dot and Ethel, whose friendship was one of the serial's most enduring. Other examples include Paul Priestly (Mark Thrippleton) and Trevor Short (Phil McDermott), In 1989 especially, characters were brought in who were deliberately conceived as comic or light-hearted. Such characters included Julie Cooper (Louise Plowright)\u2014a brassy maneater; Marge Green\u2014a batty older lady played by veteran comedy actress Pat Coombs; Trevor Short (Phil McDermott)\u2014the \"village idiot\"; his friend, northern heartbreaker Paul Priestly (Mark Thrippleton); wheeler-dealer Vince Johnson (Hepburn Graham) and Laurie Bates (Gary Powell), who became Pete Beale's (Peter Dean) sparring partner. The majority of \"EastEnders\" characters are working-class. Middle-class characters do occasionally become regulars, but have been less successful and rarely become long-term characters. In the main, middle-class characters exist as villains, such as James Wilmott-Brown (William Boyde), May Wright (Amanda Drew), Stella Crawford (Sophie Thompson), Yusef Khan (Ace Bhatti) and Gray Atkins (Toby-Alexander Smith) or are used to promote positive liberal influences, such as Colin Russell (Michael Cashman) or Rachel Kominski (Jacquetta May).\n\"EastEnders\" has always featured a culturally diverse cast which has included black, Asian, Turkish, Polish and Latvian characters. \"The expansion of minority representation signals a move away from the traditional soap opera format, providing more opportunities for audience identification with the characters and hence a wider appeal\". Despite this, the programme has been criticised by the Commission for Racial Equality, who argued in 2002 that \"EastEnders\" was not giving a realistic representation of the East End's \"ethnic make-up\". They suggested that the average proportion of visible minority faces on \"EastEnders\" was substantially lower than the actual ethnic minority population in East London boroughs, and it therefore reflected the East End in the 1960s, not the East End of the 2000s. The programme has since attempted to address these issues. A sari shop was opened and various characters of different ethnicities were introduced throughout 2006 and 2007, including the Fox family, the Ahmeds, and various background artists. This was part of producer Diederick Santer's plan to \"diversify\", to make \"EastEnders\" \"feel more 21st century\". \"EastEnders\" has had varying success with ethnic minority characters. Possibly the least successful were the Indian Ferreira family, who were not well received by critics or viewers and were dismissed as unrealistic by the Asian community in the UK.\n\"EastEnders\" has been praised for its portrayal of characters with disabilities, including Adam Best (David Proud) (spina bifida), Noah Chambers (Micah Thomas) (deaf), Jean Slater (Gillian Wright) and her daughter Stacey (Lacey Turner) (bipolar disorder), Janet Mitchell (Grace) (Down syndrome), Jim Branning (John Bardon) (stroke) and Dinah Wilson (Anjela Lauren Smith) (multiple sclerosis). The show also features a large number of gay, lesbian and bisexual characters (see list of soap operas with LGBT characters), including Colin Russell (Michael Cashman), Barry Clark (Gary Hailes), Simon Raymond (Andrew Lynford), Tony Hills (Mark Homer), Sonia Fowler (Natalie Cassidy), Naomi Julien (Petra Letang), Tina Carter (Luisa Bradshaw-White), Tosh Mackintosh (Rebecca Scroggs), Ben Mitchell (Harry Reid/Max Bowden), Paul Coker (Jonny Labey), Iqra Ahmed (Priya Davdra), Ash Kaur (Gurlaine Kaur Garcha), and Callum \"Halfway\" Highway (Tony Clay). Kyle Slater (Riley Carter Millington), a transgender character, was introduced in 2015.\n\"EastEnders\" has a high cast turnover and characters are regularly changed to facilitate storylines or refresh the format. The show has also become known for the return of characters after they have left the show. Sharon Watts (Letitia Dean) returned in August 2012 for her third stint on the show. Den Watts (Leslie Grantham) returned 14 years after he was believed to have died, a feat repeated by Kathy Beale (Gillian Taylforth) in 2015. Speaking extras, including Tracey the barmaid (Jane Slaughter) (who has been in the show since the first episode in 1985), have made appearances throughout the show's duration, without being the focus of any major storylines. The character of Nick Cotton (John Altman) gained a reputation for making constant exits and returns since the programme's first year, until the character's death in 2015.\n, Adam Woodyatt, Gillian Taylforth and Letitia Dean are the only members of the original cast remaining in the show, in their roles of Ian Beale, Kathy Beale and Sharon Watts respectively. Ian Beale is the only character to have appeared continuously from the first episode without formally leaving, and is the longest-serving character in \"EastEnders\".\n Tracey the barmaid is the longest-serving female character in the show, having appeared since 1985, albeit as a minor character.\nStorylines.\n\"EastEnders\" programme makers took the decision that the show was to be about \"everyday life\" in the inner city \"today\" and regarded it as a \"slice of life\". Creator/producer Julia Smith declared that \"We don't make life, we reflect it\". She also said, \"We decided to go for a realistic, fairly outspoken type of drama which could encompass stories about homosexuality, rape, unemployment, racial prejudice, etc., in a believable context. Above all, we wanted realism\". In 2011, the head of BBC drama, John Yorke, said that the real East End had changed significantly since \"EastEnders\" started, and the show no longer truly reflected real life, but that it had an \"emotional truthfulness\" and was partly \"true to the original vision\" and partly \"adapt[ing] to a changing world\", adding that \"If it was a show where every house cost a fortune and everyone drove a Lexus, it wouldn't be \"EastEnders\". You have to show shades of that change, but certain things are immutable, I would argue, like The Vic and the market.\"\nIn the 1980s, \"EastEnders\" featured \"gritty\" storylines involving drugs and crime, representing the issues faced by working-class Britain under Thatcherism. Storylines included the cot death of 14-month-old Hassan Osman, Nick Cotton's (John Altman) homophobia, racism and murder of Reg Cox (Johnnie Clayton), Arthur Fowler's (Bill Treacher) unemployment reflecting the recession of the 1980s, the rape of Kathy Beale (Gillian Taylforth) in 1988 by James Willmott-Brown (William Boyde) and Michelle Fowler's (Susan Tully) teenage pregnancy. The show also dealt with prostitution, mixed-race relationships, shoplifting, sexism, divorce, domestic violence and mugging. In 1989, the programme came under criticism in the British media for being too depressing, and according to writer Colin Brake, the programme makers were determined to change this. In 1989, there was a deliberate attempt to increase the lighter, more comic aspects of life in Albert Square. This led to the introduction of some characters who were deliberately conceived as comic or light-hearted. Brake suggested that humour was an important element in \"EastEnders\" storylines during 1989, with a greater amount of slapstick and light comedy than before. He classed 1989's changes as a brave experiment, and suggested that while some found this period of \"EastEnders\" entertaining, many other viewers felt that the comedy stretched the programme's credibility. Although the programme still covered many issues in 1989, such as domestic violence, drugs, rape and racism, Brake reflected that the new emphasis on a more balanced mix between \"light and heavy storylines\" gave the illusion that the show had lost a \"certain edge\".\nAs the show progressed into the 1990s, \"EastEnders\" still featured hard-hitting issues such as Mark Fowler (Todd Carty) revealing he was HIV positive in 1991, the death of his wife Gill (Susanna Dawson) from an AIDS-related illness in 1992, murder, adoption, abortion, Peggy Mitchell's (Barbara Windsor) battle with breast cancer, and Phil Mitchell's (Steve McFadden) alcoholism and violence towards wife Kathy. Mental health issues were confronted in 1996 when 16-year-old Joe Wicks developed schizophrenia following the off-screen death of his sister in a car crash. The long-running storyline of Mark Fowler's HIV was so successful in raising awareness that in 1999, a survey by the National Aids Trust found teenagers got most of their information about HIV from the soap, though one campaigner noted that in some ways the storyline was not reflective of what was happening at the time as the condition was more common among the gay community. Still, heterosexual Mark struggled with various issues connected to his HIV status, including public fears of contamination, a marriage breakdown connected to his inability to have children and the side effects of combination therapies.\nIn the early 2000s, \"EastEnders\" covered the issue of euthanasia with Ethel Skinner's (Gretchen Franklin) death in a pact with her friend Dot Cotton (June Brown), the unveiling of Kat Slater's (Jessie Wallace) sexual abuse by her uncle Harry (Michael Elphick) as a child (which led to the birth of her daughter Zoe (Michelle Ryan), who had been brought up to believe that Kat was her sister), the domestic abuse of Little Mo Morgan (Kacey Ainsworth) by husband Trevor (Alex Ferns) (which involved marital rape and culminated in Trevor's death after he tried to kill Little Mo in a fire), Sonia Jackson (Natalie Cassidy) giving birth at the age of 15 and then putting her baby up for adoption, and Janine Butcher's (Charlie Brooks) prostitution, agoraphobia and drug addiction. The soap also tackled the issue of mental illness and carers of people who have mental conditions, illustrated with mother and daughter Jean (Gillian Wright) and Stacey Slater (Lacey Turner); Jean suffers from bipolar disorder, and teenage daughter Stacey was her carer (this storyline won a Mental Health Media Award in September 2006). Stacey went on to struggle with the disorder herself. The issue of illiteracy was highlighted by the characters of middle-aged Keith (David Spinx) and his young son Darren (Charlie G. Hawkins). \"EastEnders\" has also covered the issue of Down syndrome, as Billy (Perry Fenwick) and Honey Mitchell's (Emma Barton) baby, Janet Mitchell (Grace), was born with the condition in 2006. \"EastEnders\" covered child abuse with its storyline involving Phil Mitchell's (Steve McFadden) 11-year-old son Ben (Charlie Jones) and lawyer girlfriend Stella Crawford (Sophie Thompson), and child grooming involving the characters Tony King (Chris Coghill) as the perpetrator and Whitney Dean (Shona McGarty) as the victim.\nAside from this, soap opera staples of youthful romance, jealousy, domestic rivalry, gossip and extramarital affairs are regularly featured, with high-profile storylines occurring several times a year. Whodunits also feature regularly, including the \"Who Shot Phil?\" story arc in 2001 that attracted over 19 million viewers and was one of the biggest successes in British soap television; the \"Who Killed Archie?\" storyline, which was revealed in a special live episode of the show that drew a peak of 17 million viewers; and the \"Who Killed Lucy Beale?\" saga.\nProduction.\nSet.\nThe exterior set for the fictional Albert Square is located in the permanent backlot of the BBC Elstree Centre, Borehamwood, Hertfordshire, at , and is outdoors and open to the weather. It was initially built in 1984 with a specification that it should last for at least 15 years at a cost of \u00a3750,000. The \"EastEnders\" lot was designed by Keith Harris, who was a senior designer within the production team together with supervising art directors Peter Findley and Gina Parr. The main buildings on the square consisted originally of hollow shells, constructed from marine plywood facades mounted onto steel frames. The lower walls, pavements, etc., were constructed of real brick and tarmac. The set had to be made to look as if it had been standing for years. This was done by a number of means, including chipping the pavements, using chemicals to crack the top layer of the paint work, using varnish to create damp patches underneath the railway bridge, and making garden walls in such a way they appeared to sag. The final touches were added in summer 1984, these included a telephone box, telegraph pole that was provided by British Telecom, lampposts that were provided by Hertsmere Borough Council and a number of vehicles parked on the square. On each set all the appliances are fully functional such as gas cookers, the laundry washing machines and The Queen Victoria beer pumps.\nThe walls were intentionally built crooked to give them an aged appearance. The drains around the set are real so rainwater can naturally flow from the streets. The square was built in two phases with only three sides being built, plus Bridge Street, to begin with in 1984, in time to be used for the show's first episode. Then in 1986, Harris added an extension to the set, building the fourth side of Albert Square, and in 1987, Turpin Road began to be featured more, which included buildings such as The Dagmar.\nIn 1993, George Street was added, and soon after Walford East Underground station was built, to create further locations when \"EastEnders\" went from two to three episodes per week. The set was constructed by the BBC in-house construction department under construction manager Mike Hagan. Most of the buildings on Albert Square have no interior filming space, with a few exceptions, and most do not have rears or gardens. Some interior shots are filmed in the actual buildings.\nIn February 2008, it was reported that the set would transfer to Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, where a new set would be built as the set was looking \"shabby\", with its flaws showing up on high-definition television broadcasts. However, by April 2010 a follow-up report confirmed that Albert Square would remain at Elstree Studios for at least another four years, taking the set through its 25th anniversary. The set was consequently rebuilt for high definition on the same site, using mostly real brick with some areas using a new improved plastic brick. Throughout rebuilding filming would still take place, and so scaffolding was often seen on screen during the process, with some storylines written to accommodate the rebuilding, such as the Queen Vic fire.\nIn 2014, then executive producer Dominic Treadwell-Collins said that he wanted Albert Square to look like a real-life east London neighbourhood so that the soap would \"better reflect the more fashionable areas of east London beloved of young professionals\" giving a flavour of the \"creeping gentrification\" of east London. He added: \"It should feel more like London. It's been frozen in aspic for too long.\" The BBC announced that they would rebuild the \"EastEnders\" set to secure the long-term future of the show, with completion expected to be in 2018. The set will provide a modern, upgraded exterior filming resource for \"EastEnders\", and will copy the appearance of the existing buildings. However, it will be 20 per cent bigger, in order to enable greater editorial ambition and improve working conditions for staff. A temporary set will be created on-site to enable filming to continue while the permanent structure is rebuilt.\nIn May 2016 the rebuild was delayed until 2020 and forecast to cost in excess of \u00a315\u00a0million, although the main part of the set is scheduled to be able to start filming in May 2019. In December 2018, it was revealed that the new set was now planned to cost \u00a359\u00a0million but a National Audit Office (NAO) report stated that it would actually cost \u00a386.7\u00a0million and be completed two-and-a-half years later than planned, in 2023; the NAO concluded that the BBC \"could not provide value for money on the project\". The NAO's forecast cost is more than the annual combined budget for BBC Radio 1 and Radio 2. The BBC said the new set would allow for HD filming and better reflect the modern East End of London. In March 2019 there was criticism from a group of MPs about how the BBC handled the redevelopment of the set. In March 2020 during the suspension of filming, the interior sets were used for a new adaptation of \"Talking Heads\". This marked the first time that it had been used for anything other than \"EastEnders\".\nFilming.\nThe majority of \"EastEnders\" episodes are filmed at the BBC Elstree Centre in Borehamwood, Hertfordshire. In January 1987, \"EastEnders\" had three production teams each comprising a director, production manager, production assistant and assistant floor manager. Other permanent staff included the producer's office, script department and designer, meaning between 30 and 35 people would be working full-time on \"EastEnders\", rising to 60 to 70 on filming days. When the number of episodes was increased to four per week, more studio space was needed, so \"Top of the Pops\" was moved from its studio at Elstree to BBC Television Centre in April 2001. Episodes are produced in \"quartets\" of four episodes, each of which starts filming on a Tuesday and takes nine days to record. Each day, between 25 and 30 scenes are recorded. During the filming week, actors can film for as many as eight to twelve episodes. Exterior scenes are filmed on a specially constructed film lot, and interior scenes take place in six studios. The episodes are usually filmed about six to eight weeks in advance of broadcast. During the winter period, filming can take place up to twelve weeks in advance, due to less daylight for outdoor filming sessions. This time difference has been known to cause problems when filming outdoor scenes. On 8 February 2007, heavy snow fell on the set and filming had to be cancelled as the scenes due to be filmed on the day were to be transmitted in April. \"EastEnders\" is normally recorded using four cameras. When a quartet is completed, it is edited by the director, videotape editor and script supervisor. The producer then reviews the edits and decides if anything needs to be re-edited, which the director will do. A week later, sound is added to the episodes and they are technically reviewed, and are ready for transmission if they are deemed of acceptable quality.\nAlthough episodes are predominantly recorded weeks before they are broadcast, occasionally, \"EastEnders\" includes current events in their episodes. In 1987, \"EastEnders\" covered the general election. Using a plan devised by co-creators Smith and Holland, five minutes of material was cut from four of the pre-recorded episodes preceding the election. These were replaced by specially recorded election material, including representatives from each major party, and a scene recorded on the day after the election reflecting the result, which was broadcast the following Tuesday. The result of the 2010 general election was referenced on 7 May 2010 episode. During the 2006 FIFA World Cup, actors filmed short scenes following the tournament's events that were edited into the programme in the following episode. Last-minute scenes have also been recorded to reference the fiftieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War in 1995, the two-minute silence on Remembrance Day 2005 (2005 also being the year for the sixtieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War and the 200th anniversary of the Battle of Trafalgar), Barack Obama's election victory in 2008, the death of Michael Jackson in 2009, the 2010 Comprehensive Spending Review, Andy Murray winning the Men's Singles at the 2013 Wimbledon Championships, the wedding of Prince William and Kate Middleton, the birth of Prince George of Cambridge, Scotland voting no against independence in 2014, and the 100th anniversary of the beginning of the Great War.\n\"EastEnders\" is often filmed on location, away from the studios in Borehamwood. Sometimes an entire quartet is filmed on location, which has a practical function and are the result of \"EastEnders\" making a \"double bank\", when an extra week's worth of episodes are recorded at the same time as the regular schedule, enabling the production of the programme to stop for a two-week break at Christmas. These episodes often air in late June or early July and again in late October or early November. The first time this happened was in December 1985 when Pauline (Wendy Richard) and Arthur Fowler (Bill Treacher) travelled to the Southend-on-Sea to find their son Mark, who had run away from home. In 1986, \"EastEnders\" filmed overseas for the first time, in Venice, and this was also the first time it was not filmed on videotape, as a union rule at the time prevented producers taking a video crew abroad and a film crew had to be used instead. In 2011, it was reported that eight per cent of the series is filmed on location.\nIf scenes during a normal week are to be filmed on location, this is done during the normal recording week. Off-set locations that have been used for filming include Clacton (1989), Devon (September 1990), Hertfordshire (used for scenes set in Gretna Green in July 1991), Portsmouth (November 1991), Milan (1997), Ireland (1997), Amsterdam (December 1999), Brighton (2001) and Portugal (2003). In 2003, filming took place at Loch Fyne Hotel and Leisure Club in Inveraray, The Arkinglass Estate in Cairndow and Grims Dyke Hotel, Harrow Weald, north London, for a week of episodes set in Scotland. The episode shown on 9 April 2007 featured scenes filmed at St Giles Church and The Blacksmiths Arms public house in Wormshill, the Ringlestone Inn, two miles away and Court Lodge Farm in Stansted, Kent. and the Port of Dover, Kent. .\nOther locations have included the court house, a disused office block, Evershed House, and St Peter's Church, all in St Albans, an abandoned mental facility in Worthing, and a wedding dress shop in Muswell Hill, north London. A week of episodes in 2011 saw filming take place on a beach in Thorpe Bay and a pier in Southend-on-Sea\u2014during which a stuntman was injured when a gust of wind threw him off balance and he fell onto rocks\u2014 with other scenes filmed on the Essex coast. In 2012, filming took place in Keynsham, Somerset. In January 2013, on-location filming at Grahame Park in Colindale, north London, was interrupted by at least seven youths who threw a firework at the set and threatened to cut members of the crew. In October 2013, scenes were filmed on a road near London Southend Airport in Essex.\n\"EastEnders\" has featured seven live broadcasts. For its 25th anniversary in February 2010, a live episode was broadcast in which Stacey Slater (Lacey Turner) was revealed as Archie Mitchell's (Larry Lamb) killer. Turner was told only 30\u00a0minutes before the live episode and to maintain suspense, she whispers this revelation to former lover and current father-in-law, Max Branning, in the very final moments of the live show. Many other cast members only found out at the same time as the public, when the episode was broadcast. On 23 July 2012, a segment of that evening's episode was screened live as Billy Mitchell (Perry Fenwick) carried the Olympic Flame around Walford in preparation for the 2012 Summer Olympics. In February 2015, for the soap's 30th anniversary, five episodes in a week featured live inserts throughout them. Episodes airing on Tuesday 17, Wednesday 18 and Thursday 19 (which featured an hour long episode and a second episode) all featured at least one live insert. The show revealed that the killer of Lucy Beale (Hetti Bywater) was her younger brother, Bobby (Eliot Carrington), during the second episode on Thursday, after a ten-month mystery regarding who killed her. In a flashback episode which revisited the night of the murder, Bobby was revealed to have killed his sister. The aftermath episode, which aired on Friday 20, was completely live and explained in detail Lucy's death. Carrington was told he was Lucy's killer on Monday 16, while Laurie Brett (who plays Bobby's adoptive mother, Jane) was informed in November, due to the character playing a huge role in the cover-up of Lucy's murder. Bywater only discovered Bobby was responsible for Lucy's death on the morning of Thursday, 19 February, several hours before they filmed the scenes revealing Bobby as Lucy's killer.\nPost-production.\nEach episode should run for 27 minutes and 15 seconds, however, if any episode runs over or under then it is the job of post-production to cut or add scenes where appropriate. As noted in the 1994 behind-the-scenes book, \"EastEnders: The First 10 Years\", after filming, tapes were sent to the videotape editor, who then edited the scenes together into an episode. The videotape editor used the director's notes so they knew which scenes the director wanted to appear in a particular episode. The producer might have asked for further changes to be made. The episode was then copied onto D3 video. The final process was to add the audio which included background noise such as a train or a jukebox music and to check it met the BBC's technical standard for broadcasting.\nSince 2010, \"EastEnders\" no longer uses tapes in the recording or editing process. After footage is recorded, the material is sent digitally to the post production team. The editors then assemble all the scenes recorded for the director to view and note any changes that are needed. The sound team also have the capability to access the edited episode, enabling them to dub the sound and create the final version.\nBudgets and costs.\nAccording to the book \"How to Study Television\", in 1995 \"EastEnders\" cost the BBC \u00a340,000 per episode on average. A 2012 agreement between the BBC, the Writers' Guild of Great Britain and the Personal Managers' Association set out the pay rate for \"EastEnders\" scripts as \u00a3137.70 per minute of transmission time (\u00a34,131 for 30 minutes), which is 85 per cent of the rate for scripts for other BBC television series. The writers would be paid 75 per cent of that fee for any repeats of the episode. In 2011, it was reported that actors receive a per-episode fee of between \u00a3400 and \u00a31,200, and are guaranteed a certain number of episodes per year, perhaps as few as 30 or as many as 100, therefore annual salaries could range from \u00a312,000 to \u00a3200,000 depending on the popularity of a character. Some actors' salaries were leaked in 2006, revealing that Natalie Cassidy (Sonia Fowler) was paid \u00a3150,000, Cliff Parisi (Minty Peterson) received \u00a3220,000, Barbara Windsor (Peggy Mitchell) and Steve McFadden (Phil Mitchell) each received \u00a3360,000 and Wendy Richard (Pauline Fowler) had a salary of \u00a3370,000. In 2017, it was revealed that Danny Dyer (Mick Carter) and Adam Woodyatt (Ian Beale) were the highest-paid actors in \"EastEnders\", earning between \u00a3200,000 and \u00a3249,999, followed by Laurie Brett (Jane Beale), Letitia Dean (Sharon Watts), Tameka Empson (Kim Fox), Linda Henry (Shirley Carter), Scott Maslen (Jack Branning), Diane Parish (Denise Fox), Gillian Taylforth (Kathy Beale) and Lacey Turner (Stacey Slater), earning between \u00a3150,000 and \u00a3199,999.\nA 2011 report from the National Audit Office (NAO) showed that \"EastEnders\" had an annual budget of \u00a329.9\u00a0million. Of that, \u00a32.9\u00a0million was spent on scripts and \u00a36.9\u00a0million went towards paying actors, extras and chaperones for child actors. According to the NAO, BBC executives approved \u00a3500,000 of additional funding for the 25th anniversary live episode (19 February 2010). With a total cost of \u00a3696,000, the difference was covered from the 2009\u20132010 series budget for \"EastEnders\". When repeats and omnibus editions are shown, the BBC pays additional fees to cast and scriptwriters and incurs additional editing costs, which in the period 2009\u20132010, amounted to \u00a35.5million. According to a Radio Times article for 212 episodes it works out at \u00a3141,000 per episode or 3.5p per viewer hour.\nSustainability.\nIn 2014, two new studios were built and they were equipped with low-energy lighting which has saved approximately 90,000 kwh per year. A carbon literacy course was run with Heads of Departments of \"EastEnders\" attending and as a result, representatives from each department agreed to meet quarterly to share new sustainability ideas. The paper usage was reduced by 50 per cent across script distribution and other weekly documents and 20 per cent across all other paper usage. The production team now use recycled paper and recycled stationery.\nAlso changes to working online has also saved transportation cost of distribution 2,500 DVDs per year. Sets, costumes, paste pots and paint are all recycled by the design department. Cars used by the studio are low emission vehicles and the production team take more efficient energy efficient generators out on location. Caterers no longer use polystyrene cups and recycling on location must be provided.\nAs a result of \"EastEnders\" sustainability, it was awarded albert+, an award that recognises the production's commitment to becoming a more eco-friendly television production. The albert+ logo was first shown at the end of the \"EastEnders\" titles for episode 5281 on 9 May 2016.\nScheduling.\nBroadcast.\nSince 1985, \"EastEnders\" has remained at the centre of BBC One's primetime schedule. Since 2001, it has been broadcast at 7:30pm on Tuesday and Thursday, and 8pm on Monday and Friday. \"EastEnders\" was originally broadcast twice weekly at 7:00pm on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 19 February 1985. However, in September 1985 the two episodes were moved to 7:30pm as Michael Grade did not want the soap running in direct competition with \"Emmerdale Farm\", and this remained the same until 7 April 1994. The BBC had originally planned to take advantage of the 'summer break' that \"Emmerdale Farm\" usually took to capitalise on ratings, but ITV added extra episodes and repeats so that \"Emmerdale Farm\" was not taken off the air over the summer. Realising the futility of the situation, Grade decided to move the show to the later 7:30pm slot.\n\"EastEnders\" output then increased to three times a week on Mondays, Tuesday and Thursdays from 11 April 1994 until 2 August 2001.\nFrom 10 August 2001, \"EastEnders\" then added its fourth episode (shown on Fridays). This caused some controversy as the first Friday episode clashed with \"Coronation Street\", which was moved to 8pm to make way for an hour-long episode of rural soap \"Emmerdale\". In this first head-to-head battle, \"EastEnders\" claimed victory over its rival.\nIn early 2003, viewers could watch episodes of \"EastEnders\" on digital channel BBC Three before they were broadcast on BBC One. This was to coincide with the relaunch of the channel and helped BBC Three break the one million viewers mark for the first time with 1.03\u00a0million who watched to see Mark Fowler's departure. According to the \"EastEnders\" website, there are on average 208 episodes outputted each year.\nRepeats.\nThe omnibus edition, a compilation of the week's episodes in a continuous sequence, originally aired on BBC One on Sunday afternoons, until 1 April 2012 when it was changed to a late Friday night or early Saturday morning slot, commencing 6 April 2012, though the exact time differed. It reverted to a weekend daytime slot as from January 2013 on BBC Two. In 2014, the omnibus moved back to around midnight on Friday nights, and in April 2015, the omnibus was axed, following detailed audience research and the introduction of 30-day catch up on BBC iPlayer and the planning of BBC One +1. The last omnibus on the BBC was shown on 24 April 2015. While W was showing same-day repeats of \"EastEnders\", they also returned the weekend omnibus, starting on 20 February 2016.\n\"EastEnders\" reruns began on UKTV Gold when the channel launched in 1992. The series ran from the first episode and followed its original broadcast order until August 1996 when the channel looped back to the first episode. In October 2008, UKTV Gold ceased showing \"EastEnders\". The last episode shown was from January 2006. Watch launched in October 2008 and resumed \"EastEnders\" reruns from 5 January 2009 to 15 October 2009, finishing with episodes originally broadcast in December 2006.\nFrom 20 February to 26 May 1995, as part of the programme's 10th Anniversary celebrations, episodes from 1985 were repeated each weekday morning at 10am, starting from episode one. Four specially selected episodes from 1985, 1986 and 1987 were also repeated on BBC1 on Friday evenings at 8pm under the banner \"The Unforgettable EastEnders\". These included the wedding of Michelle Fowler and Lofty Holloway, the revelation of the father of Michelle's baby, a two-hander between Dot Cotton and Ethel Skinner and the 1986 Christmas episode featuring Den Watts presenting Angie Watts with divorce papers.\n\"EastEnders\" was regularly repeated at 10pm on BBC Choice from the channel's launch in 1998, a practice continued by BBC Three for many years until mid-2012 with the repeat moving to 10:30pm. From 25 December 2010 - 29 April 2011 and 31 July 2012 - 13 August 2012 to the show was repeated on BBC HD in a Simulcast with BBC Three. In 2015, the BBC Three repeat moved back to 10pm. In February 2016, the repeat moved to W, the rebranded Watch, after BBC Three became an online-only channel. W stopped showing \"EastEnders\" in April 2018. Episodes of \"EastEnders\" are available on-demand through BBC iPlayer for 30 days after their original screening.\nOn 1 December 2012, the BBC uploaded the first 54 episodes of \"EastEnders\" to YouTube, and on 23 July 2013 they uploaded a further 14 episodes bringing the total to 68. These have since been taken down.\nIn April 2018, it was announced that Drama would be showing repeats starting 6 August 2018 during weekdays and they are also available on-demand on the UKTV Play catch-up service for 30 days after the broadcast. In December 2019, Christmas episodes were added to Britbox UK.\nInternational.\n\"EastEnders\" is broadcast around the world in many English-speaking countries. New Zealand became the first to broadcast \"EastEnders\" overseas, the first episode being shown on 27 September 1985. This was followed by the Netherlands on 8 December 1986, Australia on 5 January 1987, Norway on 27 April, and Barcelona on 30 June (dubbed into Catalan). On 9 July 1987, it was announced that the show would be aired in the United States on PBS. BBC Worldwide licensed 200 hours of \"EastEnders\" for broadcast in Serbia on RTS (dubbed into Serbian); it began airing the first episode in December 1997. The series was broadcast in the United States until BBC America ceased broadcasts of the serial in 2003, amidst fan protests. In June 2004, the satellite television provider Dish Network picked up \"EastEnders\", broadcasting episodes starting at the point where BBC America had ceased broadcasting them, offering the series as a pay-per-view item. Episodes air two months behind the UK schedule. Episodes from prior years are still shown on various PBS stations in the US. Since 7 March 2017, \"EastEnders\" has been available in the United States on demand, 24 hours after it has aired in the United Kingdom via BritBox, a joint venture between BBC and ITV.\nThe series was screened in Australia by ABC TV from 1987 until 1991. It is aired in Australia on Satellite &amp; Streaming services on BBC UKTV, from Mondays to Thursdays 7:50pm\u20138:30pm with two advertisement breaks of five minutes each. Episodes are shown roughly one week after their UK broadcast. In New Zealand, it was shown by TVNZ on TVNZ 1 for several years, and then on Prime each weekday afternoon. It is shown on BBC UKTV from Mondays to Thursdays at 8pm. Episodes are roughly two weeks behind the UK.\n\"EastEnders\" is shown on BBC Entertainment (formerly BBC Prime) in Europe and in Africa, where it is approximately six episodes behind the UK. It was also shown on BBC Prime in Asia, but when the channel was replaced by BBC Entertainment, it ceased broadcasting the series. In Canada, \"EastEnders\" was shown on BBC Canada until 2010, at which point it was picked up by VisionTV.\nIn Ireland, \"EastEnders\" was shown on TV3 from September 1998 until March 2001, when it moved over to RT\u00c9 One, after RT\u00c9 lost to TV3 the rights to air rival soap \"Coronation Street\". Additionally, episodes of \"EastEnders\" are available on-demand through RT\u00c9 Online for seven days after their original screening.\nHM Forces and their families stationed overseas can watch \"EastEnders\" on BBC One, carried by the British Forces Broadcasting Service, which is also available to civilians in the Falkland Islands and Tristan da Cunha. It was previously shown on BFBS1.\nInternational versions.\nIn 1991 the BBC sold the programme's format rights to a Dutch production company IDTV, the programme was renamed \"Het Oude Noorden\" (Translation: Old North). The Dutch version was re-written from already existing \"EastEnders\" scripts. The schedule remained the same as \"EastEnders\" twice weekly episodes, however some notable changes included the programme is now set in Rotterdam rather than London, characters are given Dutch names (Den and Angie became Ger and Ankie) and The Queen Victoria pub is renamed \"Cade Faas\".\nAccording to Barbara Jurgen who re-wrote the scripts for a Dutch audience he said \"The power of the show is undeniable. The Scripts are full of hard, sharp drama, plus great one-liners which will translate well to Holland.\" The Dutch version began broadcasting on VARA 13 March 1993 but was cancelled after 20 episodes.\nSpin-offs and merchandise.\nOn 26 December 1988, the first \"EastEnders\" \"bubble\" was shown, titled \"CivvyStreet\". Since then, \"Return of Nick Cotton\" (2000), \"Ricky &amp; Bianca\" (2002), \"Dot's Story\" (2003), \"Perfectly Frank\" (2003) and \"Pat and Mo\" (2004) have all been broadcast, each episode looking into lives of various characters and revealing part of their backstories or lives since leaving \"EastEnders\". In 1993, the two-part story \"Dimensions in Time\", a charity cross-over with \"Doctor Who\", was shown.\nIn 1998, \"EastEnders Revealed\" was launched on BBC Choice (now BBC Three). The show takes a look behind the scenes of the \"EastEnders\" and investigates particular places, characters or families within \"EastEnders\". An episode of \"EastEnders Revealed\" that was commissioned for BBC Three attracted 611,000 viewers. As part of the BBC's digital push, \"EastEnders Xtra\" was introduced in 2005. The show was presented by Angellica Bell and was available to digital viewers at 8:30\u00a0pm on Monday nights. It was also shown after the Sunday omnibus. The series went behind the scenes of the show and spoke to some of the cast members. A new breed of behind-the-scenes programmes have been broadcast on BBC Three since 1 December 2006. These are all documentaries related to current storylines in \"EastEnders\", in a similar format to \"EastEnders Revealed\", though not using the \"EastEnders Revealed\" name.\nIn October 2009, a 12-part Internet spin-off series entitled \"\" was announced. The series was conceived by executive producer Diederick Santer \"as a way of nurturing new, young talent, both on- and off-screen, and exploring the stories of the soaps' anonymous bystanders.\" \"E20\" features a group of sixth-form characters and targets the \"\"Hollyoaks\" demographic\". It was written by a team of young writers and was shown three times a week on the \"EastEnders\" website from 8 January 2010. A second 10-part series started in September 2010, with twice-weekly episodes available online and an omnibus on BBC Three. A third series of 15 episodes started in September 2011.\n\"EastEnders\" and rival soap opera \"Coronation Street\" took part in a crossover episode for Children in Need on 19 November 2010 called \"East Street\". On 4 April 2015, \"EastEnders\" confirmed plans for a BBC One series featuring Kat and Alfie Moon. The six-part drama, \"\", was created by executive producer Dominic Treadwell-Collins and his team. In the spin-off, the Moons visit Ireland where they \"search for answers to some very big questions.\"\nUntil its closure, BBC Store released 553 \"EastEnders\" episodes from various years, including the special episode \"CivvyStreet\", available to buy as digital downloads.\nPopularity and viewership.\nAn example of \"EastEnders\" popularity is that after episodes, electricity use in the United Kingdom rises significantly as viewers who have waited for the show to end begin boiling water for tea, a phenomenon known as TV pickup. Over five minutes, power demand rises by three GW, the equivalent of 1.5 to 1.75\u00a0million kettles. National Grid personnel watch the show to know when closing credits begin so they can prepare for the surge, asking for additional power from France if necessary.\nRatings.\n\"EastEnders\" is the BBC's most consistent programme in terms of ratings, and as of 2021, episodes typically receive between 4 and 6 million viewers. \"EastEnders\" two biggest ratings rivals are the ITV soaps \"Coronation Street\" and \"Emmerdale\".\nThe launch show in 1985 attracted 17.35\u00a0million viewers. 25 July 1985 was the first time the show's viewership rose to first position in the weekly top 10 shows for BBC One. The highest rated episode of \"EastEnders\" is the Christmas Day 1986 episode, which attracted a combined 30.15\u00a0million viewers who tuned into either the original transmission or the omnibus to see Den Watts hand over divorce papers to his wife Angie. This remains the highest rated episode of a soap in British television history.\nIn 2001, \"EastEnders\" clashed with \"Coronation Street\" for the first time. \"EastEnders\" won the battle with 8.4\u00a0million viewers (41% share) whilst \"Coronation Street\" lagged behind with 7.3\u00a0million viewers (34% share). On 21 September 2004, Louise Berridge, the then executive producer, quit following criticism of the show. The following day the show received its lowest ever ratings at that time (6.2\u00a0million) when ITV scheduled an hour-long episode of \"Emmerdale\" against it. \"Emmerdale\" was watched by 8.1\u00a0million viewers. The poor ratings motivated the press into reporting viewers were bored with implausible and ill-thought-out storylines. Under new producers, \"EastEnders\" and \"Emmerdale\" continued to clash at times, and \"Emmerdale\" tended to come out on top, giving \"EastEnders\" lower than average ratings. In 2006, \"EastEnders\" regularly attracted between 8 and 12 million viewers in official ratings. \"EastEnders\" received its second lowest ratings on 17 May 2007, when 4.0\u00a0million viewers tuned in. This was also the lowest ever audience share, with just 19.6 per cent. This was attributed to a conflicting one-hour special episode of \"Emmerdale\" on ITV1. However, ratings for the 10pm \"EastEnders\" repeat on BBC Three reached an all-time high of 1.4\u00a0million. However, there have been times when \"EastEnders\" had higher ratings than \"Emmerdale\" despite the two going head-to-head.\nThe ratings increased in 2010, thanks to the \"Who Killed Archie?\" storyline and second wedding of Ricky Butcher (Sid Owen) and Bianca Jackson (Patsy Palmer), and the show's first live episode on 19 February 2010. The live-episode averaged 15.6\u00a0million viewers, peaking at 16.6\u00a0million in the final five minutes of broadcast. In January 2010, the average audience was higher than that of \"Coronation Street\" for the first time in three years. During the 30th anniversary week in which there were live elements and the climax of the Who Killed Lucy Beale? storyline, 10.84\u00a0million viewers tuned in for the 30th anniversary episode itself in an hour long special on 19 February 2015 (peaking with 11.9\u00a0million). Later on in the same evening, a special flashback episode averaged 10.3\u00a0million viewers, and peaked with 11.2\u00a0million. The following day, the anniversary week was rounded off with another fully live episode (the second after 2010) with 9.97\u00a0million viewers watching the aftermath of the reveal, the Beale family finding out the truth of Lucy's killer and deciding to keep it a secret.\nCriticism.\n\"EastEnders\" has received both praise and criticism for most of its storylines, which have dealt with difficult themes, such as violence, rape, murder and child abuse.\nMorality and violence.\nMary Whitehouse, social critic, argued at the time that \"EastEnders\" represented a violation of \"family viewing time\" and that it undermined the watershed policy. She regarded \"EastEnders\" as a fundamental assault on the family and morality itself. She made reference to representation of family life and emphasis on psychological and emotional violence within the show. She was also critical of language such as \"bleeding\", \"bloody hell\", \"bastard\" and \"for Christ's sake\". However, Whitehouse also praised the programme, describing Michelle Fowler's decision not to have an abortion as a \"very positive storyline\". She also felt that \"EastEnders\" had been cleaned up as a result of her protests, though she later commented that \"EastEnders\" had returned to its old ways. Her criticisms were widely reported in the tabloid press as ammunition in its existing hostility towards the BBC. The stars of \"Coronation Street\" in particular aligned themselves with Mary Whitehouse, gaining headlines such as \"STREETS AHEAD! RIVALS LASH SEEDY EASTENDERS\" and \"CLEAN UP SOAP! Street Star Bill Lashes 'Steamy' EastEnders\".\n\"EastEnders\" has been criticised for being too violent, most notably during a domestic violence storyline between Little Mo Morgan (Kacey Ainsworth) and her husband Trevor Morgan (Alex Ferns). As \"EastEnders\" is shown pre-watershed, there were worries that some scenes in this storyline were too graphic for its audience. Complaints against a scene in which Little Mo's face was pushed in gravy on Christmas Day were upheld by the Broadcasting Standards Council. However, a helpline after this episode attracted over 2000 calls. Erin Pizzey, who became internationally famous for having started one of the first women's refuges, said that \"EastEnders\" had done more to raise the issue of violence against women in one story than she had done in 25 years. The character of Phil Mitchell (played by Steve McFadden since early 1990) has been criticised on several occasions for glorifying violence and proving a bad role model to children. On one occasion following a scene in an episode broadcast in October 2002, where Phil brutally beat his godson, Jamie Mitchell (Jack Ryder), 31 complaints came from viewers.\nIn 2003, cast member Shaun Williamson, who was in the final months of his role of Barry Evans, said that the programme had become much grittier over the past 10 to 15 years, and found it \"frightening\" that parents let their young children watch.\nIn 2005, the BBC was accused of anti-religious bias by a House of Lords committee, who cited \"EastEnders\" as an example. Dr. Indarjit Singh, editor of the Sikh Messenger and patron of the World Congress of Faiths, said: \"\"EastEnders\" Dot Cotton is an example. She quotes endlessly from the Bible and it ridicules religion to some extent.\" In July 2010, complaints were received following the storyline of Christian minister Lucas Johnson (Don Gilet) committing a number of murders that he believed was his duty to God, claiming that the storyline was offensive to Christians.\nIn 2008, \"EastEnders\", along with \"Coronation Street\", was criticised by Martin McGuinness, then Northern Ireland's deputy first minister, for \"the level of concentration around the pub\" and the \"antics portrayed in The [...] Queen Vic\".\nIn 2017, viewers complained on Twitter about scenes implying that Keanu Taylor (Danny Walters) is the father of his 15-year-old sister Bernadette Taylor's (Clair Norris) unborn baby, with the pair agreeing to keep the pregnancy secret from their mother, Karen Taylor (Lorraine Stanley). However, the baby's father is revealed as one of Bernadette's school friends.\nAllegations of national and racial stereotypes.\nIn 1997, several episodes were shot and set in Ireland, resulting in criticisms for portraying the Irish in a negatively stereotypical way. Ted Barrington, the Irish Ambassador to the UK at the time, described the portrayal of Ireland as an \"unrepresentative caricature\", stating he was worried by the negative stereotypes and the images of drunkenness, backwardness and isolation. Jana Bennett, the BBC's then director of production, later apologised for the episodes, stating on BBC1's news bulletin: \"It is clear that a significant number of viewers have been upset by the recent episodes of \"EastEnders\", and we are very sorry, because the production team and programme makers did not mean to cause any offence.\" A year later BBC chairman Christopher Bland admitted that as result of the Irish-set EastEnders episodes, the station failed in its pledge to represent all groups accurately and avoid reinforcing prejudice.\nIn 2008, the show was criticised for stereotyping their Asian and Black characters, by having a black single mother, Denise Fox (Diane Parish), and an Asian shopkeeper, Zainab Masood (Nina Wadia). There has been criticism that the programme does not authentically portray the ethnic diversity of the population of East London, with the programme being 'twice as white' as the real East End.\nControversial storylines.\nIn 1992, writer David Yallop successfully sued the BBC for \u00a368,000 after it was revealed he had been hired by producer Mike Gibbon in 1989 to pen several controversial storylines in an effort to \"slim down\" the cast. However, after Gibbon left the programme, executive producers chose not to use Yallop's storylines, which put the BBC in breach of the contract Yallop had signed with them. Unused storylines penned by Yallop, which were revealed in the press during the trial, included the death of Cindy Beale's (Michelle Collins) infant son Steven; Sufia Karim (Rani Singh) being killed during a shotgun raid at the corner shop; Pauline Fowler (Wendy Richard) dying of undiscovered cancer; and an IRA explosion at the Walford community centre, killing Pete Beale (Peter Dean) and Diane Butcher (Sophie Lawrence), and leaving Simon Wicks (Nick Berry) paralysed below the waist. A suicide was also planned, but the character this storyline was assigned to was not revealed.\nSome storylines have provoked high levels of viewer complaints. In August 2006, a scene involving Carly Wicks (Kellie Shirley) and Jake Moon (Joel Beckett) having sex on the floor of Scarlet nightclub, and another scene involving Owen Turner (Lee Ross) violently attacking Denise Fox (Diane Parish), prompted 129 and 128 complaints, respectively.\nIn March 2008, scenes showing Tanya Branning (Jo Joyner) and boyfriend, Sean Slater (Robert Kazinsky), burying Tanya's husband Max (Jake Wood) alive, attracted many complaints. The UK communications regulator Ofcom later found that the episodes depicting the storyline were in breach of the 2005 Broadcasting Code. They contravened the rules regarding protection of children by appropriate scheduling, appropriate depiction of violence before the 9\u00a0p.m. watershed and appropriate depiction of potentially offensive content. In September 2008, \"EastEnders\" began a grooming and paedophilia storyline involving characters Tony King (Chris Coghill), Whitney Dean (Shona McGarty), Bianca Jackson (Patsy Palmer), Lauren Branning (Madeline Duggan) and Peter Beale (Thomas Law). The storyline attracted over 200 complaints.\nIn December 2010, Ronnie Branning (Samantha Womack) swapped her newborn baby, who died in cot, with Kat Moon's (Jessie Wallace) living baby. Around 3,400 complaints were received, with viewers branding the storyline \"insensitive\", \"irresponsible\" and \"desperate\". Roz Laws from the \"Sunday Mercury\" called the plot \"shocking and ridiculous\" and asked \"are we really supposed to believe that Kat won't recognise that the baby looks different?\" The Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths (FSID) praised the storyline, and its director Joyce Epstein explained, \"We are very grateful to \"EastEnders\" for their accurate depiction of the devastating effect that the sudden death of an infant can have on a family. We hope that this story will help raise the public's awareness of cot death, which claims 300 babies' lives each year.\" By 7 January, that storyline had generated the most complaints in show history: the BBC received about 8,500 complaints, and media regulator Ofcom received 374. Despite the controversy however, \"EastEnders\" pulled in rating highs of 9\u201310\u00a0million throughout the duration of the storyline.\nIn October 2014, the BBC defended a storyline, after receiving 278 complaints about 6 October 2014 episode where pub landlady Linda Carter (Kellie Bright) was raped by Dean Wicks (Matt Di Angelo). On 17 November 2014 it was announced that Ofcom will investigate over the storyline. On 5 January 2015, the investigation was cleared by Ofcom. A spokesman of Ofcom said: \"After carefully investigating complaints about this scene, Ofcom found the BBC took appropriate steps to limit offence to viewers. This included a warning before the episode and implying the assault, rather than depicting it. Ofcom also took into account the programme's role in presenting sometimes challenging or distressing social issues.\"\nPortrayal of certain professions.\nIn 2010, \"EastEnders\" came under criticism from the police for the way that they were portrayed during the \"Who Killed Archie?\" storyline. During the storyline, DCI Jill Marsden (Sophie Stanton) and DC Wayne Hughes (Jamie Treacher) talk to locals about the case and Hughes accepts a bribe. The police claimed that such scenes were \"damaging\" to their reputation and added that the character DC Deanne Cunningham (Zoe Henry) was \"irritatingly inaccurate\". In response to the criticism, \"EastEnders\" apologised for offending real life detectives and confirmed that they use a police consultant for such storylines.\nIn October 2012, a storyline involving Lola Pearce (Danielle Harold), forced to hand over her baby Lexi Pearce, was criticised by the charity The Who Cares? Trust, who called the storyline an \"unhelpful portrayal\" and said it had already received calls from members of the public who were \"distressed about the \"EastEnders\" scene where a social worker snatches a baby from its mother's arms\". The scenes were also condemned by the British Association of Social Workers (BASW), calling the BBC \"too lazy and arrogant\" to correctly portray the child protection process, and saying that the baby was taken \"without sufficient grounds to do so\". Bridget Robb, acting chief of the BASW, said the storyline provoked \"real anger among a profession well used to a less than accurate public and media perception of their jobs .. \"EastEnders\" shabby portrayal of an entire profession has made a tough job even tougher.\"\nIn popular culture.\nSince its premiere in 1985, \"EastEnders\" has had a large impact on British popular culture. It has frequently been referred to in many different media, including songs and television programmes.\nFurther reading.\nMany books have been written about \"EastEnders\". Notably, from 1985 to 1988, author and television writer Hugh Miller wrote 17 novels, detailing the lives of many of the show's original characters before 1985, when events on screen took place.\nKate Lock also wrote four novels centred on more recent characters; Steve Owen (Martin Kemp), Grant Mitchell (Ross Kemp), Bianca Jackson (Patsy Palmer) and Tiffany Mitchell (Martine McCutcheon). Lock also wrote a character guide entitled \"Who's Who in EastEnders\" () in 2000, examining main characters from the first 15 years of the show.\nShow creators Julia Smith and Tony Holland also wrote a book about the show in 1987, entitled \"EastEnders: The Inside Story\" (), telling the story of how the show made it to screen. Two special anniversary books have been written about the show; \"EastEnders: The First 10 Years: A Celebration\" () by Colin Brake in 1995 and \"EastEnders: 20 Years in Albert Square\" () by Rupert Smith in 2005."}
{"id": "9996", "revid": "32308078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9996", "title": "Embroidery", "text": "Embroidery is the craft of decorating fabric or other materials using a needle to apply thread or yarn. Embroidery may also incorporate other materials such as pearls, beads, quills, and sequins. In modern days, embroidery is usually seen on caps, hats, coats, blankets, dress shirts, denim, dresses, stockings, and golf shirts. Embroidery is available with a wide variety of thread or yarn colour.\nSome of the basic techniques or stitches of the earliest embroidery are chain stitch, buttonhole or blanket stitch, running stitch, satin stitch, cross stitch. Those stitches remain the fundamental techniques of hand embroidery today.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe process used to tailor, patch, mend and reinforce cloth fostered the development of sewing techniques, and the decorative possibilities of sewing led to the art of embroidery. Indeed, the remarkable stability of basic embroidery stitches has been noted:\nThe art of embroidery has been found worldwide and several early examples have been found. Works in China have been dated to the Warring States period (5th\u20133rd century BC). In a garment from Migration period Sweden, roughly 300\u2013700 AD, the edges of bands of trimming are reinforced with running stitch, back stitch, stem stitch, tailor's buttonhole stitch, and whip-stitching, but it is uncertain whether this work simply reinforced the seams or should be interpreted as decorative embroidery.\nAncient Greek mythology has credited the goddess Athena with passing down the art of embroidery along with weaving, leading to the famed competition between herself and the mortal Arachne.\nHistorical applications and techniques.\nDepending on time, location and materials available, embroidery could be the domain of a few experts or a widespread, popular technique. This flexibility led to a variety of works, from the royal to the mundane.\nElaborately embroidered clothing, religious objects, and household items often were seen as a mark of wealth and status, as in the case of Opus Anglicanum, a technique used by professional workshops and guilds in medieval England. In 18th-century England and its colonies, samplers employing fine silks were produced by the daughters of wealthy families. Embroidery was a skill marking a girl's path into womanhood as well as conveying rank and social standing.\nConversely, embroidery is also a folk art, using materials that were accessible to nonprofessionals. Examples include Hardanger from Norway, Merezhka from Ukraine, Mountmellick embroidery from Ireland, Nakshi kantha from Bangladesh and West Bengal, and Brazilian embroidery. Many techniques had a practical use such as Sashiko from Japan, which was used as a way to reinforce clothing.\nWhile historically viewed as a pastime, activity, or hobby, intended just for women, embroidery has often been used as a form of biography. Women who were unable to access a formal education or, at times, writing implements, were often taught embroidery and utilized it as a means of documenting their lives. In terms of documenting the histories of marginalized groups, especially women of color both within the United States and around the world, embroidery is a means of studying the every day lives of those whose lives largely went unstudied throughout much of history.\nThe Islamic world.\nEmbroidery was an important art in the Medieval Islamic world. The 17th-century Turkish traveler Evliya \u00c7elebi called it the \"craft of the two hands\". Because embroidery was a sign of high social status in Muslim societies, it became widely popular. In cities such as Damascus, Cairo and Istanbul, embroidery was visible on handkerchiefs, uniforms, flags, calligraphy, shoes, robes, tunics, horse trappings, slippers, sheaths, pouches, covers, and even on leather belts. Craftsmen embroidered items with gold and silver thread. Embroidery cottage industries, some employing over 800 people, grew to supply these items.\nIn the 16th century, in the reign of the Mughal Emperor Akbar, his chronicler Abu al-Fazl ibn Mubarak wrote in the famous Ain-i-Akbari:\n\"His majesty (Akbar) pays much attention to various stuffs; hence Irani, Ottoman, and Mongolian articles of wear are in much abundance especially textiles embroidered in the patterns of \"Nakshi\", \"Saadi\", \"Chikhan\", \"Ari\", \"Zardozi\", \"Wastli\", \"Gota\" and \"Kohra\". The imperial workshops in the towns of Lahore, Agra, Fatehpur and Ahmedabad turn out many masterpieces of workmanship in fabrics, and the figures and patterns, knots and variety of fashions which now prevail astonish even the most experienced travelers. Taste for fine material has since become general, and the drapery of embroidered fabrics used at feasts surpasses every description.\"\nAutomation.\nThe development of machine embroidery and its mass production came about in stages during the Industrial Revolution. The first embroidery machine was the hand embroidery machine, invented in France in 1832 by Josu\u00e9 Heilmann. The next evolutionary step was the schiffli embroidery machine. The latter borrowed from the sewing machine and the Jacquard loom to fully automate its operation. The manufacture of machine-made embroideries in St. Gallen in eastern Switzerland flourished in the latter half of the 19th century. Both St. Gallen, Switzerland and Plauen, Germany were important centers for machine embroidery and embroidery machine development. Many Swiss and Germans immigrated to Hudson county, New Jersey in the early twentieth century and developed a machine embroidery industry there. Shiffli machines have continued to evolve and are still used for industrial scale embroidery.\nClassification.\nEmbroidery can be classified according to what degree the design takes into account the nature of the base material and by the relationship of stitch placement to the fabric. The main categories are free or surface embroidery, counted embroidery, and needlepoint or canvas work.\nIn free or surface embroidery, designs are applied without regard to the weave of the underlying fabric. Examples include crewel and traditional Chinese and Japanese embroidery.\nCounted-thread embroidery patterns are created by making stitches over a predetermined number of threads in the foundation fabric. Counted-thread embroidery is more easily worked on an even-weave foundation fabric such as embroidery canvas, aida cloth, or specially woven cotton and linen fabrics. Examples include cross-stitch and some forms of blackwork embroidery.\nWhile similar to counted thread in regards to technique, in canvas work or needlepoint, threads are stitched through a fabric mesh to create a dense pattern that completely covers the foundation fabric. Examples of canvas work include bargello and Berlin wool work.\nEmbroidery can also be classified by the similarity of appearance. In drawn thread work and cutwork, the foundation fabric is deformed or cut away to create holes that are then embellished with embroidery, often with thread in the same color as the foundation fabric. When created with white thread on white linen or cotton, this work is collectively referred to as whitework. However, whitework can either be counted or free. Hardanger embroidery is a counted embroidery and the designs are often geometric. Conversely, styles such as Broderie anglaise are similar to free embroidery, with floral or abstract designs that are not dependent on the weave of the fabric.\nMaterials.\nA needle is the main stitching tool in embroidery, and comes in various sizes and types. The fabrics and yarns used in traditional embroidery vary from place to place. Wool, linen, and silk have been in use for thousands of years for both fabric and yarn. Today, embroidery thread is manufactured in cotton, rayon, and novelty yarns as well as in traditional wool, linen, and silk. Ribbon embroidery uses narrow ribbon in silk or silk/organza blend ribbon, most commonly to create floral motifs.\nSurface embroidery techniques such as chain stitch and couching or laid-work are the most economical of expensive yarns; couching is generally used for goldwork. Canvas work techniques, in which large amounts of yarn are buried on the back of the work, use more materials but provide a sturdier and more substantial finished textile.\nIn both canvas work and surface embroidery an embroidery hoop or frame can be used to stretch the material and ensure even stitching tension that prevents pattern distortion. Modern canvas work tends to follow symmetrical counted stitching patterns with designs emerging from the repetition of one or just a few similar stitches in a variety of hues. In contrast, many forms of surface embroidery make use of a wide range of stitching patterns in a single piece of work.\nMachine.\nContemporary embroidery is stitched with a computerized embroidery machine using patterns digitized with embroidery software. In machine embroidery, different types of \"fills\" add texture and design to the finished work. Machine embroidery is used to add logos and monograms to business shirts or jackets, gifts, and team apparel as well as to decorate household linens, draperies, and decorator fabrics that mimic the elaborate hand embroidery of the past.\nMachine embroidery is most typically done with rayon thread, although polyester thread can also be used. Cotton thread, on the other hand, is prone to breaking and should be avoided if under 30 wt.\nThere has also been a development in free hand machine embroidery, new machines have been designed that allow for the user to create free-motion embroidery which has its place in textile arts, quilting, dressmaking, home furnishings and more. Users can use the embroidery software to digitize the digital embroidery designs. These digitized design are then transferred to the embroidery machine with the help of a flash drive and then the embroidery machine embroiders the selected design onto the fabric.\nResurgence of hand embroidery.\nSince the late 2010s, there has been an exponential growth in the popularity of embroidering by hand. As a result of visual media such as Pinterest and Instagram, artists are able to share their work more extensively, which has inspired younger generations to pick up needle and threads.\nContemporary embroidery artists believe hand embroidery has grown in popularity as a result of an increasing need for relaxation and digitally disconnecting practises.\nModern hand embroidery, as opposed to cross-stitching, is characterized by a more \"liberal\" approach, where stitches are more freely combined in unconventional ways to create various textures and designs.\nQualifications.\nCity and Guilds qualification in embroidery allows embroiderers to become recognized for their skill. This qualification also gives them the credibility to teach. For example, the notable textiles artist, Kathleen Laurel Sage, began her teaching career by getting the City and Guilds Embroidery 1 and 2 qualifications. She has now gone on to write a book on the subject."}
{"id": "9997", "revid": "5075409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9997", "title": "Edward Mitchell Bannister", "text": "Edward Mitchell Bannister (November 2, 1828 \u2013 January 9, 1901) was an American Tonalist oil painter. Born in Canada, he spent his adult life in New England, where he was a prominent member of African American cultural and political communities. He joined Boston's abolition movement and was a founding member of the Providence Art Club. \nBannister's style and predominantly pastoral subject matter reflected his admiration for the French artist Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Millet and the French Barbizon School. A life-long sailor, he also looked to the Rhode Island seaside for inspiration. Bannister continually experimented in his artistic practice, and his artwork is noted for its connection to Idealist philosophies and his masterful control of color and atmosphere. He began his professional practice as a photographer and portraitist before developing his more well-known landscape style.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nBannister was born on November 2, 1828, in St. Andrews, New Brunswick, near the St. Croix River, to possibly Barbadian parents. His father Edward Bannister died in 1832, so Edward and his younger brother William were raised by their mother, Hannah Alexander Bannister. Early on, Bannister was apprenticed to a cobbler, but his drawing skill was already noted among his friends and family. Bannister credited his mother with igniting his early interest in art. She died in 1844, after which Bannister and his brother lived on the farm of the wealthy lawyer and merchant Harris Hatch. There, he practiced drawing by studying and reproducing two Hatch family portraits, as well as studying the family library and Bible.\nBannister and his brother found work aboard ships as mates and cooks for several months before immigrating to Boston sometime in the late 1840s. In the 1850 US census, they are listed as living at the same boarding house, with the Revaleon family, and working as barbers. The brothers' role as barbers and status as mixed race gave them relatively high standing as middle-class professionals within Boston.\nAlthough he aspired to work as a painter, Bannister had difficulty finding an apprenticeship or academic programs that would accept him, likely due to racial prejudice. At the time, Boston was an abolitionist stronghold, but it was also sharply divided by race; in 1860, Boston was one of the most segregated cities in the US. Bannister would later express his frustration with being blocked from artistic education: \"Whatever may be my success as an artist is due more to inherited potential than to instruction\" and \"All I would do I cannot ... simply for the want of proper training.\" \nBannister received his first oil painting commission, \"The Ship Outward Bound\", in 1854 from an African American doctor, John V. DeGrasse. Bannister's colleague, Jacob R. Andrews, created the commission's gilt frame. DeGrasse later commissioned Bannister to paint portraits of him and his wife. Patronage like DeGrasse's was critical to Bannister's early career, as the African American community wanted to support and highlight its contributions to high culture. African Americans found portraiture an \"ideal medium\" for expressing their freedom and opportunity, which is likely why Bannister's earliest commissions are mostly within that genre.\nThrough abolitionist newspapers like \"The Anglo-African\" and \"The Liberator\" and the writings of Martin R. Delany, Bannister likely learned about other African American artists like Robert S. Duncanson, James Presley Ball, Patrick H. Reason, and David Bustill Bowser. Their work would have made Bannister's ambition seem all the more possible. Although most cultural institutions barred Black Bostonians from entrance, Bannister would have had access to several, like the Boston Athen\u00e6um library, with collections of European art sources and exhibitions of Luminist marine painters like Robert Salmon and Fitz Hugh Lane.\nBoston activist, artist, and student.\nBannister met Christiana Carteaux in 1853 when he applied to be a barber in her salon. Both were members of Boston's diverse abolitionist movement, and barbershops were important meeting places for African American abolitionists. They married on June 10, 1857, and she became, in effect, his most important patron. The couple boarded for two years with Lewis Hayden and Harriet Bell Hayden at 66 Southac Street, a stop on Boston's Underground Railroad (a support network for escaped slaves). \nIn 1855, William Cooper Nell acknowledged Bannister's rising artistic status in \"The Colored Patriots of the American Revolution\" for his \"The Ship Outward Bound\". By 1858, Bannister was listed as an artist in Boston's city directory. Around 1862, he spent a year training in photography in New York, likely to support his painting practice, He then found work as a photographer, taking solar plates and tinting photos. One of Bannister's earliest commissioned portraits was of Prudence Nelson Bell in 1864, which is around when he found studio space at the Studio Building in Boston. At the Studio Building, he came into contact with other prominent artists, like Elihu Vedder and John La Farge. Once Bannister was established as an artist, abolitionist William Wells Brown praised Bannister in his 1865 book:\nBannister was part of Boston's African American artistic community, which included Edmonia Lewis, William H. Simpson, and Nelson A. Primus. He sang a tenor in the Crispus Attucks Choir, which performed anti-slavery songs at public events, and acted with The Histrionic Club, as well as serving as a delegate for the New England Colored Citizens Conventions in August 1859 and 1865. His name also appears on several public petitions published in \"The Liberator\". \nBannister and Carteaux were devout members of the militant abolitionist Twelfth Baptist Church, located on Southac Street near their home at the Hayden House. In May 1859, Bannister served as the secretary for the church's meetings to respond to the Oberlin\u2013Wellington Rescue of imprisoned fugitive slaves and, in 1863, to plan celebrations for the Emancipation Proclamation.\nDuring the US Civil War, Carteaux lobbied for equal pay for African American soldiers and organized the 1864 soldiers\u2019 relief fair for the Massachusetts 54th infantry regiment, 55th infantry regiment, and 5th cavalry regiment, which had gone without pay for over a year and a half. Bannister donated his full-length portrait of Robert Gould Shaw, the commander of the 54th killed in action, to raise money for the cause.\nThe Bannister portrait of Robert Gould Shaw was one of several reclamations of Gould Shaw by members of Boston's African American artistic community such as Edmonia Lewis, despite Gould Shaw's Boston Brahmin background. It was displayed with the label \"\"Our\" Martyr\". The portrait was praised in the \"New York Weekly Anglo-African\" as \"a fine specimen of art\" and inspired a poem by Martha Perry Lowe entitled \"The Picture of Col. Shaw in Boston.\" The portrait's paternalistic praise from Lowe and Lydia Maria Child exemplified the divide between Boston's white abolitionists and the African American community. The painting was purchased by the state of Massachusetts and installed in its state house, but its current location is unknown. \nBannister's activism also took other forms: on June 17, 1865, Bannister marshaled around 200 members of the Twelfth Baptist Sunday School at a Grand Temperance Celebration on Boston Common. They marched under a banner reading \"Equal rights for all men\".\nBannister eventually studied at the Lowell Institute with the artist William Rimmer for about a year. Because of his daytime photography business, he mostly took his drawing classes at night. Through Rimmer and the community at the Studio Building, Bannister was inspired by the Barbizon school-influenced paintings of William Morris Hunt, who had studied in Europe and held numerous public exhibitions in Boston around the 1860s. He also formed a temporary painting partnership with Asa R. Lewis that lasted from 1868 to 1869. During that partnership of \"Bannister &amp; Lewis\", Bannister began to advertise himself as both a portrait and landscape painter. \nDespite his early commissions, Bannister still struggled to receive wider recognition for his work due to racism in the US. Following emancipation and the end of the US Civil War, the abolitionists began to disperse and, with them, their patronage. Due to increasing competition, Bannister did little to support Nelson A. Primus, who had come to him seeking an apprenticeship. An 1867 article in the \"New York Herald\" belittled both Bannister and his work, stating, \"the negro has an appreciation for art while being manifestly unable to produce it\". The article reportedly spurred his desire to achieve success as an artist. At the same time, Bannister had begun to receive more recognition within white art circles in Boston.\nProvidence.\nSupported by Carteaux, Bannister became a full-time painter from 1870 on, shortly after they moved to Providence, Rhode Island, at the end of 1869. He first took a studio in the Mercantile National Bank Building and eventually moved his studio to the Woods Building in Providence, where he shared a floor with artists like Sydney Burleigh and became friends with Providence painter George William Whitaker. Over time, he painted more landscapes; he received an 1872 award at the Rhode Island Industrial Exposition for \"Summer Afternoon\" and began submitting paintings to the Boston Art Club.\nBannister finally received national commendation for his work when he won first prize for his large oil \"Under the Oaks\" at the 1876 Philadelphia Centennial. \nEven then, the judge wanted to rescind the award after learning his identity until other exhibition artists protested; afterwards, Bannister reflected: \"I was and am proud to know that the jury of award did not know anything about me, my antecedents, color or race. There was no sentimental sympathy leading to the award of the medal.\" Bannister had intentionally submitted his painting with only a signature attached to ensure he would be judged fairly. As his career matured, he received more commissions and accumulated many honors, several from the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanics Association (silver medals in 1881 and 1884). Collectors and local notables Isaac Comstock Bates and Joseph Ely were among his patrons.\nHe was an original board member of the Rhode Island School of Design in 1878. In 1880, Bannister joined with other professional artists, amateurs, and art collectors to found the Providence Art Club to stimulate the appreciation of art in the community. Their first meeting was in Bannister's studio in the Woods Building at the bottom of College Hill. He was the second to sign the club's charter, served on its initial executive board, and taught regular Saturday art classes. He continued to show paintings at Boston Art Club exhibitions, as well as in Connecticut and at New York's National Academy of Design, and exhibited \"A New England Hillside\" at the New Orleans Cotton Exposition in 1885. There, Bannister's work was segregated and ignored by the judging committees. With that experience in mind, Bannister decided not to submit any works to the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition since they would have to be pre-judged in Boston before they could even be sent to Chicago. \nIn the 1880s, Bannister bought a small sloop sailboat, the \"Fanchon\", and he would spend his summers sketching, painting watercolors, and sailing Narragansett Bay and up to Bar Harbor in Maine. He would return with his studies and use them as the basis for winter commissions. He supplemented his sailing trips with journeys to exhibitions in New York, but a planned trip to Europe fell through due to funding problems.\nIn 1885, with other art club members, Bannister helped found the \"Anne Eliza Club\" (or \"A&amp;E Club\")\u2014a communal men's discussion group whose members shared art and literature. Through his teaching there and at the Providence Art Club, he became a mentor to younger Providence artists, like Charles Walter Stetson. Stetson often mentioned Bannister in his personal diaries and once praised Bannister by writing, \"He is my only confidant in Art matters &amp; I am his.\" Rhode Island engineer George Henry Corliss commissioned a painting from Bannister in 1886, as his reputation grew.\nBannister and Carteaux were consistent members of the African American community in Providence. They lived for a time in the boarding house of Ransom Parker, who had participated in the Dorr Rebellion, and were friends with merchant George Henry, Reverend Mahlon Van Horne, Brown graduate John Hope, and abolitionist George T. Downing, an ally from the Bannisters' political work in Boston. Carteaux founded the Home for Aged Colored Women, which is known as the Bannister Center today. Edward exhibited his painting \"Christ Healing the Sick\" in the home in 1892 and donated his portrait of Carteaux to it as well. Bannister's abolitionism likely led to conflict with the mostly white members of the Providence Art Club, which exhibited art with minstrel stereotypes by E. W. Kemble and W. L. Shephard in 1887 and 1893.\nSometime around 1890, Bannister sold the \"Fanchon\" to Judge George Newman Bliss. His largest exhibition of works was held in 1891, when he showed 33 works at the Spring Providence Art Club Exhibition. Later in the 1890s, Bannister seems to have sold fewer paintings, perhaps due to waning popularity, and exhibited less often. In 1898, Bannister closed his studio and the couple moved to Boston for a year before returning to a smaller home in Providence on Wilson Street in 1900.\nDeath.\nBannister died of a heart attack on January 9, 1901, while attending an evening prayer meeting at his church, Elmwood Avenue Free Baptist Church. He had experienced heart trouble for some time but had completed two paintings only the previous day. During the service, he offered a prayer and shortly after sat down, gasping. His last words were reportedly \"Jesus, help me.\"\nAfter his death, the Providence Art Club held a memorial exhibition in his name that focused on his artistic achievements, without mentioning his contribution to abolitionism. In the exhibition pamphlet, they wrote that \"His gentle disposition, his urbanity of manner, and his generous appreciation of the work of others, made him a welcome guest in all artistic circles. [...] He painted with profound feeling, not for pecuniary results, but to leave upon the canvas his impression of natural scenery, and to express his delight in the wondrous beauty of land and sea and sky.\"\nHe is buried in the North Burial Ground in Providence, under a stone monument designed by his art club friends. The disparity between Bannister's financial difficulties at the end of his life and the support shown by Providence's artists after his death led one friend to say about the memorial: \"In the labor incident to this work I was constantly reminded of the remark attributed to the mother of Robert Burns on being shown the splendid monument erected to the memory of her gifted son: 'He asked for bread and they gave him a stone.'\"\nCarteaux was admitted to her Home for Aged Colored Women in 1902 and died in 1903 in a mental institution. She and Bannister are buried together.\nArtistic style.\nBannister is primarily known for his idealized landscapes and seascapes, but he also executed portraits, as well as biblical, mythological, and genre scenes. He advertised himself as a portraitist as a young painter, but eventually became popular for his landscapes. An intellectual autodidact, his tastes in literature were typical of an educated Victorian painter, including Spenser, Virgil, Ruskin, and Tennyson, from whose works much of his iconography can be traced. Much like George Inness, his work reflected the composition, mood, and influences of French Barbizon painters Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot, Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Millet, and Charles-Fran\u00e7ois Daubigny. Defending Millet in \"The Artist and His Critics\", Bannister saw him as the most \"spiritual artist of our time\" who voiced \"the sad, uncomplaining life he saw about him \u2014 and with which he sympathized so deeply.\" \nHistorian Joseph Skerrett has noted the influence of the Hudson River School on Bannister, while maintaining that he consistently experimented throughout his career: \"Bannister managed to please a conservative New England taste in art while continuing to try new methods and styles.\" For their mutual affinity with the Hudson River School, Bannister has been compared to his contemporary, the Ohio-based African American painter Robert S. Duncanson. Unlike the Hudson River School style, Bannister did not create meticulous landscapes but paid more attention to creating \"generalized masses defined by light and shadow\" and works that were more picturesque than sublime. Bannister also avoided the \"nationalist grandeur\" often found Hudson River School paintings.\nBannister often made pencil or pastel studies in preparation for larger oil paintings. Several of his compositions refer to classical, mathematical methods like the Golden Ratio or \"Harmonic Grid\" and make careful use of symmetry and asymmetry. In other paintings, his contrast of darks and lights create dynamic diagonals or circles that divide the composition. His paintings are known for their delicate use of color to depict shadow and atmosphere and their loose brushwork. His later palette exhibited brighter, but more muted colors: the Boston Common scene he painted late in his life is a notable example. This change in style stands in contrast to his earlier stated disapproval of Impressionist painting.\nArt historian Traci Lee Costa has argued that a \"reductive\" emphasis on Bannister's biography has taken attention away from scholarly analysis of his artwork. In the lecture \"The Artist and His Critics\" given to the Ann Eliza Club on April 15, 1886, and published afterward, Bannister spelled out his belief that making art is a highly spiritual practice\u2014the pinnacle of human achievement. In its nearly religious approach and focus on subjective representations of nature, Bannister's philosophy has been compared to both German Idealism and American Transcendentalism. In his lecture, Bannister made explicit reference to the works of American Transcendentalist Washington Allston. Bannister's friend George W. Whitaker even referred to him as \"The Idealist\" in a 1914 article \"Reminiscences of Providence Artists.\" The lecture and its idealistic view are linked to Bannister's \"Approaching Storm\", which he completed in the same year. \"Approaching Storm\" features a human figure at its center, which is nonetheless rendered small by the surrounding landscape. Despite the implied drama, Bannister used a cool color palette of blues and greens, with contrasting yellows that provide warmth against the darker, almost purple sky. The contrast of melancholy elements against more cheerful pastoral themes appears in many of Bannister's paintings.\nAlthough committed to freedom and equal rights for African Americans, Bannister did not often directly represent those issues in his paintings. In one work, \"Hay Gatherers\", Bannister depicts African American field laborers that combines his rural landscapes with a representation of the racial oppression and labor exploitation that marked Rhode Island, particularly in South County, where most of the state's plantations once were. Through the geometric composition of the painting, which divides the figures and the landscapes into triangular sections, he combined a seemingly idealized landscape with his early political practice, visible in his humanist portraits such as \"Newspaper Boy\". \nBannister often conveyed political meaning in his paintings through allegory and allusion. One of his first commissions, \"The Ship Outward Bound\", might have been a veiled reference to the forced return of Anthony Burns to slavery and Virginia under the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 in 1854. In African American culture, an image of a ship leaving harbor was a clear reminder of the Transatlantic Slave Trade. Bannister's 1885 drawing \"The Woodsman\" is thought to be Bannister's response to the murder of Amasa Sprague, an event that spurred the abolition of capital punishment in Rhode Island after the dubious conviction and hanging of John Gordon. Similarly, his \"Governor Sprague's White Horse\" depicted the horse that William Sprague IV rode into the First Battle of Bull Run.\nHe has, however, been criticized for \"not\" often directly representing African Americans, outside of his early portraiture. Bannister's art subtly dismantled racial stereotypes, but many of his works consisted of commissioned landscapes and portraits that reinforced European ideas. In that way, Bannister has been compared to later Bostonian poet William Stanley Braithwaite, whose writing did not clearly reflect his identity. Art historian Juanita Marie Holland believes that Bannister's work reflected his desire to excel and contribute to racial uplift, while still needing to depend on white patronage to reach a wider audience. Holland wrote of Bannister's dilemma: \"This was a large part of the double blind that [Boston's] black artists faced: they needed to both address and represent an African American identity, while finding a way for their white viewers to look past race to a perception of the work in more universal terms.\"\nLegacy.\nBannister was the only major African American artist of the late nineteenth century who developed his talents without European exposure; and he was well known in the artistic community of Providence and admired within the wider East Coast art world. After his death, Bannister was largely forgotten by art history for almost a century, principally due to racial prejudice. Still, he and his paintings are an indelible part of a refigured relationship between African American culture and the landscapes of Reconstruction-era America.\nBannister's art continued to be supported by galleries like the Barnett-Aden Gallery, and following the civil rights movement in the 1960s, his work was again celebrated and widely collected. In collaboration with the Rhode Island School of Design and the Frederick Douglass Institute, the National Museum of African Art held an exhibition titled \"Edward Mitchell Bannister, 1828\u20131901: Providence Artist\" in 1973. The Rhode Island Heritage Hall of Fame inducted Bannister in 1976, and, in 1978, Rhode Island College dedicated its Art Gallery in Bannister's name with the exhibition: \"Four From Providence: Alston, Bannister, Jennings &amp; Prophet\". \nThe New York-based Kenkebala Gallery held two exhibitions of Bannister's work, one in 1992 curated by Corrinne Jennings in collaboration with the Whitney and one in 2001 on the centennial of Bannister's death. From June 9 to October 8, 2018, the Gilbert Stuart Museum held an exhibition honoring Bannister and Carteaux's relationship, \"\"My Greatest Successes Have Come Through Her\": The Artistic Partnership of Edward and Christiana Bannister\", as part of its Rhode Island Masters exhibition series. was the center of the exhibition. \nIn September 2017, a Providence City Council committee unanimously voted to rename Magee Street (which had been named after a Rhode Island slave trader) to Bannister Street, in honor of Edward and Christiana Bannister.\nThe historian Anne Louise Avery is currently compiling the first catalogue raisonn\u00e9 and a major biography of Bannister's work.\nHouse.\nIn 1884, Bannister and Carteaux moved from the boarding house of Ransom Parker to 93 Benevolent Street, and lived there until 1899. The two-and-a-half-story wooden house was built circa 1854 by engineer Charles E. Paine and is now known as \"The Vault\" or \"The Bannister House.\" Euchlin Reeves and Louise Herreshoff purchased the house in the late 1930s and renovated it to add a brick exterior. The renovation was made to create consistency with their next-door property, so both houses could hold their \"little museum\" of antiques. Herreshoff died in 1967 and the porcelain collection filling the Bannister House was donated to Washington and Lee University.\nThe house is now listed as contributing to College Hill's historical designation. Brown University bought the property in 1989 and used it to store refrigerators. Due to a lack of plans for its preservation and use, the Providence Preservation Society put the Bannister House on its 2001 list of most endangered buildings in Providence, Brown University president Ruth Simmons assured historian and former Rhode Island deputy secretary of state Ray Rickman that the house would be preserved, although the university debated whether to sell the house to a third party.\nBecause its disrepair and long disuse made the house unsuitable for residence, Brown renovated the property in 2015 and restored it to its original appearance. It was sold to Professor Jeff Huang in 2016 as part of the Brown to Brown Home Ownership Program\u2014the program specifies that if the house is ever sold, it has to be sold back to the university."}
{"id": "9998", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9998", "title": "Eliezer S. Yudkowsky", "text": ""}
{"id": "10000", "revid": "983814521", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10000", "title": "Eiffel", "text": "Eiffel may refer to:"}
{"id": "10002", "revid": "8850448", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10002", "title": "Emil Kraepelin", "text": "Emil Wilhelm Georg Magnus Kraepelin (; ; 15 February 1856 \u2013 7 October 1926) was a German psychiatrist. H. J. Eysenck's \"Encyclopedia of Psychology\" identifies him as the founder of modern scientific psychiatry, psychopharmacology and psychiatric genetics.\nKraepelin believed the chief origin of psychiatric disease to be biological and genetic malfunction. His theories dominated psychiatry at the start of the 20th century and, despite the later psychodynamic influence of Sigmund Freud and his disciples, enjoyed a revival at century's end. While he proclaimed his own high clinical standards of gathering information \"by means of expert analysis of individual cases\", he also drew on reported observations of officials not trained in psychiatry.\nHis textbooks do not contain detailed case histories of individuals but mosaic-like compilations of typical statements and behaviors from patients with a specific diagnosis. He has been described as \"a scientific manager\" and \"a political operator\", who developed \"a large-scale, clinically oriented, epidemiological research programme\".\nFamily and early life.\nKraepelin, whose father, Karl Wilhelm, was a former opera singer, music teacher, and later successful story teller, was born in 1856 in Neustrelitz, in the Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz in Germany. He was first introduced to biology by his brother Karl, 10 years older and, later, the director of the Zoological Museum of Hamburg.\nEducation and career.\nKraepelin began his medical studies in 1874 at the University of Leipzig and completed them at the University of W\u00fcrzburg (1877\u201378). At Leipzig, he studied neuropathology under Paul Flechsig and experimental psychology with Wilhelm Wundt. Kraepelin would be a disciple of Wundt and had a lifelong interest in experimental psychology based on his theories. While there, Kraepelin wrote a prize-winning essay, \"The Influence of Acute Illness in the Causation of Mental Disorders\".\nAt W\u00fcrzburg he completed his \"Rigorosum\" (roughly equivalent to an MBBS viva-voce examination) in March 1878, his \"Staatsexamen\" (licensing examination) in July 1878, and his \"Approbation\" (his license to practice medicine; roughly equivalent to an MBBS) on 9 August 1878. From August 1878 to 1882, he worked with Bernhard von Gudden at the University of Munich.\nReturning to the University of Leipzig in February 1882, he worked in Wilhelm Heinrich Erb's neurology clinic and in Wundt's psychopharmacology laboratory. He completed his \"habilitation\" thesis at Leipzig; it was entitled \"The Place of Psychology in Psychiatry\". On 3 December 1883 he completed his \"\" (\"rehabilitation\" = habilitation recognition procedure) at Munich.\nKraepelin's major work, \"Compendium der Psychiatrie: Zum Gebrauche f\u00fcr Studirende und Aerzte\" (\"Compendium of Psychiatry: For the Use of Students and Physicians\"), was first published in 1883 and was expanded in subsequent multivolume editions to \"Ein Lehrbuch der Psychiatrie\" (\"A Textbook: Foundations of Psychiatry and Neuroscience\"). In it, he argued that psychiatry was a branch of medical science and should be investigated by observation and experimentation like the other natural sciences. He called for research into the physical causes of mental illness, and started to establish the foundations of the modern classification system for mental disorders. Kraepelin proposed that by studying case histories and identifying specific disorders, the progression of mental illness could be predicted, after taking into account individual differences in personality and patient age at the onset of disease.\nIn 1884, he became senior physician in the Prussian provincial town of Leubus, Silesia Province, and the following year he was appointed director of the Treatment and Nursing Institute in Dresden. On 1 July 1886, at the age of 30, Kraepelin was named Professor of Psychiatry at the University of Dorpat (today the University of Tartu) in what is today Estonia (see Burgmair et al., vol. IV). Four years later, on 5 December 1890, he became department head at the University of Heidelberg, where he remained until 1904. While at Dorpat he became the director of the 80-bed University Clinic. There he began to study and record many clinical histories in detail and \"was led to consider the importance of the course of the illness with regard to the classification of mental disorders\".\nIn 1903, Kraepelin moved to Munich to become Professor of Clinical Psychiatry at the University of Munich.\nIn 1908, he was elected a member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.\nIn 1912, at the request of the DVP (Deutscher Verein f\u00fcr Psychiatrie; German Association for Psychiatry), of which he was the head from 1906\u20131920, he began plans to establish a centre for research. Following a large donation from the Jewish German-American banker James Loeb, who had at one time been a patient, and promises of support from \"patrons of science\", the German Institute for Psychiatric Research was founded in 1917 in Munich. Initially housed in existing hospital buildings, it was maintained by further donations from Loeb and his relatives. In 1924 it came under the auspices of the Kaiser Wilhelm Society for the Advancement of Science. The German-American Rockefeller family's Rockefeller Foundation made a large donation enabling the development of a new dedicated building for the institute along Kraepelin's guidelines, which was officially opened in 1928.\nKraepelin spoke out against the barbarous treatment that was prevalent in the psychiatric asylums of the time, and crusaded against alcohol, capital punishment and the imprisonment rather than treatment of the insane. For the sedation of agitated patients Kraepelin recommended potassium bromide. He rejected psychoanalytical theories that posited innate or early sexuality as the cause of mental illness, and he rejected philosophical speculation as unscientific. He focused on collecting clinical data and was particularly interested in neuropathology (e.g., diseased tissue).\nIn the later period of his career, as a convinced champion of social Darwinism, he actively promoted a policy and research agenda in racial hygiene and eugenics.\nKraepelin retired from teaching at the age of 66, spending his remaining years establishing the institute. The ninth and final edition of his \"Textbook\" was published in 1927, shortly after his death. It comprised four volumes and was ten times larger than the first edition of 1883.\nIn the last years of his life, Kraepelin was preoccupied with Buddhist teachings and was planning to visit Buddhist shrines at the time of his death, according to his daughter, Antonie Schmidt-Kraepelin.\nTheories and classification schemes.\nKraepelin announced that he had found a new way of looking at mental illness, referring to the traditional view as \"symptomatic\" and to his view as \"clinical\". This turned out to be his paradigm-setting synthesis of the hundreds of mental disorders classified by the 19th century, grouping diseases together based on classification of syndrome\u2014common \"patterns\" of symptoms over time\u2014rather than by simple similarity of major symptoms in the manner of his predecessors.\nKraepelin described his work in the 5th edition of his textbook as a \"decisive step from a symptomatic to a clinical view of insanity. . . . The importance of external clinical signs has . . . been subordinated to consideration of the conditions of origin, the course, and the terminus which result from individual disorders. Thus, all purely symptomatic categories have disappeared from the nosology\".\nPsychosis and mood.\nKraepelin is specifically credited with the classification of what was previously considered to be a unitary concept of psychosis, into two distinct forms (known as the Kraepelinian dichotomy):\nDrawing on his long-term research, and using the criteria of course, outcome and prognosis, he developed the concept of dementia praecox, which he defined as the \"sub-acute development of a peculiar simple condition of mental weakness occurring at a youthful age\". When he first introduced this concept as a diagnostic entity in the fourth German edition of his \"Lehrbuch der Psychiatrie\" in 1893, it was placed among the degenerative disorders alongside, but separate from, catatonia and dementia paranoides. At that time, the concept corresponded by and large with Ewald Hecker's hebephrenia. In the sixth edition of the \"Lehrbuch\" in 1899 all three of these clinical types are treated as different expressions of one disease, dementia praecox.\nOne of the cardinal principles of his method was the recognition that any given symptom may appear in virtually any one of these disorders; e.g., there is almost no single symptom occurring in dementia praecox which cannot sometimes be found in manic depression. What distinguishes each disease symptomatically (as opposed to the underlying pathology) is not any particular (pathognomonic) symptom or symptoms, but a specific pattern of symptoms. In the absence of a direct physiological or genetic test or marker for each disease, it is only possible to distinguish them by their specific pattern of symptoms. Thus, Kraepelin's system is a method for pattern recognition, not grouping by common symptoms.\nIt has been claimed that Kraepelin also demonstrated specific patterns in the genetics of these disorders and patterns in their course and outcome, but no specific biomarkers have yet been identified. Generally speaking, there tend to be more schizophrenics among the relatives of schizophrenic patients than in the general population, while manic depression is more frequent in the relatives of manic depressives. Though, of course, this does not demonstrate genetic linkage, as this might be a socio-environmental factor as well.\nHe also reported a pattern to the course and outcome of these conditions. Kraepelin believed that schizophrenia had a deteriorating course in which mental function continuously (although perhaps erratically) declines, while manic-depressive patients experienced a course of illness which was intermittent, where patients were relatively symptom-free during the intervals which separate acute episodes. This led Kraepelin to name what we now know as schizophrenia, dementia praecox (the dementia part signifying the irreversible mental decline). It later became clear that dementia praecox did not necessarily lead to mental decline and was thus renamed schizophrenia by Eugen Bleuler to correct Kraepelin's misnomer.\nIn addition, as Kraepelin accepted in 1920, \"It is becoming increasingly obvious that we cannot satisfactorily distinguish these two diseases\"; however, he maintained that \"On the one hand we find those patients with irreversible dementia and severe cortical lesions. On the other are those patients whose personality remains intact\". Nevertheless, overlap between the diagnoses and neurological abnormalities (when found) have continued, and in fact a diagnostic category of schizoaffective disorder would be brought in to cover the intermediate cases.\nKraepelin devoted very few pages to his speculations about the etiology of his two major insanities, dementia praecox and manic-depressive insanity. However, from 1896 to his death in 1926 he held to the speculation that these insanities (particularly dementia praecox) would one day probably be found to be caused by a gradual systemic or \"whole body\" disease process, probably metabolic, which affected many of the organs and nerves in the body but affected the brain in a final, decisive cascade.\nPsychopathic personalities.\nIn the first through sixth edition of Kraepelin's influential psychiatry textbook, there was a section on moral insanity, which meant then a disorder of the emotions or moral sense without apparent delusions or hallucinations, and which Kraepelin defined as \"lack or weakness of those sentiments which counter the ruthless satisfaction of egotism\". He attributed this mainly to degeneration. This has been described as a psychiatric redefinition of Cesare Lombroso's theories of the \"born criminal\", conceptualised as a \"moral defect\", though Kraepelin stressed it was not yet possible to recognise them by physical characteristics.\nIn fact from 1904 Kraepelin changed the section heading to \"The born criminal\", moving it from under \"Congenital feeble-mindedness\" to a new chapter on \"Psychopathic personalities\". They were treated under a theory of degeneration. Four types were distinguished: born criminals (inborn delinquents), pathological liars, querulous persons, and Triebmenschen (persons driven by a basic compulsion, including vagabonds, spendthrifts, and dipsomaniacs).\nThe concept of \"psychopathic inferiorities\" had been recently popularised in Germany by Julius Ludwig August Koch, who proposed congenital and acquired types. Kraepelin had no evidence or explanation suggesting a congenital cause, and his assumption therefore appears to have been simple \"biologism\". Others, such as Gustav Aschaffenburg, argued for a varying combination of causes. Kraepelin's assumption of a moral defect rather than a positive drive towards crime has also been questioned, as it implies that the moral sense is somehow inborn and unvarying, yet it was known to vary by time and place, and Kraepelin never considered that the moral sense might just be different.\nKurt Schneider criticized Kraepelin's nosology on topics such as Haltlose for appearing to be a list of behaviors that he considered undesirable, rather than medical conditions, though Schneider's alternative version has also been criticised on the same basis. Nevertheless, many essentials of these diagnostic systems were introduced into the diagnostic systems, and remarkable similarities remain in the DSM-V and ICD-10. The issues would today mainly be considered under the category of personality disorders, or in terms of Kraepelin's focus on psychopathy.\nKraepelin had referred to psychopathic conditions (or \"states\") in his 1896 edition, including compulsive insanity, impulsive insanity, homosexuality, and mood disturbances. From 1904, however, he instead termed those \"original disease conditions, and introduced the new alternative category of psychopathic personalities. In the eighth edition from 1909 that category would include, in addition to a separate \"dissocial\" type, the excitable, the unstable, the Triebmenschen driven persons, eccentrics, the liars and swindlers, and the quarrelsome. It has been described as remarkable that Kraepelin now considered mood disturbances to be not part of the same category, but only attenuated (more mild) phases of manic depressive illness; this corresponds to current classification schemes.\nAlzheimer's disease.\nKraepelin postulated that there is a specific brain or other biological pathology underlying each of the major psychiatric disorders. As a colleague of Alois Alzheimer, he was a co-discoverer of Alzheimer's disease, and his laboratory discovered its pathological basis. Kraepelin was confident that it would someday be possible to identify the pathological basis of each of the major psychiatric disorders.\nEugenics.\nUpon moving to become Professor of Clinical Psychiatry at the University of Munich in 1903, Kraepelin increasingly wrote on social policy issues. He was a strong and influential proponent of eugenics and racial hygiene. His publications included a focus on alcoholism, crime, degeneration and hysteria.\nKraepelin was convinced that such institutions as the education system and the welfare state, because of their trend to break the processes of natural selection, undermined the Germans' biological \"struggle for survival\". He was concerned to preserve and enhance the German people, the Volk, in the sense of nation or race. He appears to have held Lamarckian concepts of evolution, such that cultural deterioration could be inherited. He was a strong ally and promoter of the work of fellow psychiatrist (and pupil and later successor as director of the clinic) Ernst R\u00fcdin to clarify the mechanisms of genetic inheritance as to make a so-called \"empirical genetic prognosis\".\nMartin Brune has pointed out that Kraepelin and R\u00fcdin also appear to have been ardent advocates of a self-domestication theory, a version of social Darwinism which held that modern culture was not allowing people to be weeded out, resulting in more mental disorder and deterioration of the gene pool. Kraepelin saw a number of \"symptoms\" of this, such as \"weakening of viability and resistance, decreasing fertility, proletarianisation, and moral damage due to \"penning up people\" [\"Zusammenpferchung\"]. He also wrote that \"the number of idiots, epileptics, psychopaths, criminals, prostitutes, and tramps who descend from alcoholic and syphilitic parents, and who transfer their inferiority to their offspring, is incalculable\". He felt that \"the well-known example of the Jews, with their strong disposition towards nervous and mental disorders, teaches us that their extraordinarily advanced domestication may eventually imprint clear marks on the race\". Brune states that Kraepelin's nosological system \"was, to a great deal, built on the degeneration paradigm\".\nInfluence.\nKraepelin's great contribution in classifying schizophrenia and manic depression remains relatively unknown to the general public, and his work, which had neither the literary quality nor paradigmatic power of Freud's, is little read outside scholarly circles. Kraepelin's contributions were also to a large extent marginalized throughout a good part of the 20th century during the success of Freudian etiological theories. However, his views now dominate many quarters of psychiatric research and academic psychiatry. His fundamental theories on the diagnosis of psychiatric disorders form the basis of the major diagnostic systems in use today, especially the American Psychiatric Association's DSM-IV and the World Health Organization's ICD system, based on the Research Diagnostic Criteria and earlier Feighner Criteria developed by espoused \"neo-Kraepelinians\", though Robert Spitzer and others in the DSM committees were keen not to include assumptions about causation as Kraepelin had.\nKraepelin has been described as a \"scientific manager\" and political operator, who developed a large-scale, clinically oriented, epidemiological research programme. In this role he took in clinical information from a wide range of sources and networks. Despite proclaiming high clinical standards for himself to gather information \"by means of expert analysis of individual cases\", he would also draw on the reported observations of officials not trained in psychiatry. The various editions of his textbooks do not contain detailed case histories of individuals, however, but mosaiclike compilations of typical statements and behaviors from patients with a specific diagnosis. In broader terms, he has been described as a bourgeois or reactionary citizen.\nKraepelin wrote in a \"knapp und klar\" (concise and clear) style that made his books useful tools for physicians. Abridged and clumsy English translations of the sixth and seventh editions of his textbook in 1902 and 1907 (respectively) by Allan Ross Diefendorf (1871\u20131943), an assistant physician at the Connecticut Hospital for the Insane at Middletown, inadequately conveyed the literary quality of his writings that made them so valuable to practitioners.\nAmong the doctors trained by Alois Alzheimer and Emil Kraepelin at M\u00fcnchen in the beginning of the XXth century were the Spanish neuropathologists and neuropsychiatres Nicol\u00e1s Ach\u00facarro and Gonzalo Rodr\u00edguez Lafora, two distinguished disciples of Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal and members of the Spanish Neurological School.\nDreaming for psychiatry's sake.\nIn the Heidelberg and early Munich years he edited \"Psychologische Arbeiten\", a journal on experimental psychology. One of his own famous contributions to this journal also appeared in the form of a monograph (105 pp.) entitled \"\u00dcber Sprachst\u00f6rungen im Traume\" (\"On Language Disturbances in Dreams\"). Kraepelin, on the basis of the dream-psychosis analogy, studied for more than 20 years language disorder in dreams in order to study indirectly schizophasia. The dreams Kraepelin collected are mainly his own. They lack extensive comment by the dreamer. In order to study them the full range of biographical knowledge available today on Kraepelin is necessary (see, e.g., Burgmair et al., I-IX).\nExternal links.\nFor biographies of Kraepelin see:\nFor English translations of Kraepelin's work see:"}
{"id": "10003", "revid": "751375", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10003", "title": "Evoluon", "text": "The Evoluon is a conference centre and former science museum erected by the electronics and electrical company Philips at Eindhoven in the Netherlands in 1966. Since its construction, it has become a landmark and a symbol for the city.\nThe building is unique due to its very futuristic design, resembling a landed flying saucer. It was designed by architects Leo de Bever and Louis Christiaan Kalff, while the exhibition it housed was conceived by James Gardner. De Bever and Kalff only got two demands for the design of the building, it had to be \"spectacular\" and it had to be possible to hold exhibitions in the building.\nIts concrete dome is in diameter and is held in place by of reinforcing steel bars.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s the Evoluon attracted large visitor numbers, since its interactive exhibitions were a new and unique concept in the Netherlands at that time. But when competing science museums opened in other cities, the number of visitors began to decline. After several years of losing money, the original museum closed down in 1989 and the Evoluon was converted into a conference centre, opening in 1998.\nIn the UK the Evoluon is chiefly remembered from Bert Haanstra's wordless short film entitled simply \"Evoluon\", commissioned by Philips to publicise the museum, and shown as a trade test colour film on BBC television from 1968 to 1972.\nIn October 2013 the Evoluon was used to stage four 3D-concerts by the German electronic band Kraftwerk, each before an audience of 1,200 spectators. Key band member Ralf H\u00fctter handpicked the venue for its retro-futuristic look. Bespoke 3D-visuals of the saucer section of the building descending from space were used in the live rendition of their track \"Spacelab\"."}
{"id": "10004", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10004", "title": "Educational essentialism", "text": "Educational essentialism is an educational philosophy whose adherents believe that children should learn the traditional basic subjects thoroughly. In this philosophical school of thought, the aim is to instill students with the \"essentials\" of academic knowledge, enacting a back-to-basics approach. Essentialism ensures that the accumulated wisdom of our civilization as taught in the traditional academic disciplines is passed on from teacher to student. Such disciplines might include Reading, Writing, Literature, Foreign Languages, History, Mathematics, Science, Art, and Music. Moreover, this traditional approach is meant to train the mind, promote reasoning, and ensure a common culture.\nPrinciples of essentialism.\nEssentialism is a relatively conservative stance to education that strives to teach students the knowledge of a society and civilization through a core curriculum. This core curriculum involves such areas that include the study of the surrounding environment, basic natural laws, and the disciplines that promote a happier, more educated living. Other non-traditional areas are also integrated as well in moderation to balance the education. Essentialists' goals are to instill students with the \"essentials\" of academic knowledge, patriotism, and character development through traditional (or back-to-basic) approaches. This is to promote reasoning, train the mind, and ensure a common culture for all citizens.\nEssentialism is the most typically enacted philosophy in American classrooms today. Traces of this can be found in the organized learning centered on teachers and textbooks, in addition to the regular assignments and evaluations.\nEssentialism as a teacher-centered philosophy.\nThe role of the teacher as the leader of the classroom is a very important tenet of Educational essentialism. The teacher is the center of the classroom, so they should be rigid and disciplinary. Establishing order in the classroom is crucial for student learning; effective teaching cannot take place in a loud and disorganized environment. It is the teacher's responsibility to keep order in the classroom. The teacher must interpret essentials of the learning process, take the leadership position and set the tone of the classroom. These needs require an educator who is academically well-qualified with an appreciation for learning and development. The teacher must control the students with distributions of rewards and penalties.\nHistory of essentialism.\nThe Essentialist movement first began in the United States in the year 1938. In Atlantic City, New Jersey, a group met for the first time called \"The Essentialist's Committee for the Advancement of Education.\" Their emphasis was to reform the educational system to a rationality-based system.\nThe term essentialist first appeared in the book \"An Introduction to the Philosophy of Education\" which was written by Michael John Demiashkevich. In his book, Demiashkevich labels some specific educators (including William C. Bagley) as \u201cessentialists.\" Demiashkevich compared the essentialists to the different viewpoints of the Progressive Education Association. He described how the Progressives preached a \u201chedonistic doctrine of change\u201d whereas the essentialists stressed the moral responsibility of man for his actions and looked toward permanent principles of behavior (Demiashkevich likened the arguments to those between the Socratics and the Sophists in Greek philosophy). In 1938 Bagley and other educators met together where Bagley gave a speech detailing the main points of the essentialism movement and attacking the public education in the United States. One point that Bagley noted was that students in the U.S. were not getting an education on the same levels as students in Europe who were the same age.\nA recent branch has emerged within the essentialist school of thought called \"neoessentialism.\" Emerging in the eighties as a response to the essentialist ideals of the thirties as well as to the criticism of the fifties and the advocates for education in the seventies, neoessentialism was created to try to appease the problems facing the United States at the time. The most notable change within this school of thought is that it called for the creation of a new discipline, computer science.\nRenowned essentialists.\nWilliam Bagley (1874\u20131946) was an important historical essentialist. William C. Bagley completed his undergraduate degree at Michigan Agricultural College in 1895. It wasn\u2019t until after finishing his undergraduate studies that he truly wanted to be a teacher. Bagley did his Graduate studies at the University of Chicago and at Cornell University. He acquired his Ph.D. in 1900, after which he took his first school job as a Principal in a St. Louis, Missouri Elementary School. Bagley\u2019s devotion increased during his work at Montana State Normal School in Dillon, Montana. It was here where he decided to dedicate his time to the education of teachers and where he published \"The Educative Process\", launching his name across the nation. Throughout his career Bagley argued against the conservative position that teachers were not in need of special training for their work. He believed that liberal arts material was important in teacher education. Bagley also believed the dominant theories of education of the time were weak and lacking.\nIn April 1938, he published the \"Essentialist's Platform\", in which he outlined three major points of essentialism. He described the right of students to a well-educated and culturally knowledgeable teacher. Secondly, he discussed the importance of teaching the ideals of community to each group of students. Lastly, Bagley wrote of the importance of accuracy, thoroughness and effort on the part of the student in the classroom.\nAnother important essentialist is E. D. Hirsch (1928-). Hirsch was Founder and Chairman of the Core Knowledge Foundation and authored several books concerning fact-based approaches to education. Now retired, he spent many years teaching at the University of Virginia while also being an advocate for the \"back to basics\" movement. In his most popular book, \"Cultural Literacy \u2014 What Every American Needs To Know\", he offers lists, quotations, and information regarding what he believes is essential knowledge.\nSee also Arthur Bestor.\nSchools enacting an essentialist curriculum.\nThe Core Knowledge Schools were founded on the philosophy of essentialist E.D. Hirsch. Although it is difficult to maintain a pure and strict essentialist-only curriculum, these schools have the central aim of establishing a common knowledge base for all citizens. To do so, they follow a nationwide, content-specific, and teacher-centered curriculum. The Core Knowledge curriculum also allows for local variance above and beyond the core curriculum. Central curricular aims are academic excellence and the learning of knowledge, and teachers who are masters of their knowledge areas serve this aim.\nCriticism of essentialism.\nBecause Essentialism is largely teacher-centered, the role of the student is often called into question. Presumably, in an essentialist classroom, the teacher is the one designing the curriculum for the students based upon the core disciplines. Moreover, he or she is enacting the curriculum and setting the standards which the students must meet. The teacher's evaluative role may undermine students' interest in study. As a result, the students begin to take on more of a passive role in their education as they are forced to meet and learn such standards and information.\nFurthermore, there is also speculation that an essentialist education helps in promoting the cultural lag. This philosophy of education is very traditional in the mindset of passing on the knowledge of the culture via the academic disciplines. Thus, students are forced to think in the mindset of the larger culture, and individual creativity and subversive investigation are often not emphasized, or even outright discouraged."}
{"id": "10005", "revid": "1021670697", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10005", "title": "Progressive education", "text": "Progressive education is a pedagogical movement that began in the late nineteenth century and has persisted in various forms to the present. The term \"progressive\" was engaged to distinguish this education from the traditional curricula of the 19th century, which was rooted in classical preparation for the university and strongly differentiated by social class. By contrast, progressive education finds its roots in modern experience. Most progressive education programs have these qualities in common: \nEducational theory.\nProgressive education can be traced back to the works of John Locke and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, both of whom are known as forerunners of ideas that would be developed by theorists such as John Dewey. Considered one of the first of the British empiricists, Locke believed that \"truth and knowledge\u2026 arise out of observation and experience rather than manipulation of accepted or given ideas\". He further discussed the need for children to have concrete experiences in order to learn. Rousseau deepened this line of thinking in Emile, or On Education, where he argued that subordination of students to teachers and memorization of facts would not lead to an education.\nJohann Bernhard Basedow.\nIn Germany, Johann Bernhard Basedow (1724\u20131790) established the Philanthropinum at Dessau in 1774. He developed new teaching methods based on conversation and play with the child, and a program of physical development. Such was his success that he wrote a treatise on his methods, \"On the best and hitherto unknown method of teaching children of noblemen\".\nChristian Gotthilf Salzmann.\nChristian Gotthilf Salzmann (1744\u20131811) was the founder of the Schnepfenthal institution, a school dedicated to new modes of education (derived heavily from the ideas of Jean-Jacques Rousseau). He wrote \"Elements of Morality, for the Use of Children\", one of the first books translated into English by Mary Wollstonecraft.\nJohann Heinrich Pestalozzi.\nJohann Heinrich Pestalozzi (1746\u20131827) was a Swiss pedagogue and educational reformer who exemplified Romanticism in his approach. He founded several educational institutions both in German- and French-speaking regions of Switzerland and wrote many works explaining his revolutionary modern principles of education. His motto was \"Learning by head, hand and heart\". His research and theories closely resemble those outlined by Rousseau in Emile. He is further considered by many to be the \"father of modern educational science\" His psychological theories pertain to education as they focus on the development of object teaching, that is, he felt that individuals best learned through experiences and through a direct manipulation and experience of objects. He further speculated that children learn through their own internal motivation rather than through compulsion. (See Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic motivation). A teacher's task will be to help guide their students as individuals through their learning and allow it to unfold naturally.\nFriedrich Fr\u00f6bel.\nFriedrich Wilhelm August Fr\u00f6bel (1782\u20131852) was a student of Pestalozzi who laid the foundation for modern education based on the recognition that children have unique needs and capabilities. He believed in \"self-activity\" and play as essential factors in child education. The teacher's role was not to indoctrinate but to encourage self-expression through play, both individually and in group activities. He created the concept of kindergarten.\nJohann Friedrich Herbart.\nJohann Friedrich Herbart (1776\u20131841) emphasized the connection between individual development and the resulting societal contribution. The five key ideas which composed his concept of individual maturation were Inner Freedom, Perfection, Benevolence, Justice, and Equity or Recompense. According to Herbart, abilities were not innate but could be instilled, so a thorough education could provide the framework for moral and intellectual development. In order to develop a child to lead to a consciousness of social responsibility, Herbart advocated that teachers utilize a methodology with five formal steps: \"Using this structure a teacher prepared a topic of interest to the children, presented that topic, and questioned them inductively, so that they reached new knowledge based on what they had already known, looked back, and deductively summed up the lesson's achievements, then related them to moral precepts for daily living\".\nJohn Melchior Bosco.\nJohn Melchior Bosco (1815\u20131888) was concerned about the education of street children who had left their villages to find work in the rapidly industrialized city of Turin, Italy. Exploited as cheap labor or imprisoned for unruly behavior, Bosco saw the need for creating a space where they would feel at home. He called it an 'Oratory' where they could play, learn, share friendships, express themselves, develop their creative talents and pick up skills for gainful self-employment. With those who had found work, he set up a mutual-fund society (an early version of the Grameen Bank) to teach them the benefits of saving and self-reliance. The principles underlying his educational method that won over the hearts and minds of thousands of youth who flocked to his oratory were: 'be reasonable', 'be kind', 'believe' and 'be generous in service'. Today his method of education is practiced in nearly 3000 institutions set up around the world by the members of the Salesian Society he founded in 1873.\nCecil Reddie.\nWhile studying for his doctorate in G\u00f6ttingen in 1882\u20131883, Cecil Reddie was greatly impressed by the progressive educational theories being applied there. Reddie founded Abbotsholme School in Derbyshire, England, in 1889. Its curriculum enacted the ideas of progressive education. Reddie rejected rote learning, classical languages and corporal punishment. He combined studies in modern languages and the sciences and arts with a program of physical exercise, manual labour, recreation, crafts and arts. Schools modeling themselves after Abbotsholme were established throughout Europe, and the model was particularly influential in Germany. Reddie often engaged foreign teachers, who learned its practices, before returning home to start their own schools. Hermann Lietz an Abbotsholme teacher founded five schools (Landerziehungsheime f\u00fcr Jungen) on Abbotsholme's principles. Other people he influenced included Kurt Hahn, Adolphe Ferri\u00e8re and Edmond Demolins. His ideas also reached Japan, where it turned into \"Taisho-era Free Education Movement\" (Taisho Jiyu Kyoiku Undo)\nJohn Dewey.\nIn the United States the \"Progressive Education Movement\", starting in the 1880s and lasting for sixty years, helped boost American public schools from a budding idea to the established norm. John Dewey, a principal figure in this movement from the 1880s to 1904, set the tone for educational philosophy as well as concrete school reforms. His thinking had been influenced by the ideas of Fr\u00f6bel and Herbart. His reactions to the prevailing theories and practices in education, corrections made to these philosophies, and recommendations to teachers and administrators to embrace \"the new education\", provide a vital account of the history of the development of educational thinking in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Dewey placed pragmatism above moral absolutes and helped give rise to situational ethics. Beginning in 1897 John Dewey published a summary of his theory on progressive education in School Journal. His theoretical standpoints are divided into five sections outlined below.\nWhat education is.\nEducation according to Dewey is the \"participation of the individual in the social consciousness of the race\" (Dewey, 1897, para. 1). As such, education should take into account that the student is a social being. The process begins at birth with the child unconsciously gaining knowledge and gradually developing their knowledge to share and partake in society.\nThe educational process has two sides, the psychological and the sociological, with the psychological forming the basis. (Dewey, 1897). A child's own instincts will help develop the material that is presented to them. These instincts also form the basis of their knowledge with everything building upon it. This forms the basis of Dewey's assumption that one cannot learn without motivation.\nInstruction must focus on the child as a whole for you can never be sure as to where society may end or where that student will be needed or will take them.\nWhat the school is.\n\"Education fails because it neglects this fundamental principle of the school as a form of community life. It conceives the school as a place where certain information is to be given, where certain lessons are to be learned, or where certain habits are to be formed\" (Dewey, 1897, para. 17) Dewey felt that as education is a social construct, it is, therefore, a part of society and should reflect the community.\n\"Education is the process of living and is not meant to be the preparation of future living\", (Dewey, 1897), so the school must represent the present life. As such, parts of the student's home life (such as moral and ethical education) should take part in the schooling process. The teacher is a part of this, not as an authoritative figure, but as a member of the community who is there to assist the student.\nThe subject matter of education.\nAccording to Dewey, the curriculum in the schools should reflect that of society. The center of the school curriculum should reflect the development of humans in society. The study of the core subjects (language, science, history) should be coupled with the study of cooking, sewing, and manual training. Furthermore, he feels that \"progress is not in the succession of studies but in the development of new attitudes towards, and new interests in, experience\" (Dewey, 1897, para. 38)\nThe nature of method.\nThe method is focused on the child's powers and interests. If the child is thrown into a passive role as a student, absorbing information, the result is a waste of the child's education. (Dewey, 1897). Information presented to the student will be transformed into new forms, images, and symbols by the student so that they fit with their development and interests. The development of this is natural. To repress this process and attempt to \"substitute the adult for the child\" (Dewey, 1897, para. 52) would weaken the intellectual curiosity of the child.\nThe school and social progress.\nFor Dewey, education, which regulates \"the process of coming to share in the social consciousness,\" is the \"only sure\" method of ensuring social progress and reform (Dewey, 1897, para. 60). In this respect, Dewey foreshadows Social Reconstructionism, whereby schools are a means to reconstruct society. As schools become a means for social reconstruction, they must be given the proper equipment to perform this task and guide their students.\nHelen Parkhurst.\nThe American teacher Helen Parkhurst (1886\u20131973) developed the Dalton Plan at the beginning of the twentieth century with the goal of reforming the then current pedagogy and classroom management. She wanted to break the teacher-centered lockstep teaching. During her first experiment, which she implemented in a small elementary school as a young teacher in 1904, she noticed that when students are given freedom for self-direction and self-pacing and to help one another, their motivation increases considerably and they learn more. In a later experiment in 1911 and 1912, Parkhurst re-organized the education in a large school for nine- to fourteen-year-olds. Instead of each grade, each subject was appointed its own teacher and its own classroom. The subject teachers made assignments: they converted the subject matter for each grade into learning assignments. In this way, learning became the students\u2019 own work; they could carry out their work independently, work at their own pace and plan their work themselves. The classroom turned into a laboratory, a place where students are working, furnished and equipped as work spaces, tailored to meet the requirements of specific subjects. Useful and attractive learning materials, instruments and reference books were put within the students\u2019 reach. The benches were replaced by large tables to facilitate co-operation and group instruction. This second experiment formed the basis for the next experiments, those in Dalton and New York, from 1919 onwards. The only addition was the use of graphs, charts enabling students to keep track of their own progress in each subject.\nIn the nineteen-twenties and nineteen-thirties, Dalton education spread throughout the world. There is no certainty regarding the exact numbers of Dalton schools, but there was Dalton education in America, Australia, England, Germany, the Netherlands, the Soviet Union, India, China and Japan. Particularly in the Netherlands, China and Japan, Dalton education has remained in existence. In recent years there has been a revival of international interest, particularly in England, Germany, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.\nRudolf Steiner.\nRudolf Steiner (1869\u20131925) first described the principles of what was to become Waldorf education in 1907. He established a series of schools based on these principles beginning in 1919. The focus of the education is on creating a developmentally appropriate curriculum that holistically integrates practical, artistic, social, and academic experiences. There are more than a thousand schools and many more [[early childhood]] centers worldwide; it has also become a popular form of [[homeschooling]].\nMaria Montessori.\n[[Maria Montessori]] (1870\u20131952) began to develop her philosophy and methods in 1897. She based her work on her observations of children and experimentation with the environment, materials, and lessons available to them. She frequently referred to her work as \"scientific pedagogy\", arguing for the need to go beyond observation and measurement of students, to developing new methods to transform them. Although [[Montessori education]] spread to the United States in 1911 there were conflicts with the American educational establishment and was opposed by William Heard Kilpatrick. However Montessori education returned to the United States in 1960 and has since spread to thousands of schools there.\nIn 1914 the Montessori Society in England organised its first conference. Hosted by Rev Bertram Hawker, who had set-up, in partnership with his local elementary school in the Norfolk coastal village of East Runton, the first Montessori School in England. Pictures of this school, and its children, illustrated the 'Montessori's Own Handbook' (1914). Hawker had been impressed by his visit to Montessori's Casa dei Bambini in Rome, he gave numerous talks on Montessori's work after 1912, assisting in generating a national interest in her work. He organised the Montessori Conference 1914 in partnership with Edmond Holmes, ex-Chief Inspector of Schools, who had written a government report on Montessori. The conference decided that its remit was to promote the 'liberation of the child in the school', and though inspired by Montessori, would encourage, support and network teachers and educationalists who sought, through their schools and methods, that aim. They changed their name the following year to New Ideals in Education. Each subsequent conference was opened with reference to its history and origin as a Montessori Conference recognising her inspiration, reports italicized the members of the Montessori Society in the delegate lists, and numerous further events included Montessori methods and case studies. Montessori, through New Ideals in Education, its committee and members, events and publications, greatly influenced progressive state education in England. (references to be added).\nRobert Baden-Powell.\nIn July 1906, [[Ernest Thompson Seton]] sent [[Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell|Robert Baden-Powell]] a copy of his book \"The Birchbark Roll of the Woodcraft Indians\". Seton was a British-born Canadian-American living in the United States. They shared ideas about youth training programs. In 1907 Baden-Powell wrote a draft called \"Boy Patrols\". In the same year, to test his ideas, he gathered 21 boys of mixed social backgrounds and held a week-long camp in August on [[Brownsea Island Scout camp|Brownsea Island]] in England. His organizational method, now known as the Patrol System and a key part of Scouting training, allowed the boys to organize themselves into small groups with an elected patrol leader. Baden Powell then wrote \"[[Scouting for Boys]]\" (London, 1908). The Brownsea camp and the publication of \"Scouting for Boys\" are generally regarded as the start of the Scout movement which spread throughout the world. Baden-Powell and his sister [[Agnes Baden-Powell]] introduced the [[Girl Guide and Girl Scout|Girl Guides]] in 1910.\nComparison with traditional education.\nTraditional education uses extrinsic motivation, such as grades and prizes. Progressive education is more likely to use intrinsic motivation, basing activities on the interests of the child. Praise may be discouraged as a motivator. Progressive education is a response to traditional methods of teaching. It is defined as an educational movement which gives more value to experience than formal learning. It is based more on experiential learning that concentrate on the development of a child's talents.\n21st century skills.\n21st century skills are a series of higher-order [[skills]], abilities, and learning dispositions that have been identified as being required for success in the rapidly changing, digital society and workplaces. Many of these skills are also defining qualities of \"progressive education\" as well as being associated with [[Deeper Learning|deeper learning]], which is based on mastering skills such as analytic reasoning, complex problem solving, and teamwork. These skills differ from traditional academic skills in that they are not primarily content knowledge-based.\nIn the West.\nFrance.\nEdmond Demolins was inspired by Abbotsholme and Bedales to found the \u00c9cole des Roches in [[Verneuil-sur-Avre]] in 1899. [[Paul Robin]] implemented progressive principles at the [[Pr\u00e9vost orphanage]] between 1880 and 1894. This was the first French mixed school, and a scandal at that time. [[Sebastien Faure]] in 1904 created a libertarian school 'La Ruche' (the Hive).\nGermany.\nHermann Lietz founded three Landerziehungsheime (country boarding schools) in 1904 based on Reddie's model for boys of different ages. Lietz eventually succeeded in establishing five more Landerziehungsheime. Edith and [[Paul Geheeb]] founded [[Odenwaldschule]] in [[Heppenheim]] in the [[Odenwald]] in 1910 using their concept of progressive education, which integrated the work of the head and hand.\nPoland.\n[[Janusz Korczak]] was one notable follower and developer of Pestalozzi's ideas. He wrote\n\"The names of Pestalozzi, Froebel and Spencer shine with no less brilliance than the names of the greatest inventors of the twentieth century. For they discovered more than the unknown forces of nature; they discovered the unknown half of humanity: children.\" His Orphan's Home in Warsaw became a model institution and exerted influence on the educational process in other orphanages of the same type.\nIreland.\nThe [[Quakers|Quaker]] school run in [[Ballitore]], [[County Kildare|Co Kildare]] in the 18th century had students from as far away as Bordeaux (where there was a substantial Irish \u00e9migr\u00e9 population), the Caribbean and Norway. Notable pupils included [[Edmund Burke]] and [[Napper Tandy]].\nSgoil \u00c9anna, or in English [[St. Enda's School|St Enda's]] was founded in 1908 by [[Patrick Pearse|P\u00e1draig Pearse]] on Montessori principles. Its former assistant headmaster [[Thomas MacDonagh]] and other teachers including Pearse; games master [[Con Colbert]]; Pearse's brother, Willie, the art teacher, and [[Joseph Plunkett]], and occasional lecturer in English, were executed by the British after the 1916 Rising. Pearse and MacDonagh were two of the seven leaders who signed the [[Irish Declaration of Independence]]. Pearse's book \"The Murder Machine\" was a denunciation of the English school system of the time and a declaration of his own educational principles.\nSpain.\nIn Spain, the [[Escuela Moderna]] was founded in 1901 by [[Francisco Ferrer]], a Catalan educator and [[anarchism|anarchist]]. He had been influenced by Cecil Reddie. The [[Modern Schools]], also called 'Ferrer Schools', that were founded in the United States, were based on Escuela Moderna. As in Spain the schools were intended to educate the working-classes from a [[secular]], [[class-conscious]] perspective. The Modern Schools imparted day-time academic classes for children, and night-time continuing-education lectures for adults.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden, an early proponent of progressive education was [[Alva Myrdal]], who with her husband Gunnar co-wrote \"[[Crisis in the Population Question|Kris i befolkningsfr\u00e5gan]]\" (1934), a most influential program for the social-democratic hegemony (1932\u20131976) popularly known as \"[[Folkhemmet]]\". School reforms went through government reports in the 1940s and trials in the 1950s, resulting in the introduction in 1962 of public comprehensive schools (\"grundskola\") instead of the previously separated parallel schools for theoretical and non-theoretical education.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe ideas from Reddie's Abbotsholme spread to schools such as [[Bedales School]] (1893), [[King Alfred School, London]] (1898) and [[St Christopher School, Letchworth]] (1915), as well as all the [[Quakers|Friends']] schools, [[Waldorf education|Steiner Waldorf]] schools and those belonging to the [[Round Square (educational organisation)|Round Square Conference]]. The King Alfred School was radical for its time in that it provided a secular education and that boys and girls were educated together. [[Alexander Sutherland Neill]] believed children should achieve self-determination and should be encouraged to think critically rather than blindly obeying. He implemented his ideas with the founding of [[Summerhill School]] in 1921. Neill believed that children learn better when they are not compelled to attend lessons. The school was also managed democratically, with regular meetings to determine school rules. Pupils had equal voting rights with school staff.\nUnited States.\nEarly practitioners.\nFr\u00f6bel's student [[Margarethe Schurz]] founded the first kindergarten in the United States at [[Watertown, Wisconsin]], in 1856, and she also inspired [[Elizabeth Peabody]], who went on to found the first English-speaking kindergarten in the United States \u2013 the language at Schurz's kindergarten had been German, to serve an immigrant community \u2013 in [[Boston]] in 1860. This paved the way for the concept's spread in the USA. The German \u00e9migr\u00e9 Adolph Douai had also founded a kindergarten in Boston in 1859, but was obliged to close it after only a year. By 1866, however, he was founding others in New York City.\n[[William Heard Kilpatrick]] (1871\u20131965) was a pupil of Dewey and one of the most effective practitioners of the concept as well as the more adept at proliferating the progressive education movement and spreading word of the works of Dewey. He is especially well known for his \"project method of teaching\". This developed the progressive education notion that students were to be engaged and taught so that their knowledge may be directed to society for a socially useful need. Like Dewey he also felt that students should be actively engaged in their learning rather than actively disengaged with the simple reading and regurgitation of material.\nThe most famous early practitioner of progressive education was [[Francis Wayland Parker|Francis Parker]]; its best-known spokesperson was the philosopher [[John Dewey]]. In 1875 Francis Parker became superintendent of schools in [[Quincy, Massachusetts]], after spending two years in Germany studying emerging educational trends on the continent. Parker was opposed to rote learning, believing that there was no value in knowledge without understanding. He argued instead schools should encourage and respect the child's creativity. Parker's [[Quincy Method|Quincy System]] called for child-centered and experience-based learning. He replaced the traditional curriculum with integrated learning units based on core themes related to the knowledge of different disciplines. He replaced traditional readers, spellers and [[grammar]] books with children's own writing, [[literature]], and teacher prepared materials. In 1883 Parker left Massachusetts to become Principal of the Cook County Normal School in [[Chicago]], a school that also served to train teachers in Parker's methods. In 1894 Parker's Talks on Pedagogics, which drew heavily on the thinking of [[Friedrich Fr\u00f6bel|Fr\u00f6bel]], [[Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi|Pestalozzi]] and [[Johann Friedrich Herbart|Herbart]], became one of the first American writings on education to gain international fame.\nThat same year, philosopher John Dewey moved from the [[University of Michigan]] to the newly established [[University of Chicago]] where he became chair of the department of [[philosophy]], [[psychology]] and education. He and his wife enrolled their children in Parker's school before founding their own school two years later.\nWhereas Parker started with practice and then moved to theory, Dewey began with hypotheses and then devised methods and curricula to test them. By the time Dewey moved to Chicago at the age of thirty-five, he had already published two books on psychology and applied psychology. He had become dissatisfied with philosophy as pure speculation and was seeking ways to make philosophy directly relevant to practical issues. Moving away from an early interest in [[Hegel]], Dewey proceeded to reject all forms of [[Dualism (philosophy of mind)|dualism]] and dichotomy in favor of a philosophy of experience as a series of unified wholes in which everything can be ultimately related.\nIn 1896, John Dewey opened what he called the laboratory school to test his theories and their sociological implications. With Dewey as the director and his wife as principal, the University of Chicago Laboratory school, was dedicated \"to discover in administration, selection of subject-matter, methods of learning, teaching, and [[discipline]], how a school could become a cooperative community while developing in individuals their own capacities and satisfy their own needs.\" (Cremin, 136) For Dewey the two key goals of developing a cooperative [[community]] and developing [[individual]]s' own capacities were not at odds; they were necessary to each other. This unity of purpose lies at the heart of the progressive education philosophy. In 1912, Dewey sent out students of his philosophy to found [[The Park School of Buffalo]] and [[The Park School of Baltimore]] to put it into practice. These schools operate to this day within a similar progressive approach.\nAt Columbia, Dewey worked with other educators such as Charles Eliot and Abraham Flexner to help bring progressivism into the mainstream of American education. In 1917 Columbia established the Lincoln School of Teachers College \"as a laboratory for the working out of an elementary and secondary curriculum which shall eliminate obsolete material and endeavor to work up in usable form material adapted to the needs of modern living.\" (Cremin, 282) Based on Flexner's demand that the modern curriculum \"include nothing for which an affirmative case can not be made out\" (Cremin, 281) the new school organized its activities around four fundamental fields: [[science]], [[Industry (manufacturing)|industry]], [[aesthetics]] and [[civics]]. The Lincoln School built its curriculum around \"units of work\" that reorganized traditional subject matter into forms embracing the development of children and the changing needs of adult life. The first and second grades carried on a study of community life in which they actually built a city. A third grade project growing out of the day-to-day life of the nearby [[Hudson River]] became one of the most celebrated units of the school, a unit on boats, which under the guidance of its legendary teacher Miss Curtis, became an entr\u00e9e into [[history]], [[geography]], [[Reading (process)|reading]], [[writing]], [[arithmetic]], science, [[art]] and literature. Each of the units was broadly enough conceived so that different children could concentrate on different aspects depending on their own interests and needs. Each of the units called for widely diverse student activities, and each sought to deal in depth with some critical aspect of contemporary civilization. Finally each unit engaged children working together cooperatively and also provided opportunities for individual research and exploration.\nIn 1924, [[Agnes de Lima]], the lead writer on education for \"[[The New Republic]]\" and \"[[The Nation]]\", published a collection of her articles on progressive education as a book, titled \"Our Enemy the Child\".\nIn 1918 The [[National Education Association]], representing superintendents and administrators in smaller districts across the country, issued its report \"Cardinal Principles of Secondary Education.\" It emphasized the education of students in terms of health, a command of fundamental processes, worthy home membership, vocation, citizenship, worthy use of leisure, and ethical character. They Emphasized life adjustment and reflected the social efficiency model of progressive education.\nFrom 1919 to 1955 the [[Progressive Education Association]] founded by [[Stanwood Cobb#Career as educator|Stanwood Cobb]] and others worked to promote a more student-centered approach to education. During the [[Great Depression]] the organization conducted the [[Eight-Year Study]], evaluating the effects of progressive programs. More than 1500 students over four years were compared to an equal number of carefully matched students at conventional schools. When they reached college, the experimental students were found to equal or surpass traditionally educated students on all outcomes: grades, extracurricular participation, dropout rates, intellectual curiosity, and resourcefulness. Moreover, the study found that the more the school departed from the traditional college preparatory program, the better was the record of the graduates. (Kohn, Schools, 232)\nBy mid-century many public school programs had also adopted elements of progressive curriculum. At mid-century Dewey believed that progressive education had \"not really penetrated and permeated the foundations of the educational institution.\"(Kohn, Schools, 6,7) As the influence of progressive pedagogy grew broader and more diffuse, practitioners began to vary their application of progressive principles. As varying interpretations and practices made evaluation of progressive reforms more difficult to assess, critics began to propose alternative approaches.\nThe seeds of the debate over progressive education can be seen in the differences of Parker and Dewey. These have to do with how much and by whom curriculum should be worked out from grade to grade, how much the child's emerging interests should determine classroom activities, the importance of child-centered vs. societal\u2013centered learning, the relationship of community building to individual growth, and especially the relationship between emotion, thought and experience.\nIn 1955 the publication of Rudolf Flesch's \"[[Why Johnny Can't Read]]\" leveled criticism of reading programs at the progressive emphasis on reading in context. The conservative [[McCarthy era]] raised questions about the liberal ideas at the roots of the progressive reforms. The launching of [[Sputnik]] in 1957 at the height of the [[cold war]] gave rise to a number of intellectually competitive approaches to disciplinary knowledge, such as [[Biological Sciences Curriculum Study|BSCS]] biology [[Physical Science Study Committee|PSSC]] physics, led by university professors such as [[Jerome Bruner]] and [[Jerrold Zacharias]].\nSome of the cold war reforms incorporated elements of progressivism. For example, the work of Zacharias and Bruner was based in the developmental psychology of [[Jean Piaget]] and incorporated many of Dewey's ideas of experiential education. Bruner's analysis of developmental psychology became the core of a pedagogical movement known as [[Constructivism (learning theory)|constructivism]], which argues that the child is an active participant in making meaning and must be engaged in the progress of education for learning to be effective. This psychological approach has deep connections to the work of both Parker and Dewey and led to a resurgence of their ideas in second half of the century.\nIn 1965, President Johnson inaugurated the [[Great Society]] and the [[Elementary and Secondary Education Act]] suffused public school programs with funds for sweeping education reforms. At the same time the influx of federal funding also gave rise to demands for accountability and the behavioral objectives approach of Robert F. Mager and others foreshadowed the [[No Child Left Behind Act]] passed in 2002. Against these critics eloquent spokespersons stepped forward in defense of the progressive tradition. The [[Open classroom|Open Classroom]] movement, led by [[Herbert Kohl (education)|Herb Kohl]] and George Dennison, recalled many of Parker's child centered reforms.\nThe late 1960s and early 1970s saw a rise and decline in the number of progressive schools. There were several reasons for the decline:\nProgressive education has been viewed as an alternative to the test-oriented instruction legislated by the [[No Child Left Behind]] educational funding act. [[Alfie Kohn]] has been an outspoken critic of the No Child Left Behind Act and a passionate defender of the progressive tradition.\nTaxpayer revolts, leading to cuts in funding for public education in many states, have led to the founding of an unprecedented number of independent schools, many of which have progressive philosophies. The charter school movement has also spawned an increase in progressive programs. Most recently, public outcry against No Child Left Behind testing and [[teaching to the test]] has brought progressive education again into the limelight. Despite the variations that still exist among the progressive programs throughout the country, most progressive schools today are vitalized by these common practices:\nIn the East.\nIndia.\n[[Rabindranath Tagore]] (1861\u20131941) was one of the most effective practitioners of the concept of progressive education. He expanded [[Santiniketan]], which is a small town near Bolpur in the Birbhum district of West Bengal, India, approximately 160\u00a0km north of Kolkata. He de-emphasized textbook learning in favor of varied learning resources from nature. The emphasis here was on self-motivation rather than on discipline, and on fostering intellectual curiosity rather than competitive excellence. There were courses on a great variety of cultures, and study programs devoted to China, Japan, and the Middle East. He was of the view that education should be a \"joyous exercise of our inventive and constructive energies that help us to build up character.\"\nJapan.\nSeikatsu tsuzurikata is a grassroots movement in Japan that has many parallels to the progressive education movement, but it developed completely independently, beginning in\nthe late 1920s. The Japanese progressive educational movement was one of the stepping stones to the modernization of Japan and it has resonated down to the present.\nKorea.\nWhile the first \"Daean Hakgyo\" (lit. \"alternative school\") was established in the 1970s, the alternative education became known to the public in the 1990s. However, until well into the 2000s, many people thought that such a school system was for \"troublemakers\" as they were not accredited by the Ministry of Education and thus provided no diploma. Students who attended these schools had to take \"Geomjeong-goshi\" (High School Equivalency Diploma test), which was and is highly stigmatized. Nonetheless, starting from the late 2000s, alternative schools with progressive motives and education philosophy started to get accredited. In the 2010s, public progressive schools became increasingly popular.\nFurther reading.\nHistoriography.\n[[Category:Progressive education| ]]\n[[Category:Education theory]]\n[[Category:Alternative education]]\n[[Category:Pedagogy]]\n[[Category:Philosophy of education]]\n[[Category:Progressivism]]"}
{"id": "10006", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10006", "title": "Electronic musical instrument", "text": "An electronic musical instrument or electrophone is a musical instrument that produces sound using electronic circuitry. Such an instrument sounds by outputting an electrical, electronic or digital audio signal that ultimately is plugged into a power amplifier which drives a loudspeaker, creating the sound heard by the performer and listener.\nAn electronic instrument might include a user interface for controlling its sound, often by adjusting the pitch, frequency, or duration of each note. A common user interface is the musical keyboard, which functions similarly to the keyboard on an acoustic piano, except that with an electronic keyboard, the keyboard itself does not make any sound. An electronic keyboard sends a signal to a synth module, computer or other electronic or digital sound generator, which then creates a sound. However, it is increasingly common to separate user interface and sound-generating functions into a music controller (input device) and a music synthesizer, respectively, with the two devices communicating through a musical performance description language such as MIDI or Open Sound Control.\nAll electronic musical instruments can be viewed as a subset of audio signal processing applications. Simple electronic musical instruments are sometimes called sound effects; the border between sound effects and actual musical instruments is often unclear.\nIn the 21st century, electronic musical instruments are now widely used in most styles of music. In popular music styles such as electronic dance music, almost all of the instrument sounds used in recordings are electronic instruments (e.g., bass synth, synthesizer, drum machine). Development of new electronic musical instruments, controllers, and synthesizers continues to be a highly active and interdisciplinary field of research. Specialized conferences, notably the International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, have organized to report cutting-edge work, as well as to provide a showcase for artists who perform or create music with new electronic music instruments, controllers, and synthesizers.\nClassification.\nIn musicology, electronic musical instruments are known as electrophones. Electrophones are the fifth category of musical instrument under the Hornbostel-Sachs system. Musicologists typically only classify music as electrophones if the sound is initially produced by electricity, excluding electronically controlled acoustic instruments such as pipe organs and amplified instruments such as electric guitars.\nThe category was added to the Hornbostel-Sachs musical instrument classification system by Sachs in 1940, in his 1940 book \"The History of Musical Instruments\"; the original 1914 version of the system did not include it. Sachs divided electrophones into three subcategories:\nThe last category included instruments such as theremins or synthesizers, which he called radioelectric instruments.\nFrancis William Galpin provided such a group in his own classification system, which is closer to Mahillon than Sachs-Hornbostel. For example, in Galpin's 1937 book \"A Textbook of European Musical Instruments\", he lists electrophones with three second-level divisions for sound generation (\"by oscillation,\" \"electro-magnetic,\" and \"electro-static\"), as well as third-level and fourth-level categories based on the control method.\nPresent-day ethnomusicologists, such as Margaret Kartomi and Terry Ellingson, suggest that, in keeping with the spirit of the original Hornbostel Sachs classification scheme, if one categorizes instruments by what first produces the initial sound in the instrument, that only subcategory 53 should remain in the electrophones category. Thus, it has been more recently proposed, for example, that the pipe organ (even if it uses electric key action to control solenoid valves) remain in the aerophones category, and that the electric guitar remain in the chordophones category, and so on.\nThus, in present-day ethnomusicology, an electrophone is considered to be only musical instruments which produce sound primarily by electrical means. It is usually considered to constitute one of five main categories in the Hornbostel-Sachs scheme of musical instrument classification, despite not being in the original scheme published in 1914.\nEarly examples.\nIn the 18th-century, musicians and composers adapted a number of acoustic instruments to exploit the novelty of electricity. Thus, in the broadest sense, the first electrified musical instrument was the Denis d'or keyboard, dating from 1753, followed shortly by the clavecin \u00e9lectrique by the Frenchman Jean-Baptiste de Laborde in 1761. The Denis d'or consisted of a keyboard instrument of over 700 strings, electrified temporarily to enhance sonic qualities. The clavecin \u00e9lectrique was a keyboard instrument with plectra (picks) activated electrically. However, neither instrument used electricity as a sound-source.\nThe first electric synthesizer was invented in 1876 by Elisha Gray. The \"Musical Telegraph\" was a chance by-product of his telephone technology when Gray accidentally discovered that he could control sound from a self-vibrating electromagnetic circuit and so invented a basic oscillator. The Musical Telegraph used steel reeds oscillated by electromagnets and transmitted over a telephone line. Gray also built a simple loudspeaker device into later models, which consisted of a diaphragm vibrating in a magnetic field.\nA significant invention, which later had a profound effect on electronic music, was the audion in 1906. This was the first thermionic valve, or vacuum tube and which led to the generation and amplification of electrical signals, radio broadcasting, and electronic computation, among other things. Other early synthesizers included the Telharmonium (1897), the Theremin (1919), J\u00f6rg Mager's Spharophon (1924) and Partiturophone, Taubmann's similar Electronde (1933), Maurice Martenot's ondes Martenot (\"Martenot waves\", 1928), Trautwein's Trautonium (1930). The Mellertion (1933) used a non-standard scale, Bertrand's Dynaphone could produce octaves and perfect fifths, while the Emicon was an American, keyboard-controlled instrument constructed in 1930 and the German Hellertion combined four instruments to produce chords. Three Russian instruments also appeared, Oubouhof's Croix Sonore (1934), Ivor Darreg's microtonal 'Electronic Keyboard Oboe' (1937) and the ANS synthesizer, constructed by the Russian scientist Evgeny Murzin from 1937 to 1958. Only two models of this latter were built and the only surviving example is currently stored at the Lomonosov University in Moscow. It has been used in many Russian movies\u2014like \"Solaris\"\u2014to produce unusual, \"cosmic\" sounds.\nHugh Le Caine, John Hanert, Raymond Scott, composer Percy Grainger (with Burnett Cross), and others built a variety of automated electronic-music controllers during the late 1940s and 1950s. In 1959 Daphne Oram produced a novel method of synthesis, her \"Oramics\" technique, driven by drawings on a 35\u00a0mm film strip; it was used for a number of years at the BBC Radiophonic Workshop. This workshop was also responsible for the theme to the TV series \"Doctor Who\" a piece, largely created by Delia Derbyshire, that more than any other ensured the popularity of electronic music in the UK.\nTelharmonium.\nIn 1897 Thaddeus Cahill patented an instrument called the Telharmonium (or Teleharmonium, also known as the Dynamaphone). Using tonewheels to generate musical sounds as electrical signals by additive synthesis, it was capable of producing any combination of notes and overtones, at any dynamic level. This technology was later used to design the Hammond organ. Between 1901 and 1910 Cahill had three progressively larger and more complex versions made, the first weighing seven tons, the last in excess of 200 tons. Portability was managed only by rail and with the use of thirty boxcars. By 1912, public interest had waned, and Cahill's enterprise was bankrupt.\nTheremin.\nAnother development, which aroused the interest of many composers, occurred in 1919\u20131920. In Leningrad, Leon Theremin (actually Lev Termen) built and demonstrated his Etherophone, which was later renamed the Theremin. This led to the first compositions for electronic instruments, as opposed to noisemakers and re-purposed machines. The Theremin was notable for being the first musical instrument played without touching it. In 1929, Joseph Schillinger composed \"First Airphonic Suite for Theremin and Orchestra\", premi\u00e8red with the Cleveland Orchestra with Leon Theremin as soloist. The next year Henry Cowell commissioned Theremin to create the first electronic rhythm machine, called the Rhythmicon. Cowell wrote some compositions for it, and he and Schillinger premiered it in 1932.\nOndes Martenot.\nThe 1920s have been called the apex of the Mechanical Age and the dawning of the Electrical Age. In 1922, in Paris, Darius Milhaud began experiments with \"vocal transformation by phonograph speed change.\" These continued until 1927. This decade brought a wealth of early electronic instruments\u2014along with the Theremin, there is the presentation of the Ondes Martenot, which was designed to reproduce the microtonal sounds found in Hindu music, and the Trautonium.\nMaurice Martenot invented the Ondes Martenot in 1928, and soon demonstrated it in Paris. Composers using the instrument ultimately include Boulez, Honegger, Jolivet, Koechlin, Messiaen, Milhaud, Tremblay, and Var\u00e8se. Radiohead guitarist and multi-instrumentalist Jonny Greenwood also uses it in his compositions and a plethora of Radiohead songs. In 1937, Messiaen wrote \"F\u00eate des belles eaux\" for 6 ondes Martenot, and wrote solo parts for it in \"Trois petites Liturgies de la Pr\u00e9sence Divine\" (1943\u201344) and the \"Turangal\u00eela-Symphonie\" (1946\u201348/90).\nTrautonium.\nThe Trautonium was invented in 1928. It was based on the subharmonic scale, and the resulting sounds were often used to emulate bell or gong sounds, as in the 1950s Bayreuth productions of \"Parsifal\". In 1942, Richard Strauss used it for the bell- and gong-part in the Dresden premi\u00e8re of his \"Japanese Festival Music\". This new class of instruments, microtonal by nature, was only adopted slowly by composers at first, but by the early 1930s there was a burst of new works incorporating these and other electronic instruments.\nHammond organ and Novachord.\nIn 1929 Laurens Hammond established his company for the manufacture of electronic instruments. He went on to produce the Hammond organ, which was based on the principles of the Telharmonium, along with other developments including early reverberation units. The Hammond organ is an electromechanical instrument, as it used both mechanical elements and electronic parts. A Hammond organ used spinning metal tonewheels to produce different sounds. A magnetic pickup similar in design to the pickups in an electric guitar is used to transmit the pitches in the tonewheels to an amplifier and speaker enclosure. While the Hammond organ was designed to be a lower-cost alternative to a pipe organ for church music, musicians soon discovered that the Hammond was an excellent instrument for blues and jazz; indeed, an entire genre of music developed built around this instrument, known as the organ trio (typically Hammond organ, drums, and a third instrument, either saxophone or guitar).\nThe first commercially manufactured synthesizer was the Novachord, built by the Hammond Organ Company from 1938 to 1942, which offered 72-note polyphony using 12 oscillators driving monostable-based divide-down circuits, basic envelope control and resonant low-pass filters. The instrument featured 163 vacuum tubes and weighed 500 pounds. The instrument's use of envelope control is significant, since this is perhaps the most significant distinction between the modern synthesizer and other electronic instruments.\nAnalogue synthesis 1950\u20131980.\nThe most commonly used electronic instruments are synthesizers, so-called because they artificially generate sound using a variety of techniques. All early circuit-based synthesis involved the use of analogue circuitry, particularly voltage controlled amplifiers, oscillators and filters. An important technological development was the invention of the Clavivox synthesizer in 1956 by Raymond Scott with subassembly by Robert Moog. French composer and engineer Edgard Var\u00e8se created a variety of compositions using electronic horns, whistles, and tape. Most notably, he wrote \"Po\u00e8me \u00e9lectronique\" for the Phillips pavilion at the Brussels World Fair in 1958.\nModular synthesizers.\nRCA produced experimental devices to synthesize voice and music in the 1950s. The Mark II Music Synthesizer, housed at the Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center in New York City. Designed by Herbert Belar and Harry Olson at RCA, with contributions from Vladimir Ussachevsky and Peter Mauzey, it was installed at Columbia University in 1957. Consisting of a room-sized array of interconnected sound synthesis components, it was only capable of producing music by programming, using a paper tape sequencer punched with holes to control pitch sources and filters, similar to a mechanical player piano but capable of generating a wide variety of sounds. The vacuum tube system had to be patched to create timbres.\nIn the 1960s synthesizers were still usually confined to studios due to their size. They were usually modular in design, their stand-alone signal sources and processors connected with patch cords or by other means and controlled by a common controlling device. Harald Bode, Don Buchla, Hugh Le Caine, Raymond Scott and Paul Ketoff were among the first to build such instruments, in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Buchla later produced a commercial modular synthesizer, the Buchla Music Easel. Robert Moog, who had been a student of Peter Mauzey and one of the RCA Mark II engineers, created a synthesizer that could reasonably be used by musicians, designing the circuits while he was at Columbia-Princeton. The Moog synthesizer was first displayed at the Audio Engineering Society convention in 1964. It required experience to set up sounds but was smaller and more intuitive than what had come before, less like a machine and more like a musical instrument. Moog established standards for control interfacing, using a logarithmic 1-volt-per-octave for pitch control and a separate triggering signal. This standardization allowed synthesizers from different manufacturers to operate simultaneously. Pitch control was usually performed either with an organ-style keyboard or a music sequencer producing a timed series of control voltages. During the late 1960s hundreds of popular recordings used Moog synthesizers. Other early commercial synthesizer manufacturers included ARP, who also started with modular synthesizers before producing all-in-one instruments, and British firm EMS.\nIntegrated synthesizers.\nIn 1970, Moog designed the Minimoog, a non-modular synthesizer with a built-in keyboard. The analogue circuits were interconnected with switches in a simplified arrangement called \"normalization.\" Though less flexible than a modular design, normalization made the instrument more portable and easier to use. The Minimoog sold 12,000 units. Further standardized the design of subsequent synthesizers with its integrated keyboard, pitch and modulation wheels and VCO-&gt;VCF-&gt;VCA signal flow. It has become celebrated for its \"fat\" sound\u2014and its tuning problems. Miniaturized solid-state components allowed synthesizers to become self-contained, portable instruments that soon appeared in live performance and quickly became widely used in popular music and electronic art music.\nPolyphony.\nMany early analog synthesizers were monophonic, producing only one tone at a time. Popular monophonic synthesizers include the Moog Minimoog. A few, such as the Moog Sonic Six, ARP Odyssey and EML 101, could produce two different pitches at a time when two keys were pressed. Polyphony (multiple simultaneous tones, which enables chords) was only obtainable with electronic organ designs at first. Popular electronic keyboards combining organ circuits with synthesizer processing included the ARP Omni and Moog's Polymoog and Opus 3.\nBy 1976 affordable polyphonic synthesizers began to appear, notably the Yamaha CS-50, CS-60 and CS-80, the Sequential Circuits Prophet-5 and the Oberheim Four-Voice. These remained complex, heavy and relatively costly. The recording of settings in digital memory allowed storage and recall of sounds. The first practical polyphonic synth, and the first to use a microprocessor as a controller, was the Sequential Circuits Prophet-5 introduced in late 1977. For the first time, musicians had a practical polyphonic synthesizer that could save all knob settings in computer memory and recall them at the touch of a button. The Prophet-5's design paradigm became a new standard, slowly pushing out more complex and recondite modular designs.\nTape recording.\nIn 1935, another significant development was made in Germany. Allgemeine Elektricit\u00e4ts Gesellschaft (AEG) demonstrated the first commercially produced magnetic tape recorder, called the \"Magnetophon\". Audio tape, which had the advantage of being fairly light as well as having good audio fidelity, ultimately replaced the bulkier wire recorders.\nThe term \"electronic music\" (which first came into use during the 1930s) came to include the tape recorder as an essential element: \"electronically produced sounds recorded on tape and arranged by the composer to form a musical composition\". It was also indispensable to Musique concr\u00e8te.\nTape also gave rise to the first, analogue, sample-playback keyboards, the Chamberlin and its more famous successor the Mellotron, an electro-mechanical, polyphonic keyboard originally developed and built in Birmingham, England in the early 1960s.\nSound sequencer.\nDuring the 1940s\u20131960s, Raymond Scott, an American composer of electronic music, invented various kind of music sequencers for his electric compositions. Step sequencers played rigid patterns of notes using a grid of (usually) 16 buttons, or steps, each step being 1/16 of a measure. These patterns of notes were then chained together to form longer compositions. Software sequencers were continuously utilized since the 1950s in the context of computer music, including computer-\"played\" music (software sequencer), computer-\"composed\" music (music synthesis), and computer \"sound generation\" (sound synthesis).\nDigital era 1980\u20132000.\nDigital synthesis.\nThe first digital synthesizers were academic experiments in sound synthesis using digital computers. FM synthesis was developed for this purpose; as a way of generating complex sounds digitally with the smallest number of computational operations per sound sample. In 1983 Yamaha introduced the first stand-alone digital synthesizer, the DX-7. It used frequency modulation synthesis (FM synthesis), first developed by John Chowning at Stanford University during the late sixties. Chowning exclusively licensed his FM synthesis patent to Yamaha in 1975. Yamaha subsequently released their first FM synthesizers, the GS-1 and GS-2, which were costly and heavy. There followed a pair of smaller, preset versions, the CE20 and CE25 Combo Ensembles, targeted primarily at the home organ market and featuring four-octave keyboards. Yamaha's third generation of digital synthesizers was a commercial success; it consisted of the DX7 and DX9 (1983). Both models were compact, reasonably priced, and dependent on custom digital integrated circuits to produce FM tonalities. The DX7 was the first mass market all-digital synthesizer. It became indispensable to many music artists of the 1980s, and demand soon exceeded supply. The DX7 sold over 200,000 units within three years.\nThe DX series was not easy to program but offered a detailed, percussive sound that led to the demise of the electro-mechanical Rhodes piano, which was heavier and larger than a DX synth. Following the success of FM synthesis Yamaha signed a contract with Stanford University in 1989 to develop digital waveguide synthesis, leading to the first commercial physical modeling synthesizer, Yamaha's VL-1, in 1994. The DX-7 was affordable enough for amateurs and young bands to buy, unlike the costly synthesizers of previous generations, which were mainly used by top professionals.\nSampling.\nThe Fairlight CMI (Computer Musical Instrument), the first polyphonic digital sampler, was the harbinger of sample-based synthesizers. Designed in 1978 by Peter Vogel and Kim Ryrie and based on a dual microprocessor computer designed by Tony Furse in Sydney, Australia, the Fairlight CMI gave musicians the ability to modify volume, attack, decay, and use special effects like vibrato. Sample waveforms could be displayed on-screen and modified using a light pen. The Synclavier from New England Digital was a similar system. Jon Appleton (with Jones and Alonso) invented the Dartmouth Digital Synthesizer, later to become the New England Digital Corp's Synclavier. The Kurzweil K250, first produced in 1983, was also a successful polyphonic digital music synthesizer, noted for its ability to reproduce several instruments synchronously and having a velocity-sensitive keyboard.\nComputer music.\nAn important new development was the advent of computers for the purpose of composing music, as opposed to manipulating or creating sounds. Iannis Xenakis began what is called \"musique stochastique,\" or \"stochastic music\", which is a method of composing that employs mathematical probability systems. Different probability algorithms were used to create a piece under a set of parameters. Xenakis used graph paper and a ruler to aid in calculating the velocity trajectories of glissando for his orchestral composition \"Metastasis\" (1953\u201354), but later turned to the use of computers to compose pieces like \"ST/4\" for string quartet and \"ST/48\" for orchestra (both 1962).\nThe impact of computers continued in 1956. Lejaren Hiller and Leonard Issacson composed \"Illiac Suite\" for string quartet, the first complete work of computer-assisted composition using algorithmic composition.\nIn 1957, Max Mathews at Bell Lab wrote MUSIC-N series, a first computer program family for generating digital audio waveforms through direct synthesis. Then Barry Vercoe wrote MUSIC 11 based on MUSIC IV-BF, a next-generation music synthesis program (later evolving into csound, which is still widely used).\nIn mid 80s, Miller Puckette at IRCAM developed graphic signal-processing software for 4X called Max (after Max Mathews), and later ported it to Macintosh (with Dave Zicarelli extending it for Opcode ) for real-time MIDI control, bringing algorithmic composition availability to most composers with modest computer programming background.\nMIDI.\nIn 1980, a group of musicians and music merchants met to standardize an interface by which new instruments could communicate control instructions with other instruments and the prevalent microcomputer. This standard was dubbed MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface). A paper was authored by Dave Smith of Sequential Circuits and proposed to the Audio Engineering Society in 1981. Then, in August 1983, the MIDI Specification 1.0 was finalized.\nThe advent of MIDI technology allows a single keystroke, control wheel motion, pedal movement, or command from a microcomputer to activate every device in the studio remotely and in synchrony, with each device responding according to conditions predetermined by the composer.\nMIDI instruments and software made powerful control of sophisticated instruments easily affordable by many studios and individuals. Acoustic sounds became reintegrated into studios via sampling and sampled-ROM-based instruments.\nModern electronic musical instruments.\nThe increasing power and decreasing cost of sound-generating electronics (and especially of the personal computer), combined with the standardization of the MIDI and Open Sound Control musical performance description languages, has facilitated the separation of musical instruments into music controllers and music synthesizers.\nBy far the most common musical controller is the musical keyboard. Other controllers include the radiodrum, Akai's EWI and Yamah's WX wind controllers, the guitar-like SynthAxe, the BodySynth, the Buchla Thunder, the Continuum Fingerboard, the Roland Octapad, various isomorphic keyboards including the Thummer, and Kaossilator Pro, and kits like I-CubeX.\nReactable.\nThe Reactable is a round translucent table with a backlit interactive display. By placing and manipulating blocks called \"tangibles\" on the table surface, while interacting with the visual display via finger gestures, a virtual modular synthesizer is operated, creating music or sound effects.\nPercussa AudioCubes.\nAudioCubes are autonomous wireless cubes powered by an internal computer system and rechargeable battery. They have internal RGB lighting, and are capable of detecting each other's location, orientation and distance. The cubes can also detect distances to the user's hands and fingers. Through interaction with the cubes, a variety of music and sound software can be operated. AudioCubes have applications in sound design, music production, DJing and live performance.\nKaossilator.\nThe Kaossilator and Kaossilator Pro are compact instruments where the position of a finger on the touch pad controls two note-characteristics; usually the pitch is changed with a left-right motion and the tonal property, filter or other parameter changes with an up-down motion. The touch pad can be set to different musical scales and keys. The instrument can record a repeating loop of adjustable length, set to any tempo, and new loops of sound can be layered on top of existing ones. This lends itself to electronic dance-music but is more limited for controlled sequences of notes, as the pad on a regular Kaossilator is featureless.\nEigenharp.\nThe Eigenharp is a large instrument resembling a bassoon, which can be interacted with through big buttons, a drum sequencer and a mouthpiece. The sound processing is done on a separate computer.\nXTH Sense.\nThe XTH Sense is a wearable instrument that uses muscle sounds from the human body (known as mechanomyogram) to make music and sound effects. As a performer moves, the body produces muscle sounds that are captured by a chip microphone worn on arm or legs. The muscle sounds are then live sampled using a dedicated software program and a library of modular audio effects. The performer controls the live sampling parameters by weighing force, speed and articulation of the movement.\nAlphaSphere.\nThe AlphaSphere is a spherical instrument that consists of 48 tactile pads that respond to pressure as well as touch. Custom software allows the pads to be indefinitely programmed individually or by groups in terms of function, note, and pressure parameter among many other settings. The primary concept of the AlphaSphere is to increase the level of expression available to electronic musicians, by allowing for the playing style of a musical instrument.\nChip music.\nChiptune, chipmusic, or chip music is music written in sound formats where many of the sound textures are synthesized or sequenced in real time by a computer or video game console sound chip, sometimes including sample-based synthesis and low bit sample playback. Many chip music devices featured synthesizers in tandem with low rate sample playback.\nDIY culture.\nDuring the late 1970s and early 1980s, DIY (Do it yourself) designs were published in hobby electronics magazines (notably the Formant modular synth, a DIY clone of the Moog system, published by Elektor) and kits were supplied by companies such as Paia in the US, and Maplin Electronics in the UK.\nCircuit bending.\nIn 1966, Reed Ghazala discovered and began to teach math \"circuit bending\"\u2014the application of the creative short circuit, a process of chance short-circuiting, creating experimental electronic instruments, exploring sonic elements mainly of timbre and with less regard to pitch or rhythm, and influenced by John Cage\u2019s aleatoric music concept.\nMuch of this manipulation of circuits directly, especially to the point of destruction, was pioneered by Louis and Bebe Barron in the early 1950s, such as their work with John Cage on the \"Williams Mix\" and especially in the soundtrack to Forbidden Planet.\nModern circuit bending is the creative customization of the circuits within electronic devices such as low voltage, battery-powered guitar effects, children's toys and small digital synthesizers to create new musical or visual instruments and sound generators. Emphasizing spontaneity and randomness, the techniques of circuit bending have been commonly associated with noise music, though many more conventional contemporary musicians and musical groups have been known to experiment with \"bent\" instruments. Circuit bending usually involves dismantling the machine and adding components such as switches and potentiometers that alter the circuit. With the revived interest for analogue synthesizer circuit bending became a cheap solution for many experimental musicians to create their own individual analogue sound generators. Nowadays many schematics can be found to build noise generators such as the Atari Punk Console or the Dub Siren as well as simple modifications for children toys such as the famous Speak &amp; Spell that are often modified by circuit benders.\nModular synthesizers.\nThe modular synthesizer is a type of synthesizer consisting of separate interchangeable modules. These are also available as kits for hobbyist DIY constructors. Many hobbyist designers also make available bare PCB boards and front panels for sale to other hobbyists.\n2010s.\nAccording to a forum post in December 2010, Sixense Entertainment is working on musical control with the Sixense TrueMotion motion controller. Immersive virtual musical instruments, or immersive virtual instruments for music and sound aim to represent musical events and sound parameters in a virtual reality so that they can be perceived not only through auditory feedback but also visually in 3D and possibly through tactile as well as haptic feedback, allowing the development of novel interaction metaphors beyond manipulation such as prehension."}
{"id": "10008", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10008", "title": "Electrode", "text": "An electrode is an electrical conductor used to make contact with a nonmetallic part of a circuit (e.g. a semiconductor, an electrolyte, a vacuum or air). The word was coined by William Whewell at the request of the scientist Michael Faraday from two Greek words: \"elektron\", meaning amber (from which the word electricity is derived), and \"hodos\", a way.\nThe electrophore, invented by Johan Wilcke, was an early version of an electrode used to study static electricity.\nAnode and cathode in electrochemical cells.\nAn electrode in an electrochemical cell is referred to as either an \"anode\" or a \"cathode\" (words that were coined by William Whewell at Faraday's request). The anode is now defined as the electrode at which electrons leave the cell and oxidation occurs (indicated by a minus symbol, \"\u2212\"), and the cathode as the electrode at which electrons enter the cell and reduction occurs (indicated by a plus symbol, \"+\"). Each electrode may become either the anode or the cathode depending on the direction of current through the cell. A bipolar electrode is an electrode that functions as the anode of one cell and the cathode of another cell.\nPrimary cell.\nA primary cell is a special type of electrochemical cell in which the reaction cannot be reversed, and the identities of the anode and cathode are therefore fixed. The anode is always the negative electrode. The cell can be discharged but not recharged.\nSecondary cell.\nA secondary cell, for example a rechargeable battery, is a cell in which the chemical reactions are reversible. When the cell is being charged, the anode becomes the positive (+) and the cathode the negative (\u2212) electrode. This is also the case in an electrolytic cell. When the cell is being discharged, it behaves like a primary cell, with the anode as the negative and the cathode as the positive electrode. Charging and discharging processes, such as those in lithium-ion batteries, tend to incur large losses through contact resistance at electrodes. Minimising these electrode localised losses constitutes an important approach in improving energy usage in electrochemical storage.\nOther anodes and cathodes.\nIn a vacuum tube or a semiconductor having polarity (diodes, electrolytic capacitors) the anode is the positive (+) electrode and the cathode the negative (\u2212). The electrons enter the device through the cathode and exit the device through the anode. Many devices have other electrodes to control operation, e.g., base, gate, control grid.\nIn a three-electrode cell, a counter electrode, also called an auxiliary electrode, is used only to make a connection to the electrolyte so that a current can be applied to the working electrode. The counter electrode is usually made of an inert material, such as a noble metal or graphite, to keep it from dissolving.\nWelding electrodes.\nIn arc welding, an electrode is used to conduct current through a workpiece to fuse two pieces together. Depending upon the process, the electrode is either consumable, in the case of gas metal arc welding or shielded metal arc welding, or non-consumable, such as in gas tungsten arc welding. For a direct current system, the weld rod or stick may be a cathode for a filling type weld or an anode for other welding processes. For an alternating current arc welder, the welding electrode would not be considered an anode or cathode.\nAlternating current electrodes.\nFor electrical systems which use alternating current, the electrodes are the connections from the circuitry to the object to be acted upon by the electric current but are not designated anode or cathode because the direction of flow of the electrons changes periodically, usually many times per second.\nUses.\nElectrodes are used to provide current through nonmetal objects to alter them in numerous ways and to measure conductivity for numerous purposes. Examples include:\nChemically modified electrodes.\nChemically modified electrodes are electrodes that have their surfaces chemically modified to change the electrode's physical, chemical, electrochemical, optical, electrical, and transportive properties. These electrodes are used for advanced purposes in research and investigation."}
{"id": "10009", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10009", "title": "Electroconvulsive Therapy", "text": ""}
{"id": "10011", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10011", "title": "Epistolary novel", "text": "An epistolary novel is a novel written as a series of documents. The usual form is letters, although diary entries, newspaper clippings and other documents are sometimes used. Recently, electronic \"documents\" such as recordings and radio, blogs, and e-mails have also come into use. The word \"epistolary\" is derived from Latin from the Greek word \u1f10\u03c0\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03bf\u03bb\u03ae \"epistol\u0113\", meaning a letter (see epistle).\nThe epistolary form can add greater realism to a story, because it mimics the workings of real life. It is thus able to demonstrate differing points of view without recourse to the device of an omniscient narrator. An important strategic device in the epistolary novel for creating the impression of authenticity of the letters is the fictional editor.\nEarly works.\nThere are two theories on the genesis of the epistolary novel. The first claims that the genre is originated from novels with inserted letters, in which the portion containing the third person narrative in between the letters was gradually reduced. The other theory claims that the epistolary novel arose from miscellanies of letters and poetry: some of the letters were tied together into a (mostly amorous) plot. Both claims have some validity. The first truly epistolary novel, the Spanish \"Prison of Love\" (\"C\u00e1rcel de amor\") (c.1485) by Diego de San Pedro, belongs to a tradition of novels in which a large number of inserted letters already dominated the narrative. Other well-known examples of early epistolary novels are closely related to the tradition of letter-books and miscellanies of letters. Within the successive editions of Edm\u00e9 Boursault's \"Letters of Respect, Gratitude and Love\" (\"Lettres de respect, d'obligation et d'amour\") (1669), a group of letters written to a girl named Babet were expanded and became more and more distinct from the other letters, until it formed a small epistolary novel entitled \"Letters to Babet\" (\"Lettres \u00e0 Babet\"). The immensely famous \"Letters of a Portuguese Nun\" (\"Lettres portugaises\") (1669) generally attributed to Gabriel-Joseph de La Vergne, comte de Guilleragues, though a small minority still regard Marianna Alcoforado as the author, is claimed to be intended to be part of a miscellany of Guilleragues prose and poetry. The founder of the epistolary novel in English is said by many to be James Howell (1594\u20131666) with \"Familiar Letters\" (1645\u201350), who writes of prison, foreign adventure, and the love of women.\nThe first novel to expose the complex play that the genre allows was Aphra Behn's \"Love-Letters Between a Nobleman and His Sister\", which appeared in three volumes in 1684, 1685, and 1687. The novel shows the genre's results of changing perspectives: individual points were presented by the individual characters, and the central voice of the author and moral evaluation disappeared (at least in the first volume; her further volumes introduced a narrator). Behn furthermore explored a realm of intrigue with letters that fall into the wrong hands, faked letters, letters withheld by protagonists, and even more complex interaction.\nThe epistolary novel as a genre became popular in the 18th century in the works of such authors as Samuel Richardson, with his immensely successful novels \"Pamela\" (1740) and \"Clarissa\" (1749). John Cleland's early erotic novel \"Fanny Hill\" (1748) is written as a series of letters from the titular character to an unnamed recipient. In France, there was \"Lettres persanes\" (1721) by Montesquieu, followed by \"Julie, ou la nouvelle H\u00e9lo\u00efse\" (1761) by Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Choderlos de Laclos' \"Les Liaisons dangereuses\" (1782), which used the epistolary form to great dramatic effect, because the sequence of events was not always related directly or explicitly. In Germany, there was Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's \"The Sorrows of Young Werther\" (\"Die Leiden des jungen Werther\") (1774) and Friedrich H\u00f6lderlin's \"Hyperion\". The first Canadian novel, \"The History of Emily Montague\" (1769) by Frances Brooke, and twenty years later the first American novel, \"The Power of Sympathy\" (1789) by William Hill Brown, were both written in epistolary form.\nStarting in the 18th century, the epistolary form was subject to much ridicule, resulting in a number of savage burlesques. The most notable example of these was Henry Fielding's \"Shamela\" (1741), written as a parody of \"Pamela\". In it, the female narrator can be found wielding a pen and scribbling her diary entries under the most dramatic and unlikely of circumstances. Oliver Goldsmith used the form to satirical effect in \"The Citizen of the World\", subtitled \"Letters from a Chinese Philosopher Residing in London to his Friends in the East\" (1760\u201361). So did the diarist Fanny Burney in a successful comic first novel, \"Evelina\" (1788).\nThe epistolary novel slowly fell out of use in the late 18th century. Although Jane Austen tried her hand at the epistolary in juvenile writings and her novella \"Lady Susan\" (1794), she abandoned this structure for her later work. It is thought that her lost novel \"First Impressions\", which was redrafted to become \"Pride and Prejudice\", may have been epistolary: \"Pride and Prejudice\" contains an unusual number of letters quoted in full and some play a critical role in the plot.\nThe epistolary form nonetheless saw continued use, surviving in exceptions or in fragments in nineteenth-century novels. In Honor\u00e9 de Balzac's novel \"Letters of Two Brides\", two women who became friends during their education at a convent correspond over a 17-year period, exchanging letters describing their lives. Mary Shelley employs the epistolary form in her novel \"Frankenstein\" (1818). Shelley uses the letters as one of a variety of framing devices, as the story is presented through the letters of a sea captain and scientific explorer attempting to reach the north pole who encounters Victor Frankenstein and records the dying man's narrative and confessions. Published in 1848, Anne Bront\u00eb's novel \"The Tenant of Wildfell Hall\" is framed as a retrospective letter from one of the main heroes to his friend and brother-in-law with the diary of the eponymous tenant inside it. In the late 19th century, Bram Stoker released one of the most widely recognized and successful novels in the epistolary form to date, \"Dracula\". Printed in 1897, the novel is compiled entirely of letters, diary entries, newspaper clippings, telegrams, doctor's notes, ship's logs, and the like.\nTypes.\nEpistolary novels can be categorized based on the number of people whose letters are included. This gives three types of epistolary novels: monologic (giving the letters of only one character, like \"Letters of a Portuguese Nun\" and \"The Sorrows of Young Werther\"), dialogic (giving the letters of two characters, like Mme Marie Jeanne Riccoboni's \"Letters of Fanni Butler\" (1757), and polylogic (with three or more letter-writing characters, such as in Bram Stoker's \"Dracula\"). A crucial element in polylogic epistolary novels like \"Clarissa\" and \"Dangerous Liaisons\" is the dramatic device of 'discrepant awareness': the simultaneous but separate correspondences of the heroines and the villains creating dramatic tension.\nNotable works.\nThe epistolary novel form has continued to be used after the eighteenth century."}
{"id": "10013", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10013", "title": "Evidence-based medicine", "text": "Evidence-based medicine (EBM) is \"the conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients.\" The aim of EBM is to integrate the experience of the clinician, the values of the patient, and the best available scientific information to guide decision-making about clinical management. The term was originally used to describe an approach to teaching the practice of medicine and improving decisions by individual physicians about individual patients.\nBackground, history and definition.\nMedicine has a long history of scientific inquiry about the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of human disease.\nThe concept of a controlled clinical trial was first described in 1662 by Jan Baptist van Helmont in reference to the practice of bloodletting. Wrote Van Helmont:\nThe first published report describing the conduct and results of a controlled clinical trial was by James Lind, a Scot Naval Surgeon who conducted research on scurvy during his time aboard HMS Salisbury in the Channel Fleet, while patrolling the Bay of Biscay. Lind divided the sailors participating in his experiment into six groups, so that the effects of various treatments could be fairly compared. Lind found improvement in symptoms and signs of scurvy among the group of men treated with lemons or oranges. He published a treatise describing the results of this experiment in 1753.\nAn early critique of statistical methods in medicine was published in 1835.\nThe term \"Evidence-based medicine\" was introduced in 1990 by Gordon Guyatt of McMaster University.\nClinical decision making.\nAlvan Feinstein's publication of \"Clinical Judgment\" in 1967 focused attention on the role of clinical reasoning and identified biases that can affect it. In 1972, Archie Cochrane published \"Effectiveness and Efficiency\", which described the lack of controlled trials supporting many practices that had previously been assumed to be effective. In 1973, John Wennberg began to document wide variations in how physicians practiced. Through the 1980s, David M. Eddy described errors in clinical reasoning and gaps in evidence. In the mid 1980s, Alvin Feinstein, David Sackett and others published textbooks on clinical epidemiology, which translated epidemiological methods to physician decision making. Toward the end of the 1980s, a group at RAND showed that large proportions of procedures performed by physicians were considered inappropriate even by the standards of their own experts.\nEvidence-based guidelines and policies.\nDavid M. Eddy first began to use the term \"evidence-based\" in 1987 in workshops and a manual commissioned by the Council of Medical Specialty Societies to teach formal methods for designing clinical practice guidelines. The manual was eventually published by the American College of Physicians. Eddy first published the term \"evidence-based\" in March, 1990, in an article in the \"Journal of the American Medical Association\" that laid out the principles of evidence-based guidelines and population-level policies, which Eddy described as \"explicitly describing the available evidence that pertains to a policy and tying the policy to evidence instead of standard-of-care practices or the beliefs of experts. The pertinent evidence must be identified, described, and analyzed. The policymakers must determine whether the policy is justified by the evidence. A rationale must be written.\" He discussed \"evidence-based\" policies in several other papers published in \"JAMA\" in the spring of 1990. Those papers were part of a series of 28 published in \"JAMA\" between 1990 and 1997 on formal methods for designing population-level guidelines and policies.\nMedical education.\nThe term \"evidence-based medicine\" was introduced slightly later, in the context of medical education. In the autumn of 1990, Gordon Guyatt used it in an unpublished description of a program at McMaster University for prospective or new medical students. Guyatt and others first published the term two years later (1992) to describe a new approach to teaching the practice of medicine.\nIn 1996, David Sackett and colleagues clarified the definition of this tributary of evidence-based medicine as \"the conscientious, explicit and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients. ... [It] means integrating individual clinical expertise with the best available external clinical evidence from systematic research.\" This branch of evidence-based medicine aims to make individual decision making more structured and objective by better reflecting the evidence from research. Population-based data are applied to the care of an individual patient, while respecting the fact that practitioners have clinical expertise reflected in effective and efficient diagnosis and thoughtful identification and compassionate use of individual patients' predicaments, rights, and preferences.\nBetween 1993 and 2000, the Evidence-based Medicine Working Group at McMaster University published the methods to a broad physician audience in a series of 25 \"Users' Guides to the Medical Literature\" in \"JAMA\". In 1995 Rosenberg and Donald defined individual level evidence-based medicine as \"the process of finding, appraising, and using contemporaneous research findings as the basis for medical decisions.\" In 2010, Greenhalgh used a definition that emphasized quantitative methods: \"the use of mathematical estimates of the risk of benefit and harm, derived from high-quality research on population samples, to inform clinical decision-making in the diagnosis, investigation or management of individual patients.\"\nThe two original definitions highlight important differences in how evidence-based medicine is applied to populations versus individuals. When designing guidelines applied to large groups of people in settings where there is relatively little opportunity for modification by individual physicians, evidence-based policymaking stresses that there should be good evidence to document a test's or treatment's effectiveness. In the setting of individual decision-making, practitioners can be given greater latitude in how they interpret research and combine it with their clinical judgment. In 2005, Eddy offered an umbrella definition for the two branches of EBM: \"Evidence-based medicine is a set of principles and methods intended to ensure that to the greatest extent possible, medical decisions, guidelines, and other types of policies are based on and consistent with good evidence of effectiveness and benefit.\"\nProgress.\nOn the evidence-based guidelines and policies side, explicit insistence on evidence of effectiveness was introduced by the American Cancer Society in 1980. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) began issuing guidelines for preventive interventions based on evidence-based principles in 1984. In 1985, the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association applied strict evidence-based criteria for covering new technologies. Beginning in 1987, specialty societies such as the American College of Physicians, and voluntary health organizations such as the American Heart Association, wrote many evidence-based guidelines. In 1991, Kaiser Permanente, a managed care organization in the US, began an evidence-based guidelines program. In 1991, Richard Smith wrote an editorial in the \"British Medical Journal\" and introduced the ideas of evidence-based policies in the UK. In 1993, the Cochrane Collaboration created a network of 13 countries to produce systematic reviews and guidelines. In 1997, the US Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ, then known as the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, or AHCPR) established Evidence-based Practice Centers (EPCs) to produce evidence reports and technology assessments to support the development of guidelines. In the same year, a National Guideline Clearinghouse that followed the principles of evidence-based policies was created by AHRQ, the AMA, and the American Association of Health Plans (now America's Health Insurance Plans). In 1999, the National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE) was created in the UK.\nOn the medical education side, programs to teach evidence-based medicine have been created in medical schools in Canada, the US, the UK, Australia, and other countries. A 2009 study of UK programs found the more than half of UK medical schools offered some training in evidence-based medicine, although there was considerable variation in the methods and content, and EBM teaching was restricted by lack of curriculum time, trained tutors and teaching materials. Many programs have been developed to help individual physicians gain better access to evidence. For example, UpToDate was created in the early 1990s. The Cochrane Collaboration began publishing evidence reviews in 1993. BMJ Publishing Group launched a 6-monthly periodical in 1995 called Clinical Evidence that provided brief summaries of the current state of evidence about important clinical questions for clinicians.\nCurrent practice.\nBy 2000, use of the term \"evidence-based\" had extended to other levels of the health care system. An example is \"evidence-based health services\", which seek to increase the competence of health service decision makers and the practice of evidence-based medicine at the organizational or institutional level.\nThe multiple tributaries of evidence-based medicine share an emphasis on the importance of incorporating evidence from formal research in medical policies and decisions. However, they differ on the extent to which they require good evidence of effectiveness before promoting a guideline or payment policy; hence, the distinction sometimes made between evidence-based medicine and science-based medicine, which also takes into account factors such as prior plausibility and compatibility with established science as when medical organizations promote controversial treatments such as acupuncture. They also differ on the extent to which it is feasible to incorporate individual-level information in decisions. Thus, evidence-based guidelines and policies may not readily 'hybridise' with experience-based practices orientated towards ethical clinical judgement, and can lead to contradictions, contest, and unintended crises. The most effective 'knowledge leaders' (managers and clinical leaders) use a broad range of management knowledge in their decision making, rather than just formal evidence. Evidence-based guidelines may provide the basis for governmentality in health care, and consequently play a central role in the governance of contemporary health care systems.\nMethods.\nSteps.\nThe steps for designing explicit, evidence-based guidelines were described in the late 1980s: Formulate the question (population, intervention, comparison intervention, outcomes, time horizon, setting); search the literature to identify studies that inform the question; interpret each study to determine precisely what it says about the question; if several studies address the question, synthesize their results (meta-analysis); summarize the evidence in \"evidence tables\"; compare the benefits, harms and costs in a \"balance sheet\"; draw a conclusion about the preferred practice; write the guideline; write the rationale for the guideline; have others review each of the previous steps; implement the guideline.\nFor the purposes of medical education and individual-level decision making, five steps of EBM in practice were described in 1992 and the experience of delegates attending the 2003 Conference of Evidence-Based Health Care Teachers and Developers was summarized into five steps and published in 2005. This five step process can broadly be categorized as:\nEvidence reviews.\nSystematic reviews of published research studies are a major part of the evaluation of particular treatments. The Cochrane Collaboration is one of the best-known organisations that conducts systematic reviews. Like other producers of systematic reviews, it requires authors to provide a detailed and repeatable plan of their literature search and evaluations of the evidence. Once all the best evidence is assessed, treatment is categorized as (1) likely to be beneficial, (2) likely to be harmful, or (3) evidence did not support either benefit or harm.\nA 2007 analysis of 1,016 systematic reviews from all 50 Cochrane Collaboration Review Groups found that 44% of the reviews concluded that the intervention was likely to be beneficial, 7% concluded that the intervention was likely to be harmful, and 49% concluded that evidence did not support either benefit or harm. 96% recommended further research. In 2017, a study assessed the role of systematic reviews produced by Cochrane Collaboration to inform US private payers' policies making; it showed that though medical policy documents of major US private payers were informed by Cochrane systematic reviews there was still scope to encourage the further usage.\nAssessing the quality of evidence.\nEvidence-based medicine categorizes different types of clinical evidence and rates or grades them according to the strength of their freedom from the various biases that beset medical research. For example, the strongest evidence for therapeutic interventions is provided by systematic review of randomized, well-blinded, placebo-controlled trials with allocation concealment and complete follow-up involving a homogeneous patient population and medical condition. In contrast, patient testimonials, case reports, and even expert opinion (however, some critics have argued that expert opinion \"does not belong in the rankings of the quality of empirical evidence because it does not represent a form of empirical evidence\" and continue that \"expert opinion would seem to be a separate, complex type of knowledge that would not fit into hierarchies otherwise limited to empirical evidence alone\") have little value as proof because of the placebo effect, the biases inherent in observation and reporting of cases, difficulties in ascertaining who is an expert and more.\nSeveral organizations have developed grading systems for assessing the quality of evidence. For example, in 1989 the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) put forth the following:\nAnother example are the CEBM Levels of evidence published by the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine. First released in September 2000, the Oxford CEBM Levels of Evidence provides 'levels' of evidence for claims about prognosis, diagnosis, treatment benefits, treatment harms, and screening, which most grading schemes do not address. The original CEBM Levels was Evidence-Based On Call to make the process of finding evidence feasible and its results explicit. In 2011, an international team redesigned the Oxford CEBM Levels to make it more understandable and to take into account recent developments in evidence ranking schemes. The Oxford CEBM Levels of Evidence have been used by patients, clinicians and also to develop clinical guidelines including recommendations for the optimal use of phototherapy and topical therapy in psoriasis and guidelines for the use of the BCLC staging system for diagnosing and monitoring hepatocellular carcinoma in Canada.\nIn 2000, a system was developed by the GRADE (short for Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation) working group and takes into account more dimensions than just the quality of medical research. It requires users of GRADE who are performing an assessment of the quality of evidence, usually as part of a systematic review, to consider the impact of different factors on their confidence in the results. Authors of GRADE tables grade the quality of evidence into four levels, on the basis of their confidence in the observed effect (a numerical value) being close to what the true effect is. The confidence value is based on judgements assigned in five different domains in a structured manner. The GRADE working group defines 'quality of evidence' and 'strength of recommendations' based on the quality as two different concepts which are commonly confused with each other.\nSystematic reviews may include randomized controlled trials that have low risk of bias, or, observational studies that have high risk of bias. In the case of randomized controlled trials, the quality of evidence is high, but can be downgraded in five different domains.\nIn the case of observational studies per GRADE, the quality of evidence starts of lower and may be upgraded in three domains in addition to being subject to downgrading.\nMeaning of the levels of quality of evidence as per GRADE:\nCategories of recommendations.\nIn guidelines and other publications, recommendation for a clinical service is classified by the balance of risk versus benefit and the level of evidence on which this information is based. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force uses:\nGRADE guideline panelists may make strong or weak recommendations on the basis of further criteria. Some of the important criteria are the balance between desirable and undesirable effects (not considering cost), the quality of the evidence, values and preferences and costs (resource utilization).\nDespite the differences between systems, the purposes are the same: to guide users of clinical research information on which studies are likely to be most valid. However, the individual studies still require careful critical appraisal.\nStatistical measures.\nEvidence-based medicine attempts to express clinical benefits of tests and treatments using mathematical methods. Tools used by practitioners of evidence-based medicine include:\nQuality of clinical trials.\nEvidence-based medicine attempts to objectively evaluate the quality of clinical research by critically assessing techniques reported by researchers in their publications.\nLimitations and criticism.\nThere are a number of limitations and criticisms of evidence-based medicine. Two widely cited categorization schemes for the various published critiques of EBM include the three-fold division of Straus and McAlister (\"limitations universal to the practice of medicine, limitations unique to evidence-based medicine and misperceptions of evidence-based-medicine\") and the five-point categorization of Cohen, Stavri and Hersh (EBM is a poor philosophic basis for medicine, defines evidence too narrowly, is not evidence-based, is limited in usefulness when applied to individual patients, or reduces the autonomy of the doctor/patient relationship).\nIn no particular order, some published objections include:\nA 2018 study, \"Why all randomised controlled trials produce biased results\", assessed the 10 most cited RCTs and argued that trials face a wide range of biases and constraints, from trials only being feasible to study a small set of questions amenable to randomisation and generally only being able to assess the \"average\" treatment effect of a sample, to limitations in extrapolating results to another context, among many others outlined in the study.\nApplication of evidence in clinical settings.\nDespite the emphasis on evidence-based medicine, unsafe or ineffective medical practices continue to be applied, because of patient demand for tests or treatments, because of failure to access information about the evidence, or because of the rapid pace of change in the scientific evidence. For example, between 2003 and 2017, the evidence shifted on hundreds of medical practices, ranging from whether hormone replacement therapy was safe to whether babies should be given certain vitamins to whether antidepressant drugs are effective in people with Alzheimer's disease. Even when the evidence is unequivocally that a treatment is either not safe or not effective, it may take many years for other treatments to be adopted. In other cases, significant change can require a generation of physicians to retire or die, and be replaced by physicians who were trained with more recent evidence.\nPhysicians may also reject evidence which conflicts with their anecdotal experience or because of cognitive biases \u2013 for example, a vivid memory of a rare but shocking outcome (the availability heuristic), such as a patient dying after refusing treatment. They may overtreat to \"do something\" or to address a patient's emotional needs. They may worry about malpractice charges based on a discrepancy between what the patient expects and what the evidence recommends. They may also overtreat or provide ineffective treatments because the treatment feels biologically plausible.\nEducation.\nTraining in evidence based medicine is offered across the continuum of medical education.\nThe Berlin questionnaire and the Fresno Test are validated instruments for assessing the effectiveness of education in evidence-based medicine. These questionnaires have been used in diverse settings.\nA Campbell systematic review that included 24 trials examined the effectiveness of e-learning in improving evidence-based health care knowledge and practice. It was found that e-learning, compared to no learning, improves evidence-based health care knowledge and skills but not attitudes and behaviour. There is no difference in outcomes when comparing e-learning to face-to-face learning. Combining e-learning with face-to-face learning (blended learning) has a positive impact on evidence-based knowledge, skills, attitude and behaviour. Related to e-learning, medical school students have engaged with editing Wikipedia to increase their EBM skills, including teaching students to construct EBM materials as developing the skills of communicating medical knowledge."}
{"id": "10016", "revid": "41331000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10016", "title": "End zone", "text": "The end zone is the scoring area on the field, according to gridiron-based codes of football. It is the area between the end line and goal line bounded by the sidelines. There are two end zones, each being on an opposite side of the field. It is bordered on all sides by a white line indicating its beginning and end points, with orange, square pylons placed at each of the four corners as a visual aid (however, prior to around the early 1970s, flags were used instead to denote the end zone). Canadian rule books use the terms \"goal area\" and \"dead line\" instead of \"end zone\" and \"end line\" respectively, but the latter terms are the more common in colloquial Canadian English. Unlike sports like association football and ice hockey which require the ball/puck to pass completely over the goal line to count as a score, both Canadian and American football merely need any part of the ball to break the vertical plane of the outer edge of the goal line.\nA similar concept exists in both rugby football codes, where it is known as the \"in-goal area\". The difference between rugby and gridiron-based codes is that in rugby, the ball must be touched to the ground in the in-goal area to count as a try (the rugby equivalent of a touchdown), whereas in the gridiron-based games, simply possessing the ball in or over the end zone is sufficient to count as a touchdown.\nUltimate frisbee also uses an end zone scoring area. Scores in this sport are counted when a pass is received in the end zone.\nHistory.\nThe end zones were invented as a result of the legalization of the forward pass in gridiron football. Prior to this, the goal line and end line were the same, and players scored a touchdown by leaving the field of play through that line. Goal posts were placed on the goal line, and any kicks that did not result in field goals but left the field through the end lines were simply recorded as touchbacks (or, in the Canadian game, singles; it was during the pre-end zone era that Hugh Gall set the record for most singles in a game, with eight).\nIn the earliest days of the forward pass, the pass had to be caught in-bounds and could not be thrown across the goal line (as the receiver would be out of bounds). This also made it difficult to pass the ball when very close to one's own goal line, since merely dropping back to pass or kick would result in a safety (rules of the forward pass at the time required the passer to be five yards behind the line of scrimmage, which would make throwing the forward pass when the ball was snapped from behind one's own five-yard line illegal in itself).\nThus, in 1912, the end zone was introduced in American football. In an era when professional football was still in its early years and college football dominated the game, the resulting enlargement of the field was constrained by fact that many college teams were already playing in well-developed stadiums, complete with stands and other structures at the ends of the fields, thereby making any substantial enlargement of the field unfeasible at many schools. Eventually, a compromise was reached: 12 yards of end zone were added to each end of the field, but in return, the playing field was shortened from 110 yards to 100, resulting in the physical size of the field being only slightly longer than before. Goal posts were originally kept on the goal lines, but after they began to interfere with play, they moved back to the end lines in 1927, where they have remained in college football ever since. The National Football League moved the goal posts up to the goal line again in 1933, then back again to the end line in 1974.\nAs with many other aspects of gridiron football, Canadian football adopted the forward pass and end zones much later than American football. The forward pass and end zones were adopted in 1929. In Canada, college football has never reached a level of prominence comparable to U.S. college football, and professional football was still in its infancy in the 1920s. As a result, Canadian football was still being played in rudimentary facilities in the late 1920s. A further consideration was that the Canadian Rugby Union (the governing body of Canadian football at the time, now known as Football Canada) wanted to reduce the prominence of single points (then called \"rouges\") in the game. Therefore, the CRU simply appended 25-yard end zones to the ends of the existing 110-yard field, creating a much larger field of play. Since moving the goal posts back 25 yards would have made the scoring of field goals excessively difficult, and since the CRU did not want to reduce the prominence of field goals, the goal posts were left on the goal line where they remain today. However, the rules governing the scoring of singles were changed: teams were required to either kick the ball out of bounds through the end zone or force the opposition to down a kicked ball in their own end zone in order to be awarded a point. By 1986, at which point CFL stadiums were becoming bigger and comparable in development to their American counterparts in an effort to stay financially competitive, the CFL reduced the depth of the end zone to 20 yards.\nScoring.\nA team scores a touchdown by entering its opponent's end zone while carrying the ball or catching the ball while being within the end zone. If the ball is carried by a player, it is considered a score when any part of the ball is directly above or beyond any part of the goal line between the pylons. In addition, a two-point conversion may be scored after a touchdown by similar means.\nIn Ultimate Frisbee, a goal is scored by completing a pass into the end zone.\nSize.\nThe end zone in American football is 10 yards long by yards (160 feet) wide. Each corner is marked with a pylon (four apiece).\nA full-sized end zone in Canadian football is 20 yards long by 65 yards wide. Prior to the 1980s, the Canadian end zone was 25 yards long. The first stadium to use the 20 yard long end zone was B.C. Place in Vancouver, which was completed in 1983. The floor of B.C. Place was (and is) too short to accommodate a field 160 yards in length. The shorter end zone proved popular enough that the CFL adopted it league-wide in 1986. At BMO Field, home to the Toronto Argonauts, the end zones are only 18 yards. Like their American counterparts, Canadian endzones are marked with four pylons.\nIn Canadian football stadiums that also feature a running track, it is usually necessary to truncate the back corners of the end zones, since a rectangular field 150 yards long and 65 yards wide will not fit completely inside an oval-shaped running track. Such truncations are marked as straight diagonal lines, resulting in an end zone with six corners and six pylons. As of 2019, Montreal's Percival Molson Stadium is the only CFL stadium that has the rounded-off end zones.\nDuring the CFL's American expansion in the mid-1990s, several stadiums, by necessity, used 15-yard end zones (some had end zones that were even shorter than 15 yards); only Baltimore and San Antonio had the endzones at the standard 20 yards.\nUltimate Frisbee uses an end zone 40 yards wide and 20 yards deep (37\u00a0m \u00d7 18\u00a0m).\nThe goal post.\nThe location and dimensions of a goal post differ from league to league, but it is usually within the boundaries of the end zone. In earlier football games (both professional and collegiate), the goal post began at the goal line, and was usually an H-shaped bar. Nowadays, for player safety reasons, almost all goal posts in the professional and collegiate levels of American football are T-shaped (resembling a slingshot), and reside just outside the rear of both end zones; these goalposts were first seen in 1966 and were invented by Jim Trimble and Joel Rottman in Montreal, Quebec, Canada.\nThe goal posts in Canadian football still reside on the goal line instead of the back of the end zones, partly because the number of field goal attempts would dramatically decrease if the posts were moved 20 yards back in that sport, and also because the larger end zone and wider field makes the resulting interference in play by the goal post a less serious problem.\nAt the high school level, it is not uncommon to see multi-purpose goal posts that include football goal posts at the top and a soccer net at the bottom; these are usually seen at smaller schools and in multi-purpose stadiums where facilities are used for multiple sports. When these or H-shaped goal posts are used in football, the lower portions of the posts are covered with several inches of heavy foam padding to protect the safety of the players.\nDecoration.\nMost professional and collegiate teams have their logo, team name, or both painted on the surface of the end zone, with team colors filling the background. Many championship and bowl games at college and professional level are commemorated by the names of the opposing teams each being painted in one of the opposite end zones. In some leagues, along with bowl games, local, national, or bowl game sponsors may also have their logos placed in the end zone. In the CFL, fully painted end zones are nonexistent, though some feature club logos or sponsors. Additionally, the Canadian end zone, being a live-ball part of the field, often features yardage dashes (usually marked every five yards), not unlike the field of play itself.\nIn many places, particularly in smaller high schools and colleges, end zones are undecorated, or have plain white diagonal stripes spaced several yards apart, in lieu of colors and decorations. One notable use of this design in major college football is the Notre Dame Fighting Irish, who have both end zones at Notre Dame Stadium painted with diagonal white lines. In professional football, since 2004, the Pittsburgh Steelers of the NFL have the south end zone at Heinz Field painted with diagonal-lines during most of the regular season. This is done because Heinz Field,which has a natural grass playing surface, is also home to the Pittsburgh Panthers of college football and the markings simplify field conversion between the two teams' respective field markings and logos. After the Panthers' season is over, the Steelers logo is painted in the south end zone.\nOne of the major quirks of the American Football League was its use of unusual patterns such as argyle in its end zones, a tradition revived in 2009 by the Denver Broncos, itself a former AFL team. The original XFL standardized its playing fields so that all eight of its teams had uniform fields with the XFL logo in each end zone and no team identification."}
{"id": "10017", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10017", "title": "Ettore Ximenes", "text": "Ettore Ximenes (11 April 1855, Palermo 20 December 1926, Rome) was an Italian sculptor.\nBiography.\nSon of Antonio Ximenes and Giulia Tolentino, a Sicilian noble woman, Ettore Ximenes initially embarked on literary studies but then took up sculpture and attended the courses at the Palermo Academy of Fine Arts. After 1872, he continued training at the Naples Academy under Domenico Morelli and Stanislao Lista. He also established a close relationship with Vincenzo Gemito.\nHe returned to Palermo in 1874 and won a competition for a four-year grant, which enabled him to study and open a studio for sculpture in Florence. In 1873 at Vienna, he exhibited \"Work without Genius\". In 1877 at Naples, he exhibited a life-size statue titled \"The Equilibrium\" about a gymnast walking on a sphere. He would make copies of this work in small marble and bronze statuettes.\nHe exhibited a stucco \"Christ and the Adultress\" and \"Il cuore del re (Heart of the King)\", the latter depicting an oft-repeated story of King Vittorio Emanuele during one of his frequent hunts, encountering and offering charity to a peasant child. At the 1878 Paris World Exposition he displayed: \"The Brawl\" and \"il Marmiton\". In Paris, he met with Auguste Rodin and Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux.\nIn 1878, he also completed a life-size stucco of \"il Ciceruacchio\", a statue of the Italian patriot Angelo Brunetti and his thirteen-year-old son, depicting them at the moment of their execution in 1849 by Austrian troops. The Cicervacchio statue, with its tinge of revolutionary zeal, did not find commissions for completing the work in marble.\nHe then completed a nude statue of \"Nan\u00e0\" based on the novel by \u00c9mile Zola; the statue was exhibited at the 1879 Salon di Paris. The next year at the Paris Salon, he displayed \"La Pesca meravigliosa\", where a fisherman rescues a bathing maiden. Returning to Italy, he displayed the bust del minister Giuseppe Zanardelli. At the Mostra of Rome, he displayed \"The assassination of Julius Caeser\"; and at the Exposition of Venice, \"Ragazzi messi in fila\". Ximenes' realism gave way to Symbolist and Neo-Renaissance elements. In addition to sculpture, he also produced illustrations for the works of Edmondo De Amicis published by the Treves publishing house.\nXimenes was involved in many of the major official monumental projects in Italy from the 1880s on and devoted his energies as from 1911 primarily to commissions for important public works in S\u00e3o Paulo, Kyiv, New York and Buenos Aires."}
{"id": "10018", "revid": "2715142", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10018", "title": "Edsger W. Dijkstra", "text": "Edsger Wybe Dijkstra ( ; ; 11 May 1930 \u2013 6 August 2002) was a Dutch computer scientist, programmer, software engineer, systems scientist, science essayist, and pioneer in computing science. A theoretical physicist by training, he worked as a programmer at the Mathematisch Centrum (Amsterdam) from 1952 to 1962. A university professor for much of his life, Dijkstra held the Schlumberger Centennial Chair in Computer Sciences at the University of Texas at Austin from 1984 until his retirement in 1999. He was a professor of mathematics at the Eindhoven University of Technology (1962\u20131984) and a research fellow at the Burroughs Corporation (1973\u20131984). In 1972, he became the first person to win the Turing Award who was neither American nor British.\nOne of the most influential figures of computing science's founding generation, Dijkstra helped shape the new discipline both as an engineer and a theorist. His fundamental contributions cover diverse areas of computing science, including compiler construction, operating systems, distributed systems, sequential and concurrent programming, programming paradigm and methodology, programming language research, program design, program development, program verification, software engineering principles, graph algorithms, and philosophical foundations of computer programming and computer science. Many of his papers are the source of new research areas. Several concepts and problems that are now standard in computer science were first identified by Dijkstra and/or bear names coined by him.\nUntil the mid-1960s computer programming was considered more an art (or a craft) than a scientific discipline. In Harlan Mills's words (1986), \"programming [before the 1970s] was regarded as a private, puzzle-solving activity of writing computer instructions to work as a program\". In the late 1960s, computer programming was in a state of crisis. Dijkstra was one of a small group of academics and industrial programmers who advocated a new programming style to improve the quality of programs. Dijkstra, who had a background in mathematics and physics, was one of the driving forces behind the acceptance of computer programming as a scientific discipline. He coined the phrase \"structured programming\" and during the 1970s this became the new programming orthodoxy. As the originator of the structured programming movement (the first remarkable movement in the history of computer programming), his ideas about programming methodology helped lay the foundations for the birth and development of the professional discipline of software engineering, enabling programmers to organize and manage increasingly complex software projects. As Bertrand Meyer (2009) noted, \"The revolution in views of programming started by Dijkstra's iconoclasm led to a movement known as structured programming, which advocated a systematic, rational approach to program construction. Structured programming is the basis for all that has been done since in programming methodology, including object-oriented programming.\"\nThe academic study of concurrent computing started in the 1960s, with Dijkstra (1965) credited with being the first paper in this field, identifying and solving the mutual exclusion problem. He was also one of the early pioneers of the research on principles of distributed computing. His foundational work on concurrency, semaphores, mutual exclusion, deadlock (deadly embrace), finding shortest paths in graphs, fault-tolerance, self-stabilization, among many other contributions comprises many of the pillars upon which the field of distributed computing is built. Shortly before his death in 2002, he received the ACM PODC Influential-Paper Award in distributed computing for his work on self-stabilization of program computation. This annual award was renamed the Dijkstra Prize (Edsger W. Dijkstra Prize in Distributed Computing) the following year. As the prize, sponsored jointly by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC) and the European Association for Theoretical Computer Science (EATCS) International Symposium on Distributed Computing (DISC), recognizes that \"No other individual has had a larger influence on research in principles of distributed computing\".\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nEdsger W. Dijkstra was born in Rotterdam. His father was a chemist who was president of the Dutch Chemical Society; he taught chemistry at a secondary school and was later its superintendent. His mother was a mathematician, but never had a formal job.\nDijkstra had considered a career in law and had hoped to represent the Netherlands in the United Nations. However, after graduating from school in 1948, at his parents' suggestion he studied mathematics and physics and then theoretical physics at the University of Leiden.\nIn the early 1950s, electronic computers were a novelty. Dijkstra stumbled on his career quite by accident, and through his supervisor, Professor A. Haantjes, he met Adriaan van Wijngaarden, the director of the Computation Department at the Mathematical Center in Amsterdam, who offered Dijkstra a job; he officially became the Netherlands' first \"programmer\" in March 1952.\nFor some time Dijkstra remained committed to physics, working on it in Leiden three days out of each week. With increasing exposure to computing, however, his focus began to shift. As he recalled:\nWhen Dijkstra married Maria (Ria) C. Debets in 1957, he was required as a part of the marriage rites to state his profession. He stated that he was a programmer, which was unacceptable to the authorities, there being no such profession then in The Netherlands.\nIn 1959, he received his PhD from the University of Amsterdam for a thesis entitled 'Communication with an Automatic Computer', devoted to a description of the assembly language designed for the first commercial computer developed in the Netherlands, the Electrologica X1. His thesis supervisor was Van Wijngaarden.\nMathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam.\nFrom 1952 until 1962, Dijkstra worked at the Mathematisch Centrum in Amsterdam, where he worked closely with Bram Jan Loopstra and Carel S. Scholten, who had been hired to build a computer. Their mode of interaction was disciplined: They would first decide upon the interface between the hardware and the software, by writing a programming manual. Then the hardware designers would have to be faithful to their part of the contract, while Dijkstra, the programmer, would write software for the nonexistent machine. Two of the lessons he learned from this experience were the importance of clear documentation, and that program debugging can be largely avoided through careful design.\nDijkstra formulated and solved the shortest path problem for a demonstration at the official inauguration of the ARMAC computer in 1956. Because of the absence of journals dedicated to automatic computing, he did not publish the result until 1959.\nAt the Mathematical Center, Dijkstra and his colleague developed the first compiler for the programming language ALGOL 60 by August 1960, more than a year before a compiler was produced by another group. It had a profound influence on his later thinking on programming as a scientific activity.\nEindhoven University of Technology.\nIn 1962, Dijkstra moved to Eindhoven, and later to Nuenen, in the south of the Netherlands, where he became a professor in the Mathematics Department at the Eindhoven University of Technology. The university did not have a separate computer science department and the culture of the mathematics department did not particularly suit him. Dijkstra tried to build a group of computer scientists who could collaborate on solving problems. This was an unusual model of research for the Mathematics Department. In the late 1960s he built the THE operating system (named for the university, then known as Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven), which has influenced the designs of subsequent operating systems through its use of software based paged virtual memory.\nBurroughs Corporation.\nDijkstra joined Burroughs Corporation, a company known then for producing computers based on an innovative hardware architecture, as its research fellow in August 1973. His duties consisted of visiting some of the firm's research centers a few times a year and carrying on his own research, which he did in the smallest Burroughs research facility, namely, his study on the second floor of his house in Nuenen. In fact, Dijkstra was the only research fellow of Burroughs and worked for it from home, occasionally travelling to its branches in the United States. As a result, he reduced his appointment at the university to one day a week. That day, Tuesday, soon became known as the day of the famous 'Tuesday Afternoon Club', a seminar during which he discussed with his colleagues scientific articles, looking at all aspects: notation, organisation, presentation, language, content, etc. Shortly after he moved in 1984 to the University of Texas at Austin (USA), a new 'branch' of the Tuesday Afternoon Club emerged in Austin, Texas.\nThe Burroughs years saw him at his most prolific in output of research articles. He wrote nearly 500 documents in the EWD series (described below), most of them technical reports, for private circulation within a select group.\nThe University of Texas at Austin.\nDijkstra accepted the Schlumberger Centennial Chair in the Computer Science Department at the University of Texas at Austin in 1984.\nLast years.\nDijkstra worked in Austin until his retirement in November 1999. To mark the occasion and to celebrate his forty-plus years of seminal contributions to computing science, the Department of Computer Sciences organized a symposium, which took place on his 70th birthday in May 2000.\nDijkstra and his wife returned from Austin to his original house in Nuenen (Netherlands) where he found that he had only months to live. He said that he wanted to retire in Austin, Texas, but to die in the Netherlands. Dijkstra died on 6 August 2002 after a long struggle with cancer. He and his wife Maria (Ria) Debets were survived by their three children: Marcus, Femke, and the computer scientist Rutger M. Dijkstra.\nPioneering contributions and impact on computing science.\nAlthough a theoretical physicist by training, Dijkstra became one of the most influential figures of computing science's founding generation. As an early pioneer in many research areas of computing science, he helped shape the new discipline from both an engineering and an academic perspective. Many of his papers are the source of new research areas. Many concepts that are now standard in computer science were first identified by Dijkstra and/or bear names coined by him. Several important problems were also first formulated and solved by him. A 1994 survey of over a thousand professors of computer science was conducted to obtain a list of 38 most influential scholarly papers in the field, and Dijkstra is the author of five papers. At the age of 42, he became the first non-American, non-British, and continental European winner of the Turing Award.\nDuring his forty-plus years as a computing scientist, which included positions in both academia and industry, Dijkstra made numerous seminal contributions to many areas of computing science, including compiler construction, operating systems, concurrent computing (concurrent programming), distributed computing, programming paradigm and methodology, programming language research, program design, program development, program verification, software engineering principles, algorithm design, and philosophical foundations of computer programming and computer science. In addition, Dijkstra was intensely interested in teaching computer science, and in the relationships between academic computing science and the software industry.\nHis main pioneering contributions (including ideas, inventions and innovations) include:\nAlgorithmic work.\nDijkstra's algorithmic work (especially graph algorithms, concurrent algorithms, and distributed algorithms) plays an important role in many areas of computing science. According to Leslie Lamport (2002), Dijkstra \"started the field of concurrent and distributed algorithms with his 1965 CACM paper \"Solution of a Problem in Concurrent Programming Control\", in which he first stated and solved the mutual exclusion problem.\" As Lamport explains, \"that paper is probably why PODC exists (...). It remains to this day the most influential paper in the field. That it did not win a PODC Influential Paper Award reflects an artificial separation between concurrent and distributed algorithms\u2013a separation that has never existed in Dijkstra's work.\"\nIn 1959 Dijkstra published in a 3-page article 'A note on two problems in connexion with graphs' the algorithm to find the shortest path in a graph between any two given nodes, now called Dijkstra's algorithm. Its impact over the next 40 years is summarised from the article of Mikkel Thorup, 'Undirected Single Source Shortest Paths with Positive Integer Weights in Linear Time' (1999): \"Since 1959, all theoretical developments in SSSP [Single-Source Shortest Paths] for general directed and undirected graphs have been based on Dijkstra's algorithm.\" Dijkstra's algorithm is used in SPF, Shortest Path First, which is used in the routing protocols OSPF and IS-IS. Various modifications to Dijkstra's algorithm have been proposed by many authors using heuristics to reduce the run time of shortest path search. One of the most used heuristic algorithms is the A* search algorithm (first described by Peter Hart, Nils Nilsson and Bertram Raphael of Stanford Research Institute in 1968), the main goal is to reduce the run time by reducing the search space. Dijkstra thought about the shortest path problem when working at the Mathematical Center in Amsterdam in 1956 as a programmer to demonstrate capabilities of a new computer named ARMAC. His objective was to choose both a problem and an answer (that would be produced by computer) that non-computing people could understand. He designed the shortest path algorithm in about 20 minutes without aid of paper and pen and later implemented it for ARMAC for a slightly simplified transportation map of 64 cities in the Netherlands (so that 6 bits would suffice to represent the city in the algorithm). As he recalled, in an interview published in 2001:\nA year later, he came across another problem from hardware engineers working on the institute's next computer: minimize the amount of wire needed to connect the pins on the back panel of the machine. As a solution, he rediscovered the algorithm known as Prim's minimal spanning tree algorithm. The Prim's algorithm was originally developed in 1930 by Czech mathematician Vojt\u011bch Jarn\u00edk. and later independently rediscovered and republished by Robert C. Prim in 1957, and Dijkstra in 1959. Therefore, it is also sometimes called the DJP algorithm.\nIn 1961, Dijkstra first described the shunting-yard algorithm, a method for parsing mathematical expressions specified in infix notation, in the Mathematisch Centrum report. It can be used to produce output in Reverse Polish notation (RPN) or as an abstract syntax tree (AST). The algorithm was named the \"shunting yard\" algorithm because its operation resembles that of a railroad shunting yard. The shunting-yard algorithm is commonly used to implement operator-precedence parsers.\nIn 1962 or 1963, Dijkstra proposed the semaphore mechanism for mutual exclusion algorithm for n processes (a generalization of Dekker's algorithm), which was probably the first published concurrent algorithm and which introduced a new area of algorithmic research. He also identified the deadlock problem and proposed the banker's algorithm that prevents deadlock.\nIn 1974, Dijkstra presented three self-stabilization algorithms for mutual exclusion on a ring. This work is considered the first to introduce and demonstrate the self-stabilization concept.\nIn the mid-1970s, Dijkstra (together with other authors) introduced two useful abstractions (mutator and collector) to the study of garbage collection. The mutator abstracts the process that performs the computation, including allocation of a new storage cell. The collector is the process that automatically reclaims garbage. Further, this paper gives a formalization of \"tri-color marking\" that is basic to incremental garbage collection.\nIn the early 1980s, Dijkstra and Carel S. Scholten proposed the Dijkstra\u2013Scholten algorithm for detecting termination in distributed systems.\nIn 1981, Dijkstra developed smoothsort, a comparison-based sorting algorithm and a variation of heapsort.\nCompiler construction and programming language research.\nDijkstra was known to be a fan of the programming language ALGOL, and worked on the team that implemented the first compiler for ALGOL 60, which he was closely involved in developing, realising, and popularising. As discussed by Peter Naur in the article 'The European side of the last phase of the development of ALGOL 60', in the \"Proceedings of the First ACM SIGPLAN Conference on History of Programming Languages\", January 1978, Dijkstra took part in the period 1958\u20131959 in a number of meetings that culminated in the publication of the report defining the ALGOL 60 language. Dijkstra's name does not appear in the list of 13 authors of the final report, but he was an official member of the International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) IFIP Working Group 2.1 on Algorithmic Languages and Calculi, which specified, supports, and maintains ALGOL 60 and ALGOL 68. He eventually left the committee, apparently because he could not agree with the majority opinions. Still, while at the Mathematisch Centrum (Amsterdam), he wrote jointly with the first ALGOL 60 compiler. By August 1960, he and Zonneveld put into operation the first complete working ALGOL 60 compiler (for the Electrologica X1 computer), more than a year before a compiler was produced by another group. Dijkstra and Zonneveld, who collaborated on the compiler, agreed not to shave until the project was completed. Zonneveld shaved shortly thereafter, but Dijkstra kept his beard for the rest of his life.\nALGOL was the result of a collaboration of American and European committees. ALGOL 60 (short for ALGOrithmic Language 1960) is a member of the ALGOL family of computer programming languages. It followed on from ALGOL 58 and inspired many languages that followed it. It gave rise to many other languages, including BCPL, B, Pascal, Simula, and C. Algol 60 was a sophisticatedly designed computer language and it provided a large number of hitherto unknown implementation challenges. As Bjarne Stroustrup notes, \"one problem with Algol60 was that no one knew how to implement it.\" A major new challenge in Algol 60 implementation was the run-time allocation and management of data. In 1960, Dijkstra and Zonneveld showed how recursive procedures could be executed using a run-time stack of activation records, and how to efficiently access identifiers from statically enclosing scopes using the so-called \"display\". The ALGOL 60 compiler was one of the first to support recursion employing a novel method to do so. Dijkstra's short book \"Primer of Algol 60 Programming\", originally published in 1962, was the standard reference for the language for several years.\nRole of programming methodology and the birth of the structured programming movement.\nComputer programming in the 1950s to 1960s was not recognized as an academic discipline and unlike mature sciences there were no theoretical concepts or coding systems. Programming as a professional activity was poorly understood in those years. In the late 1960s computer programming was in state of crisis. Software crisis is a term used in the early days of computing science for the difficulty of writing useful and efficient computer programs in the required time. The software crisis was due to the rapid increases in computer power and the complexity of the problems that could be tackled. With the increase in the complexity of the software, many software problems arose because existing methods were insufficient. The term \"software crisis\" was coined by some attendees at the first of the NATO Software Engineering Conferences in 1968 at Garmisch, Germany. His 1972 ACM Turing Award Lecture makes reference to this same problem: \"The major cause of the software crisis is that the machines have become several orders of magnitude more powerful! To put it quite bluntly: as long as there were no machines, programming was no problem at all; when we had a few weak computers, programming became a mild problem, and now we have gigantic computers, programming has become an equally gigantic problem.\"\nWhile Dijkstra had programmed extensively in machine code in the 1950s, he came to the conclusion that in high-level languages frequent use of the GOTO statement was usually symptomatic of poor structure. In 1968 he wrote a private paper \"A Case against the GO TO Statement\", which was then published as a letter in CACM. Editor Niklaus Wirth gave this letter the heading \"Go To Statement Considered Harmful\", which introduced the phrase \"considered harmful\" into computing.\nDijkstra argued that the programming statement GOTO, found in many high-level programming languages, is a major source of errors, and should therefore be eliminated. This letter caused a huge debate in the programming community. Some went to the length of equating good programming with the elimination of GO TO. Dijkstra refused to mention the debate, or even the GO TO statement, in his article \"Notes on Structured Programming\". The debate has long since died down; programming languages provide alternatives to the GO TO, few programmers today use it liberally, and most never use it at all.\nDijkstra's thesis was that departures from linear control flow were clearer if allowed only in disciplined higher-level structures such as the if-then-else statement and the while loop. This methodology was developed into structured programming movement, the title of his 1972 book, coauthored with Tony Hoare and Ole-Johan Dahl. Considered by many as the first significant movement in the history of computer programming, structured programming became the new programming orthodoxy during the 1970s.\nStructured programming is often regarded as \"goto-less programming\". But as Bertrand Meyer notes, \"As the first book on the topic [\"Structured Programming\" by Dijkstra, Dahl, and Hoare] shows, structured programming is about much more than control structures and the goto. Its principal message is that programming should be considered a scientific discipline based on mathematical rigor.\" , structured programming \u2013 especially in the 1970s and 1980s \u2013 significantly influenced the birth of many modern programming languages such as Pascal, C, Modula-2, and Ada. The Fortran 77 version which incorporates the concepts of structured programming, was released in 1978. The C++ language was a considerably extended and enhanced version of the popular C (see also: list of C-based programming languages). Since C++ was developed from a more traditional , it is a 'hybrid language', rather than a pure object-oriented programming language.\nIn his article \"Structured Programming: Retrospect and Prospect\" (1986), Harlan Mills writes, \"Edsger W. Dijkstra's 1969 \"Structured Programming\" article precipitated a decade of intense focus on programming techniques that has fundamentally altered human expectations and achievements in software development. Before this decade of intense focus, programming was regarded as a private, puzzle-solving activity of writing computer instructions to work as a program. After this decade, programming could be regarded as a public, mathematics-based activity of restructuring specifications into programs. Before, the challenge was in getting programs to run at all, and then in getting them further debugged to do the right things. After, programs could be expected to both run and do the right things with little or no debugging. Before, it was common wisdom that no sizable program could be error-free. After, many sizable programs have run a year or more with no errors detected. These expectations and achievements are not universal because of the inertia of industrial practices. But they are well-enough established to herald fundamental change in software development.\"\nThe book \"Concise Encyclopedia of Computer Science\" (2004), edited by Edwin D. Reilly, notes that \"the major contributions of structured programming have been twofold\u2014the elevation of programming technique to something less of an art and more of a science, and the demonstration that carefully structured programs can be creative works of sufficient literary merit to deserve being read by humans and not just by computer.\"\nResearch on program design and development at the dawn of software engineering.\nDijkstra's ideas about programming methodology (especially the structured programming movement) helped lay the foundations for the birth and development of the professional discipline of software engineering (in particular the software design and development), enabling programmers to organize and manage increasingly complex software projects. In the late 1960s Dijkstra discussed the concept of program families. In the mid 1970s, David Parnas and others clarified the idea and showed how to apply it in software engineering principles.\nThe rise of the structured programming movement led to many other \"structured\" approaches applied to software design. The techniques of structured analysis and structured design are outgrowths of structured programming concepts and techniques, and of the early ideas about modular design. Principles of modularity were strengthened by Larry Constantine's concepts of coupling (to be minimized between modules) and cohesion (to be maximized within modules), by David Parnas's techniques of information hiding, and by abstract data types. A number of tools and methods employing structured concepts were developed, such as Structured Design, Jackson's Structured Programming, Ross' Structured Analysis and Design Technique (SADT), Yourdon's Structured Method, Structured Systems Analysis and Design Method (SSADM), and James Martin's information technology engineering. The field of software metrics is often considered as a direct influence of the structured programming movement on software engineering in the 1970s.\nSeparation of concerns (SoC), one of the basic principles in software engineering, is a design principle for separating a computer program into distinct sections, such that each section addresses a separate concern. The term \"separation of concerns\" was coined by Dijkstra in his 1974 paper \"On the role of scientific thought\".\nOperating system research.\nIn the 1960s Dijkstra and his colleagues in Eindhoven designed and implemented THE (standing for 'Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven') operating system, which was organised into clearly identified abstraction layers. His 1968 article on this subject provided the foundation for subsequent designs of the operating systems. The IEEE Computer Society's David Alan Grier writes, \"We generally trace the idea of building computer systems in layers back to a 1967 paper that the Dutch computer scientist Edsger Dijkstra gave to a joint IEEE Computer Society/ACM conference. Prior to this paper, engineers had struggled with the problem of how to organize software. If you look at early examples of programs, and you can find many in the electronic library of the Computer Society, you will find that most code of that era is complicated, difficult to read, hard to modify, and challenging to reuse. In his 1967 paper, Dijkstra described how software could be constructed in layers and gave an example of a simple operating system that used five layers. He admitted that this system might not be a realistic test of his ideas but he argued that the \"larger the project, the more essential the structuring!\" The idea of using layers to control complexity has become a mainstay of software architecture. We see it in many forms and apply it to many problems. We see it in the hierarchy of classes in object-oriented programming and in the structure of service-oriented architecture (SOA). SOA is a relatively recent application of layering in computer science. It was articulated in 2007 as a means of controlling complexity in business systems, especially distributed systems that make substantial use of the Internet. Like Dijkstra's plan for system development, its layering system is called the SOA Solution Stack or S3. The S3's nine layers are: 1) operational systems, 2) service components, 3) services, 4) business processes, 5) consumer actions, 6) system integration, 7) quality control and assurance, 8) information architecture, and 9) system governance and policies.\"\nDijkstra organized the design of the system in layers in order to reduce the overall complexity of the software. Though the term 'architecture' had not yet been used to describe software design, this was certainly considered the first glimpse of software architecture. It introduced a number of design principles which have become part of the working vocabulary of every professional programmer: levels of abstraction, programming in layers, the semaphore, and cooperating sequential processes. His original paper on the THE operating system was reprinted in the 25th Anniversary issue of Communications of the ACM, in January 1983. By way of introduction, the Editor-in-Chief says, \"This project initiated a long line of research in multilevel systems architecture \u2014 a line that continues to the present day because hierarchical modularity is a powerful approach to organizing large systems.\"\nConcurrent computing (concurrent programming).\nIn a one-page paper from 1965 Dijkstra introduced the 'mutual exclusion problem' for n processes and discussed a solution to it. It was probably the first published concurrent algorithm. The notion, standard by now, of a 'critical section' was also introduced in this paper. Per Brinch Hansen, a pioneer in the field of concurrent computing, considers Dijkstra's \"Cooperating Sequential Processes\" (1965) to be the first classic paper in concurrent programming. As Brinch Hansen notes, 'Dijkstra lays the conceptual foundation for abstract concurrent programming' with that paper.\nIn 1968 Dijkstra published his seminal paper 'Cooperating sequential processes', a 70-page essay that originated the field of concurrent programming. He discussed in it the notion of mutual exclusion (mutex) and the criteria a satisfactory solution should satisfy. He also redressed the historical perspective left out of his 1965 paper by including the first known correct solution to the mutual exclusion problem, for two processes, due to Theodorus Dekker. Dijkstra subsequently generalized Dekker's solution to n processes. Further, he proposed the first synchronisation mechanism for concurrent processes, the semaphore with its two operations, P and V. He also identified the 'deadlock problem' (called there 'the problem of the deadly embrace') and proposed an elegant 'Banker's algorithm' that prevents deadlock. The deadlock detection and prevention became perennial research problems in the field of concurrent programming.\nThe dining philosophers problem is an example problem often used in concurrent algorithm design to illustrate synchronization issues and techniques for resolving them. It was originally formulated in 1965 by Dijkstra as a student exam exercise, presented in terms of computers competing for access to tape drive peripherals. Soon after, Tony Hoare gave the problem its present formulation. The sleeping barber problem is also attributed to Dijkstra.\nMichel Raynal (2012) writes, \"Since the early work of E.W. Dijkstra (1965), who introduced the mutual exclusion problem, the concept of a process, the semaphore object, the notion of a weakest precondition, and guarded commands (among many other contributions), synchronization is no longer a catalog of tricks but a domain of computing science with its own concepts, mechanisms, and techniques whose results can be applied in many domains. This means that process synchronization has to be a major topic of any computer science curriculum.\"\nJohn W. McCormick et al. (2011) notes, \"The notion of the concurrent program as a means for writing parallel programs without regard for the underlying hardware was first introduced by Edsger Dijkstra (1968). Moti Ben-Ari (1982) elegantly summed up Dijkstra's idea in three sentences: \u2018Concurrent programming is the name given to programming notation and techniques for expressing potential parallelism and solving the resulting synchronization and communication problems. Implementation of parallelism is a topic in computer systems (hardware and software) that is essentially independent of concurrent programming. Concurrent programming is important because it provides an abstract setting in which to study parallelism without getting bogged down in the implementation details.\u2019\"\nDistributed computing (distributed programming).\nDijkstra was one of the very early pioneers of the research on principles of distributed computing. The Dijkstra Prize sponsors recognize, \"no other individual has had a larger influence on research in principles of distributed computing.\" Some of his papers are even considered to be those that established the field. Dijkstra's 1965 paper, \"Solution of a Problem in Concurrent Programming Control\" was the first to present the correct solution to the mutual exclusion problem. Leslie Lamport writes that this work \"is probably why PODC exists\" and it \"started the field of concurrent and distributed algorithms\".\nIn particular, his paper \"Self-stabilizing Systems in Spite of Distributed Control\" (1974) started the sub-field of self-stabilization. It is also considered as the first scientific examination of fault-tolerant systems. Dijkstra's paper was not widely noticed until Leslie Lamport's invited talk at the ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC) in 1983. In his report on Dijkstra's work on self-stabilizing distributed systems, Lamport regard it to be 'a milestone in work on fault tolerance' and 'a very fertile field for research'.\nFormal specification and verification.\nFrom the 1970s, Dijkstra's chief interest was formal verification. In 1976 Dijkstra published a seminal book, \"A Discipline of Programming\", which put forward his method of systematic development of programs together with their correctness proofs. In his exposition he used his 'Guarded Command Language'. The language, with its reliance on non-determinism, the adopted weakest precondition semantics and the proposed development method has had a considerable impact on the field to this day. The refinement calculus, originally proposed by Ralph-Johan Back and developed by Carroll Morgan, is an extension of Dijkstra's weakest precondition calculus, where program statements are modeled as predicate transformers.\nIn 1984, to add further support to this approach to programming, he published jointly with Wim Feijen an introductory textbook for first-year students of computer science. The book, first published in Dutch, was entitled \"Een methode van programmeren\". The English edition appeared in 1988 as \"A Method of Programming\".\nOn the nature of computer science and computer programming.\nMany of his opinions on computer science and programming have become widespread. For example, the programming phrase \"two or more, use a for\" (a rule of thumb when to use a loop) is sometimes attributed to him.\nHe was the first to make the claim that programming is so inherently complex that, in order to manage it successfully, programmers need to harness every trick and abstraction possible.\nDijkstra was one of the most famous opponents of the engineering view of computing science. Like Peter Naur and Kristen Nygaard, Dijkstra disliked the very term 'computer science'. Computer science, as Dijkstra pointed out, deserves a better name. He suggests it can be called 'computing science'. Instead of the computer, or computing technology, Dijkstra wanted to emphasize the abstract mechanisms that computing science uses to master complexity. When expressing the abstract nature of computing science, he wrote,\nIn \"The Humble Programmer\" (1972), Dijkstra wrote: \"We must not forget that it is not our [computing scientists'] business to make programs, it is our business to design classes of computations that will display a desired behaviour.\"\nDijkstra also opposed the inclusion of software engineering under the umbrella of academic computer science. He wrote that, \"As economics is known as \"The Miserable Science\", software engineering should be known as \"The Doomed Discipline\", doomed because it cannot even approach its goal since its goal is self-contradictory.\" And \"software engineering has accepted as its charter \"How to program if you cannot.\".\"\nPersonality and working style.\nIn the world of computing science, Dijkstra is well known as a \"character\". In the preface of his book \"A Discipline of Programming\" (1976) he stated the following: \"For the absence of a bibliography I offer neither explanation nor apology.\" In fact, most of his articles and books have no references at all. This approach to references was deplored by some researchers. But Dijkstra chose this way of working to preserve his self-reliance.\nAs a university professor for much of his life, Dijkstra saw teaching not just as a required activity but as a serious research endeavour. His approach to teaching was unconventional. His lecturing style has been described as idiosyncratic. When lecturing, the long pauses between sentences have often been attributed to the fact that English is not Dijkstra's first language. However the pauses also served as a way for him to think on his feet and he was regarded as a quick and deep thinker while engaged in the act of lecturing. His courses for students in Austin had little to do with computer science but they dealt with the presentation of mathematical proofs. At the beginning of each semester he would take a photo of each of the students, in order to memorize their names. He never followed a textbook, with the possible exception of his own while it was under preparation. When lecturing, he would write proofs in chalk on a blackboard rather than using overhead foils. He invited the students to suggest ideas, which he then explored, or refused to explore because they violated some of his tenets. He assigned challenging homework problems, and would study his students' solutions thoroughly. He conducted his final examinations orally, over a whole week. Each student was examined in Dijkstra's office or home, and an exam lasted several hours.\nDijkstra was also highly original in his way of assessing people's capacity for a job. When Vladimir Lifschitz came to Austin in 1990 for a job interview, Dijkstra gave him a puzzle. Vladimir solved it and has been working in Austin since then.\nDespite having invented much of the technology of software, he eschewed the use of computers in his own work for many decades. Even after he succumbed to his UT colleagues' encouragement and acquired a Macintosh computer, he used it only for e-mail and for browsing the World Wide Web. Dijkstra never wrote his articles using a computer. He preferred to rely on his typewriter and later on his Montblanc pen. Dijkstra's favorite writing instrument was the Montblanc Meisterst\u00fcck fountain pen. He repeatedly tried other pens, but none ever displaced the Montblanc.\nHe had no use for word processors, believing that one should be able to write a letter or article without rough drafts, rewriting, or any significant editing. He would work it all out in his head before putting pen to paper, and once mentioned that when he was a physics student he would solve his homework problems in his head while walking the streets of Leiden.\nMost of Dijkstra's publications were written by him alone. He never had a secretary and took care of all his correspondence alone. When colleagues prepared a Festschrift for his sixtieth birthday, published by Springer-Verlag, he took the trouble to thank each of the 61 contributors separately, in a hand-written letter.\nThroughout Dijkstra's career, his work was characterized by elegance and economy. A prolific writer (especially as an essayist), Dijkstra authored more than 1,300 papers, many written by hand in his precise script. They were essays and parables; fairy tales and warnings; comprehensive explanation and pedagogical pretext. Most were about mathematics and computer science; others were trip reports that are more revealing about their author than about the people and places visited. It was his habit to copy each paper and circulate it to a small group of colleagues who would copy and forward the papers to another limited group of scientists. His love affair with simplicity came at an early age and under his mother's guidance. He once said he had asked his mother whether trigonometry was a difficult topic. She replied that he must learn all the formulas and that further, if he required more than five lines to prove something, he was on the wrong track.\nDijkstra was famous for his wit, eloquence, rudeness, abruptness and often cruelty to fellow professionals, and way with words, such as in his remark, \"The question of whether Machines Can Think (\u2026) is about as relevant as the question of whether Submarines Can Swim.\". His advice to a promising researcher, who asked how to select a topic for research, was the wise words: \"Do only what only you can do\". Dijkstra was also known for his vocal criticism and absence of social skills when interacting with colleagues. As an outspoken and critical visionary, he strongly opposed the teaching of BASIC.\nIn many of his more witty essays, Dijkstra described a fictional company of which he served as chairman. The company was called Mathematics, Inc., a company that he imagined having commercialized the production of mathematical theorems in the same way that software companies had commercialized the production of computer programs. He invented a number of activities and challenges of Mathematics Inc. and documented them in several papers in the EWD series. The imaginary company had produced a proof of the Riemann Hypothesis but then had great difficulties collecting royalties from mathematicians who had proved results assuming the Riemann Hypothesis. The proof itself was a trade secret. Many of the company's proofs were rushed out the door and then much of the company's effort had to be spent on maintenance. A more successful effort was the Standard Proof for Pythagoras' Theorem, that replaced the more than 100 incompatible existing proofs. Dijkstra described Mathematics Inc. as \"the most exciting and most miserable business ever conceived\". EWD 443 (1974) describes his fictional company as having over 75 percent of the world's market share.\nEWD manuscripts.\nDijkstra was well known for his habit of carefully composing manuscripts with his fountain pen. The manuscripts are called EWDs, since Dijkstra numbered them with \"EWD\", his initials, as a prefix. According to Dijkstra himself, the EWDs started when he moved from the Mathematical Centre in Amsterdam to the Eindhoven University of Technology (then Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven). After going to Eindhoven, Dijkstra experienced a writer's block for more than a year. Dijkstra distributed photocopies of a new EWD among his colleagues. Many recipients photocopied and forwarded their copies, so the EWDs spread throughout the international computer science community. The topics were computer science and mathematics, and included trip reports, letters, and speeches. These short articles span a period of 40 years. Almost all EWDs appearing after 1972 were hand-written. They are rarely longer than 15 pages and are consecutively numbered. The last one, No. 1318, is from 14 April 2002. Within computer science they are known as the EWD reports, or, simply the EWDs. More than 1300 EWDs have been scanned, with a growing number transcribed to facilitate search, and are available online at the Dijkstra archive of the University of Texas.\nPersonal life and death.\nDijkstra led a modest lifestyle, to the point of being spartan. His and his wife's house in Nuenen was simple, small and unassuming. He did not own a TV, a VCR or a mobile telephone, and did not go to the movies. He played the piano, and, while in Austin, liked to go to concerts. An enthusiastic listener of classical music, Dijkstra's favorite composer was Mozart.\nDijkstra died on 6 August 2002. According to officials at the University of Texas, the cause of death was cancer.\nInfluence and recognition.\nIn 1972 the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) acknowledged Dijkstra's seminal contributions to the field by awarding him the distinguished Turing Award. The citation for the award reads:\nThe introduction given at the awards ceremony is a tribute to Dijkstra:\nIn the words of Sir Tony Hoare, FRS, delivered by him at Dijkstra's funeral:\nIn March 2003, the following email was sent to the distributed computing community:\nFormer ACM President Peter J. Denning wrote about Dijkstra:\nAwards and honors.\nAmong Dijkstra's awards and honors are:\nIn 1969, the British Computer Society (BCS) received approval for an award and fellowship, Distinguished Fellow of the British Computer Society (DFBCS), to be awarded under bylaw 7 of their royal charter. In 1971, the first election was made, to Dijkstra.\nIn 1990, on occasion of Dijkstra's 60th birthday, the Department of Computer Science (UTCS) at the University of Texas at Austin organized a two-day seminar in his honor. Speakers came from all over the United States and Europe, and a group of computer scientists contributed research articles which were edited into a book.\nIn 2002, the C&amp;C Foundation of Japan recognized Dijkstra \"for his pioneering contributions to the establishment of the scientific basis for computer software through creative research in basic software theory, algorithm theory, structured programming, and semaphores.\" Dijkstra was alive to receive notice of the award, but it was accepted by his family in an award ceremony after his death.\nShortly before his death in 2002, Dijkstra received the ACM PODC Influential-Paper Award in distributed computing for his work on self-stabilization of program computation. This annual award was renamed the Dijkstra Prize (Edsger W. Dijkstra Prize in Distributed Computing) the following year, in his honor.\nThe Dijkstra Award for Outstanding Academic Achievement in Computer Science (Loyola University Chicago, Department of Computer Science) is named for Edsger W. Dijkstra. Beginning in 2005, this award recognizes the top academic performance by a graduating computer science major. Selection is based on GPA in all major courses and election by department faculty.\nThe Department of Computer Science (UTCS) at the University of Texas at Austin hosted the inaugural Edsger W. Dijkstra Memorial Lecture on 12 October 2010. Tony Hoare, Emeritus Professor at Oxford and Principal Researcher at Microsoft Research, was the speaker for the event. This lecture series was made possible by a generous grant from Schlumberger to honor the memory of Dijkstra."}
{"id": "10021", "revid": "1497330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10021", "title": "Educational perennialism", "text": "Educational perennialism also infrequently referred to as Universal Curriculum is a normative educational philosophy. Perennialists believe that one should teach the things that are of everlasting pertinence to all people everywhere, and that the emphasis should be on principles, not facts. Since people are human, one should teach first about humans, rather than machines or techniques, and about liberal, rather than vocational, topics.\nAlthough perennialism may appear similar to essentialism, perennialism focuses first on personal development, while essentialism focuses first on essential skills. Essentialist curricula thus tend to be much more vocational and fact-based, and far less liberal and principle-based. Both philosophies are typically considered to be teacher-centered, as opposed to student-centered philosophies of education such as progressivism. However, since the teachers associated with perennialism are in a sense the authors of the Western masterpieces themselves, these teachers may be open to student criticism through the associated Socratic method, which, if carried out as true dialogue, involves a balance between teacher activity and student activity, with the teacher promoting discussion.\nSecular perennialism.\nThe word perennial in secular perennialism suggests something that lasts an indefinitely long time, recurs again and again, or is self-renewing. As promoted primarily by Robert Hutchins and Mortimer Adler, a universal curriculum based upon the common and essential nature of all human beings is recommended. This form of perennialism comprises the humanist and scientific traditions. Hutchins and Adler implemented these ideas with great success at the University of Chicago, where they still strongly influence the curriculum in the form of the undergraduate Common Core. Other notable figures in the movement include Stringfellow Barr and Scott Buchanan (who together initiated the Great Books program at St. John's College in Annapolis, Maryland), Mark Van Doren, Alexander Meiklejohn, and Sir Richard Livingstone, an English classicist with an American following.\nSecular perennialists espouse the idea that education should focus on the historical development of a continually developing common oriented base of human knowledge and art, the timeless value of classic thought on central human issues by landmark thinkers, and revolutionary ideas critical to historical paradigm shifts or changes in world view. A program of studies which is highly general, nonspecialized, and nonvocational is advocated. They firmly believe that exposure of all citizens to the development of thought by those most responsible for the evolution of the occidental oriented tradition is integral to the survival of the freedoms, human rights and responsibilities inherent to a true Democracy.\nAdler states: \n... our political democracy depends upon the reconstitution of our schools. Our schools are not turning out young people prepared for the high office and the duties of citizenship in a democratic republic. Our political institutions cannot thrive, they may not even survive, if we do not produce a greater number of thinking citizens, from whom some statesmen of the type we had in the 18th century might eventually emerge. We are, indeed, a nation at risk, and nothing but radical reform of our schools can save us from impending disaster... Whatever the price... the price we will pay for not doing it will be much greater.\nHutchins writes in the same vein: \nThe business of saying ... that people are not capable of achieving a good education is too strongly reminiscent of the opposition of every extension of democracy. This opposition has always rested on the allegation that the people were incapable of exercising the power they demanded. Always the historic statement has been verified: you cannot expect the slave to show the virtues of the free man unless you first set him free. When the slave has been set free, he has, in the passage of time, become indistinguishable from those who have always been free ... There appears to be an innate human tendency to underestimate the capacity of those who do not belong to \"our\" group. Those who do not share our background cannot have our ability. Foreigners, people who are in a different economic status, and the young seem invariably to be regarded as intellectually backward ...\nAs with the essentialists, perennialists are educationally conservative in the requirement of a curriculum focused upon fundamental subject areas, but stress that the overall aim should be exposure to history's finest thinkers as models for discovery. The student should be taught such basic subjects as English, languages, history, mathematics, natural science, philosophy, and fine arts. Adler states: \"The three R's, which always signified the formal disciplines, are the essence of liberal or general education.\"\nSecular perennialists agree with progressivists that memorization of vast amounts of factual information and a focus on second-hand information in textbooks and lectures does not develop rational thought. They advocate learning through the development of meaningful conceptual thinking and judgement by means of a directed reading list of the profound, aesthetic, and meaningful great books of the Western canon. These books, secular perennialists argue, are written by the world's finest thinkers, and cumulatively comprise the \"Great Conversation\" of humanity with regard to the central human questions. Their basic argument for the use of original works (abridged translations being acceptable as well) is that these are the products of \"genius\". Hutchins remarks:\nGreat books are great teachers; they are showing us every day what ordinary people are capable of. These books come out of ignorant, inquiring humanity. They are usually the first announcements for success in learning. Most of them were written for, and addressed to, ordinary people.\nIt is important to note that the Great Conversation is not static, which is the impression that one might obtain from some descriptions of perennialism, a confusion with religious perennialism, or even the term perennialism itself. The Great Conversation and the set of related great books changes as the representative thought of man changes or progresses, and is therefore representative of an evolution of thought, but is not based upon the whim or fancy of the latest cultural fads. Hutchins makes this point very clear:\nIn the course of history... new books have been written that have won their place in the list. Books once thought entitled to belong to it have been superseded; and this process of change will continue as long as men can think and write. It is the task of every generation to reassess the tradition in which it lives, to discard what it cannot use, and to bring into context with the distant and intermediate past the most recent contributions to the Great Conversation. ...the West needs to recapture and reemphasize and bring to bear upon its present problems the wisdom that lies in the works of its greatest thinkers and in the name of love\nPerennialism was a solution proposed in response to what was considered by many to be a failing educational system. Again Hutchins writes:\nThe products of American high schools are illiterate; and a degree from a famous college or university is no guarantee that the graduate is in any better case. One of the most remarkable features of American society is that the difference between the \"uneducated\" and the \"educated\" is so slight.\nIn this regard John Dewey and Hutchins were in agreement. Hutchins's book \"The Higher Learning in America\" deplored the \"plight of higher learning\" that had turned away from cultivation of the intellect and toward anti-intellectual practicality due in part, to a lust for money. In a highly negative review of the book, Dewey wrote a series of articles in \"The Social Frontier\" which began by applauding Hutchins' attack on \"the aimlessness of our present educational scheme.\nPerennialists believe that reading is to be supplemented with mutual investigations (between the teacher and the student) and minimally-directed discussions through the Socratic method in order to develop a historically oriented understanding of concepts. They argue that accurate, independent reasoning distinguishes the developed or educated mind and they thus stress the development of this faculty. A skilled teacher would keep discussions on topic and correct errors in reasoning, but it would be the class, not the teacher, who would reach the conclusions. While not directing or leading the class to a conclusion, the teacher may work to accurately formulate problems within the scope of the texts being studied.\nWhile the standard argument for utilizing a modern text supports distillation of information into a form relevant to modern society, perennialists argue that many of the historical debates and the development of ideas presented by the great books are relevant to any society, at any time, and thus that the suitability of the great books for instructional use is unaffected by their age.\nPerennialists freely acknowledge that any particular selection of great books will disagree on many topics; however, they see this as an advantage, rather than a detriment. They believe that the student must learn to recognize such disagreements, which often reflect current debates. The student becomes responsible for thinking about the disagreements and reaching a reasoned, defensible conclusion. This is a major goal of the Socratic discussions. They do not advocate teaching a settled scholarly interpretation of the books, which would cheat the student of the opportunity to learn rational criticism and to know his own mind.http://dhspriory.org/thomas/QDdeVer11.htm De Magistro\nReligious perennialism.\nPerennialism was originally religious in nature, developed first by Thomas Aquinas in the thirteenth century in his work \"\" (\"On the Teacher\").\nIn the nineteenth century, John Henry Newman presented a defense of religious perennialism in \"The Idea of a University\". Discourse 5 of that work, \"Knowledge Its Own End\", is a recent statement of a Christian educational perennialism.\nThere are several epistemological options, which affect the pedagogical options. The possibilities may be surveyed by considering four extreme positions, as indicated in the following table:"}
{"id": "10022", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10022", "title": "E.163", "text": ""}
{"id": "10024", "revid": "3229404", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10024", "title": "MDMA", "text": "3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), commonly known as ecstasy (E) or molly, is a psychoactive drug primarily used for recreational purposes. The desired effects include altered sensations, increased energy, empathy, as well as pleasure. When taken by mouth, effects begin in 30 to 45 minutes and last 3 to 6 hours.\nMDMA was first developed in 1912 by Merck. It was used to enhance psychotherapy beginning in the 1970s and became popular as a street drug in the 1980s. MDMA is commonly associated with dance parties, raves, and electronic dance music. It may be mixed with other substances such as ephedrine, amphetamine, and methamphetamine. In 2016, about 21 million people between the ages of 15 and 64 used ecstasy (0.3% of the world population). This was broadly similar to the percentage of people who use cocaine or amphetamines, but lower than for cannabis or opioids. In the United States, as of 2017, about 7% of people have used MDMA at some point in their lives and 0.9% have used it in the last year.\nShort-term adverse effects include grinding of the teeth, blurred vision, sweating and a rapid heartbeat, and extended use can also lead to addiction, memory problems, paranoia and difficulty sleeping. Deaths have been reported due to increased body temperature and dehydration. Following use, people often feel depressed and tired. MDMA acts primarily by increasing the activity of the neurotransmitters serotonin, dopamine and noradrenaline in parts of the brain. It belongs to the substituted amphetamine classes of drugs and has stimulant and hallucinogenic effects.\nMDMA is illegal in most countries and, as of 2018, has no approved medical uses.\nEffects.\nIn general, MDMA users report feeling the onset of subjective effects within 30 to 60 minutes of oral consumption and reaching peak effect at 75 to 120 minutes, which then plateaus for about 3.5 hours. The desired short-term psychoactive effects of MDMA have been reported to include:\nThe experience elicited by MDMA depends on the dose, setting, and user. The variability of the induced altered state is lower compared to other psychedelics. For example, MDMA used at parties is associated with high motor activity, reduced sense of identity, and poor awareness of surroundings. Use of MDMA individually or in small groups in a quiet environment and when concentrating, is associated with increased lucidity, concentration, sensitivity to aesthetic aspects of the environment, enhanced awareness of emotions, and improved capability of communication. In psychotherapeutic settings, MDMA effects have been characterized by infantile ideas, mood lability, and memories and moods connected with childhood experiences.\nMDMA has been described as an \"empathogenic\" drug because of its empathy-producing effects. Results of several studies show the effects of increased empathy with others. When testing MDMA for medium and high doses, it showed increased hedonic and arousal continuum. The effect of MDMA increasing sociability is consistent, while its effects on empathy have been more mixed.\nUse.\nRecreational.\nMDMA is often considered the drug of choice within the rave culture and is also used at clubs, festivals, and house parties. In the rave environment, the sensory effects of music and lighting are often highly synergistic with the drug. The psychedelic amphetamine quality of MDMA offers multiple appealing aspects to users in the rave setting. Some users enjoy the feeling of mass communion from the inhibition-reducing effects of the drug, while others use it as party fuel because of the drug's stimulatory effects. MDMA is used less often than other stimulants, typically less than once per week.\nMDMA is sometimes taken in conjunction with other psychoactive drugs such as LSD, psilocybin mushrooms, and ketamine, an act called \"candy-flipping\". \nMedical.\n, MDMA has no accepted medical indications. Before it was widely banned, it saw limited use in psychotherapy. In 2017 the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved limited research on MDMA-assisted psychotherapy for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), with some preliminary evidence that MDMA may facilitate psychotherapy efficacy for PTSD.\nOther.\nSmall doses of MDMA are used by some religious practitioners as an entheogen to enhance prayer or meditation. MDMA has been used as an adjunct to New Age spiritual practices.\nForms.\nMDMA has become widely known as ecstasy (shortened \"E\", \"X\", or \"XTC\"), usually referring to its tablet form, although this term may also include the presence of possible adulterants or diluents. The UK term \"mandy\" and the US term \"molly\" colloquially refer to MDMA in a crystalline powder form that is thought to be free of adulterants. MDMA is also sold in the form of the hydrochloride salt, either as loose crystals or in gelcaps.\nPartly due to the global supply shortage of sassafras oil\u2014a problem largely assuaged by use of improved or alternative modern methods of synthesis\u2014the purity of substances sold as molly have been found to vary widely. Some of these substances contain methylone, ethylone, MDPV, mephedrone, or any other of the group of compounds commonly known as bath salts, in addition to, or in place of, MDMA. Powdered MDMA ranges from pure MDMA to crushed tablets with 30\u201340% purity. MDMA tablets typically have low purity due to bulking agents that are added to dilute the drug and increase profits (notably lactose) and binding agents. Tablets sold as ecstasy sometimes contain 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), 3,4-methylenedioxyethylamphetamine (MDEA), other amphetamine derivatives, caffeine, opiates, or painkillers. Some tablets contain little or no MDMA. The proportion of seized ecstasy tablets with MDMA-like impurities has varied annually and by country. The average content of MDMA in a preparation is 70 to 120\u00a0mg with the purity having increased since the 1990s.\nMDMA is usually consumed by mouth. It is also sometimes snorted.\nAdverse effects.\nShort-term.\nAcute adverse effects are usually the result of high or multiple doses, although single dose toxicity can occur in susceptible individuals. The most serious short-term physical health risks of MDMA are hyperthermia and dehydration. Cases of life-threatening or fatal hyponatremia (excessively low sodium concentration in the blood) have developed in MDMA users attempting to prevent dehydration by consuming excessive amounts of water without replenishing electrolytes.\nThe immediate adverse effects of MDMA use can include:\nOther adverse effects that may occur or persist for up to a week following cessation of moderate MDMA use include:\nLong-term.\n, the long-term effects of MDMA on human brain structure and function have not been fully determined. However, there is consistent evidence of structural and functional deficits in MDMA users with high lifetime exposure. There is no evidence of structural or functional changes in MDMA users with only a moderate (&lt;50 doses used and &lt;100 tablets consumed) lifetime exposure. Nonetheless, MDMA in moderate use may still be neurotoxic. Furthermore, it is not clear yet whether \"typical\" users of MDMA (1 to 2 pills of 75 to 125\u00a0mg MDMA or analogue every 1 to 4 weeks) will develop neurotoxic brain lesions. Long-term exposure to MDMA in humans has been shown to produce marked neurodegeneration in striatal, hippocampal, prefrontal, and occipital serotonergic axon terminals. Neurotoxic damage to serotonergic axon terminals has been shown to persist for more than two years. Elevations in brain temperature from MDMA use are positively correlated with MDMA-induced neurotoxicity. However, most studies on MDMA and serotonergic neurotoxicity in humans focus on the heaviest users, those who consume more than seven times the average. It is therefore possible that no serotonergic neurotoxicity is present in most casual users. Adverse neuroplastic changes to brain microvasculature and white matter also occur in humans using low doses of MDMA. Reduced gray matter density in certain brain structures has also been noted in human MDMA users. Global reductions in gray matter volume, thinning of the parietal and orbitofrontal cortices, and decreased hippocampal activity have been observed in long term users. The effects established so far for recreational use of ecstasy lie in the range of moderate to severe effects for serotonin transporter reduction.\nImpairments in multiple aspects of cognition, including attention, learning, memory, visual processing, and sleep have been found in regular MDMA users. The magnitude of these impairments is correlated with lifetime MDMA usage and are partially reversible with abstinence. Several forms of memory are impaired by chronic ecstasy use; however, the effects for memory impairments in ecstasy users are generally small overall. MDMA use is also associated with increased impulsivity and depression.\nSerotonin depletion following MDMA use can cause depression in subsequent days. In some cases, depressive symptoms persist for longer periods. Some studies indicate repeated recreational use of ecstasy is associated with depression and anxiety, even after quitting the drug. Depression is one of the main reasons for cessation of use.\nAt high doses, MDMA induces a neuroimmune response that, through several mechanisms, increases the permeability of the blood-brain barrier, thereby making the brain more susceptible to environmental toxins and pathogens. In addition, MDMA has immunosuppressive effects in the peripheral nervous system and pro-inflammatory effects in the central nervous system.\nMDMA may increase the risk of cardiac valvulopathy in heavy or long-term users due to activation of serotonin 5-HT2B receptors.\nDuring pregnancy.\nMDMA is a moderately teratogenic drug (i.e., it is toxic to the fetus). In utero exposure to MDMA is associated with a neuro- and cardiotoxicity and impaired motor functioning. Motor delays may be temporary during infancy or long-term. The severity of these developmental delays increases with heavier MDMA use.\nReinforcement disorders.\nApproximately 60% of MDMA users experience withdrawal symptoms when they stop taking MDMA. Some of these symptoms include fatigue, loss of appetite, depression, and trouble concentrating. Tolerance to some of the desired and adverse effects of MDMA is expected to occur with consistent MDMA use. A 2007 analysis estimated MDMA to have a psychological dependence and physical dependence potential roughly three-fourths to four-fifths that of cannabis.\nMDMA has been shown to induce \u0394FosB in the nucleus accumbens. Because MDMA releases dopamine in the striatum, the mechanisms by which it induces \u0394FosB in the nucleus accumbens are analogous to other dopaminergic psychostimulants. Therefore, chronic use of MDMA at high doses can result in altered brain structure and drug addiction that occur as a consequence of \u0394FosB overexpression in the nucleus accumbens. MDMA is less addictive than other stimulants such as methamphetamine and cocaine. Compared with amphetamine, MDMA and its metabolite MDA are less reinforcing.\nOne study found approximately 15% of chronic MDMA users met the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for substance dependence. However, there is little evidence for a specific diagnosable MDMA dependence syndrome because MDMA is typically used relatively infrequently.\nThere are currently no medications to treat MDMA addiction.\nHarm assessment.\nA 2007 UK study ranked MDMA 18th in harmfulness out of 20 recreational drugs. Rankings for each drug were based on the risk for acute physical harm, the propensity for physical and psychological dependency on the drug, and the negative familial and societal impacts of the drug. The authors did not evaluate or rate the negative impact of ecstasy on the cognitive health of ecstasy users (e.g. impaired memory and concentration).\nOverdose.\nMDMA overdose symptoms vary widely due to the involvement of multiple organ systems. Some of the more overt overdose symptoms are listed in the table below. The number of instances of fatal MDMA intoxication is low relative to its usage rates. In most fatalities, MDMA was not the only drug involved. Acute toxicity is mainly caused by serotonin syndrome and sympathomimetic effects. Sympathomimetic side effects can be managed with carvedilol. MDMA's toxicity in overdose may be exacerbated by caffeine, with which it is frequently cut in order to increase volume. A scheme for management of acute MDMA toxicity has been published focusing on treatment of hyperthermia, hyponatraemia, serotonin syndrome, and multiple organ failure.\nInteractions.\nA number of drug interactions can occur between MDMA and other drugs, including serotonergic drugs. MDMA also interacts with drugs which inhibit CYP450 enzymes, like ritonavir (Norvir), particularly CYP2D6 inhibitors. Life-threatening reactions and death have occurred in people who took MDMA while on ritonavir. Concurrent use of MDMA high dosages with another serotonergic drug can result in a life-threatening condition called serotonin syndrome. Severe overdose resulting in death has also been reported in people who took MDMA in combination with certain monoamine oxidase inhibitors, such as phenelzine (Nardil), tranylcypromine (Parnate), or moclobemide (Aurorix, Manerix). Serotonin reuptake inhibitors such as citalopram (Celexa), duloxetine (Cymbalta), fluoxetine (Prozac), and paroxetine (Paxil) have been shown to block most of the subjective effects of MDMA. Norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors such as reboxetine (Edronax) have been found to reduce emotional excitation and feelings of stimulation with MDMA but don't appear to influence its entactogenic or mood-elevating effects.\nPharmacology.\nMonoamine transporters.\nIn humans, MDMA increases the amount of serotonin in the synaptic clefts of serotonergic neurons by inhibiting its uptake into neurons and by directly releasing it from the neurons. The released serotonin binds to various serotonin receptors and activates them in excess, which is the primary mechanism through which MDMA causes intoxication. MDMA also induces significant norepinephrine release.\nExtracellular MDMA binds to presynaptic serotonin (SERT), norepinephrine (NET) and dopamine transporters (DAT) as a reuptake inhibitor, so that they uptake less of their namesake monoamine neurotransmitters. The efficacy of MDMA inhibition is highest towards NET and SERT, and is much less towards DAT. As a result, more norepinephrine and serotonin remains in the synaptic cleft.\nThese monoamine transporters (SERT, NET and DAT) reuptake their respective neurotransmitters via ion gradient. Normally there is a high extracellular sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl\u2013) ion concentration, and low potassium (K+) ion concentration in respect to intracellular concentrations. In each reuptake cycle, one monoamine, Na+ and Cl\u2013 are simultaneously taken inside the cell. One intracellular K+ is then transported outside the cell. In experimental situations, high extracellular K+ concentration can cause reverse transport. MDMA can substitute for K+ in this transport. Thus, high extracellular MDMA can reverse the transport. This reversal is most notable with SERT and NET, which results in direct serotonin and norepinephrine release in exchange for cellular uptake of MDMA.\nVMAT2 and other effects.\nIntracellular MDMA binds to VMAT2-proteins on synaptic vesicles as an inhibitor. Each VMAT2 transports cytosolic monoamines into the vesicle by dissipating proton gradient across the vesicular membrane. Thus, VMAT2 inhibition results in more free cytosolic monoamines like serotonin in the case of serotonergic neurons. These monoamines can then be released via monoamine transporters, which have been reversed by MDMA (see below).\nIntracellular MDMA can also bind to monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A) as an inhibitor, and thus prevent it from breaking down cytosolic serotonin. However, this effect is not significant in humans.\nCortisol, prolactin, and oxytocin quantities in blood serum are increased by MDMA.\nReceptor binding.\nIn humans, MDMA binds as an agonist to the following receptors:\nMDMA has two enantiomers, \"S\"-MDMA and \"R\"-MDMA. Mixture of the two (racemate) is typically used recreationally. \"S\"-MDMA causes the entactogenic effects of the racemate, because it releases serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine much more efficiently via monoamine transporters. It also has higher affinity towards 5-HT2CR. \"R\"-MDMA has notable agonism towards 5-HT2AR, which supposedly contributes to the mild psychedelic hallucinations induced by high doses of MDMA in humans. MDMA racemate is a partial agonist towards human TAAR1, but this is not physiologically relevant due to low EC50. Relevant EC50 would be below 5 \u00b5M, but for humans it is 35 \u00b5M. However, the agonism is significant towards the TAAR1 of mice and rats (EC50 is 1\u20134 \u00b5M).\nPharmacokinetics.\nThe MDMA concentration in the blood stream starts to rise after about 30 minutes, and reaches its maximal concentration in the blood stream between 1.5 and 3 hours after ingestion. It is then slowly metabolized and excreted, with levels of MDMA and its metabolites decreasing to half their peak concentration over the next several hours. The duration of action of MDMA is usually four to six hours, after which serotonin levels in the brain are depleted. Serotonin levels typically return to normal within 24\u201348 hours.\nMetabolites of MDMA that have been identified in humans include 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), 4-hydroxy-3-methoxymethamphetamine (HMMA), 4-hydroxy-3-methoxyamphetamine (HMA), 3,4-dihydroxyamphetamine (DHA) (also called alpha-methyldopamine (\u03b1-Me-DA)), 3,4-methylenedioxyphenylacetone (MDP2P), and 3,4-Methylenedioxy-N-hydroxyamphetamine (MDOH). The contributions of these metabolites to the psychoactive and toxic effects of MDMA are an area of active research. 80% of MDMA is metabolised in the liver, and about 20% is excreted unchanged in the urine.\nMDMA is known to be metabolized by two main metabolic pathways: (1) \"O\"-demethylenation followed by catechol-\"O\"-methyltransferase (COMT)-catalyzed methylation and/or glucuronide/sulfate conjugation; and (2) \"N\"-dealkylation, deamination, and oxidation to the corresponding benzoic acid derivatives conjugated with glycine. The metabolism may be primarily by cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzymes CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 and COMT. Complex, nonlinear pharmacokinetics arise via autoinhibition of CYP2D6 and CYP2D8, resulting in zeroth order kinetics at higher doses. It is thought that this can result in sustained and higher concentrations of MDMA if the user takes consecutive doses of the drug.\nMDMA and metabolites are primarily excreted as conjugates, such as sulfates and glucuronides. MDMA is a chiral compound and has been almost exclusively administered as a racemate. However, the two enantiomers have been shown to exhibit different kinetics. The disposition of MDMA may also be stereoselective, with the S-enantiomer having a shorter elimination half-life and greater excretion than the R-enantiomer. Evidence suggests that the area under the blood plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC) was two to four times higher for the (\"R\")-enantiomer than the (\"S\")-enantiomer after a 40\u00a0mg oral dose in human volunteers. Likewise, the plasma half-life of (\"R\")-MDMA was significantly longer than that of the (\"S\")-enantiomer (5.8\u00a0\u00b1\u00a02.2 hours vs 3.6\u00a0\u00b1\u00a00.9 hours). However, because MDMA excretion and metabolism have nonlinear kinetics, the half-lives would be higher at more typical doses (100\u00a0mg is sometimes considered a typical dose).\nChemistry.\nMDMA is in the substituted methylenedioxyphenethylamine and substituted amphetamine classes of chemicals. As a free base, MDMA is a colorless oil insoluble in water. The most common salt of MDMA is the hydrochloride salt; pure MDMA hydrochloride is water-soluble and appears as a white or off-white powder or crystal.\nSynthesis.\nThere are numerous methods available to synthesize MDMA via different intermediates. The original MDMA synthesis described in Merck's patent involves brominating safrole to 1-(3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl)-2-bromopropane and then reacting this adduct with methylamine. Most illicit MDMA is synthesized using MDP2P (3,4-methylenedioxyphenyl-2-propanone) as a precursor. MDP2P in turn is generally synthesized from piperonal, safrole or isosafrole. One method is to isomerize safrole to isosafrole in the presence of a strong base, and then oxidize isosafrole to MDP2P. Another method uses the Wacker process to oxidize safrole directly to the MDP2P intermediate with a palladium catalyst. Once the MDP2P intermediate has been prepared, a reductive amination leads to racemic MDMA (an equal parts mixture of (\"R\")-MDMA and (\"S\")-MDMA). Relatively small quantities of essential oil are required to make large amounts of MDMA. The essential oil of \"Ocotea cymbarum\", for example, typically contains between 80 and 94% safrole. This allows 500\u00a0ml of the oil to produce between 150 and 340 grams of MDMA.\nDetection in body fluids.\nMDMA and MDA may be quantitated in blood, plasma or urine to monitor for use, confirm a diagnosis of poisoning or assist in the forensic investigation of a traffic or other criminal violation or a sudden death. Some drug abuse screening programs rely on hair, saliva, or sweat as specimens. Most commercial amphetamine immunoassay screening tests cross-react significantly with MDMA or its major metabolites, but chromatographic techniques can easily distinguish and separately measure each of these substances. The concentrations of MDA in the blood or urine of a person who has taken only MDMA are, in general, less than 10% those of the parent drug.\nHistory.\nEarly research and use.\nMDMA was first synthesized in 1912 by Merck chemist Anton K\u00f6llisch. At the time, Merck was interested in developing substances that stopped abnormal bleeding. Merck wanted to avoid an existing patent held by Bayer for one such compound: hydrastinine. K\u00f6llisch developed a preparation of a hydrastinine analogue, methylhydrastinine, at the request of fellow lab members, Walther Beckh and Otto Wolfes. MDMA (called methylsafrylamin, safrylmethylamin or N-Methyl-a-Methylhomopiperonylamin in Merck laboratory reports) was an intermediate compound in the synthesis of methylhydrastinine. Merck was not interested in MDMA itself at the time. On 24 December 1912, Merck filed two patent applications that described the synthesis and some chemical properties of MDMA and its subsequent conversion to methylhydrastinine.\nMerck records indicate its researchers returned to the compound sporadically. A 1920 Merck patent describes a chemical modification to MDMA. In 1927, Max Oberlin studied the pharmacology of MDMA while searching for substances with effects similar to adrenaline or ephedrine, the latter being structurally similar to MDMA. Compared to ephedrine, Oberlin observed that it had similar effects on vascular smooth muscle tissue, stronger effects at the uterus, and no \"local effect at the eye\". MDMA was also found to have effects on blood sugar levels comparable to high doses of ephedrine. Oberlin concluded that the effects of MDMA were not limited to the sympathetic nervous system. Research was stopped \"particularly due to a strong price increase of safrylmethylamine\", which was still used as an intermediate in methylhydrastinine synthesis. Albert van Schoor performed simple toxicological tests with the drug in 1952, most likely while researching new stimulants or circulatory medications. After pharmacological studies, research on MDMA was not continued. In 1959, Wolfgang Fruhstorfer synthesized MDMA for pharmacological testing while researching stimulants. It is unclear if Fruhstorfer investigated the effects of MDMA in humans.\nOutside of Merck, other researchers began to investigate MDMA. In 1953 and 1954, the United States Army commissioned a study of toxicity and behavioral effects in animals injected with mescaline and several analogues, including MDMA. Conducted at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, these investigations were declassified in October 1969 and published in 1973. A 1960 Polish paper by Biniecki and Krajewski describing the synthesis of MDMA as an intermediate was the first published scientific paper on the substance.\nMDMA may have been in non-medical use in the western United States in 1968. An August 1970 report at a meeting of crime laboratory chemists indicates MDMA was being used recreationally in the Chicago area by 1970. MDMA likely emerged as a substitute for its analog methylenedioxyamphetamine (MDA), a drug at the time popular among users of psychedelics which was made a Schedule 1 substance in the United States in 1970.\nShulgin's research.\nAmerican chemist and psychopharmacologist Alexander Shulgin reported he synthesized MDMA in 1965 while researching methylenedioxy compounds at Dow Chemical Company, but did not test the psychoactivity of the compound at this time. Around 1970, Shulgin sent instructions for N-methylated MDA (MDMA) synthesis to the founder of a Los Angeles chemical company who had requested them. This individual later provided these instructions to a client in the Midwest. Shulgin may have suspected he played a role in the emergence of MDMA in Chicago.\nShulgin first heard of the psychoactive effects of N-methylated MDA around 1975 from a young student who reported \"amphetamine-like content\". Around 30 May 1976, Shulgin again heard about the effects of N-methylated MDA, this time from a graduate student in a medicinal chemistry group he advised at San Francisco State University who directed him to the University of Michigan study. She and two close friends had consumed 100\u00a0mg of MDMA and reported positive emotional experiences. Following the self-trials of a colleague at the University of San Francisco, Shulgin synthesized MDMA and tried it himself in September and October 1976. Shulgin first reported on MDMA in a presentation at a conference in Bethesda, Maryland in December 1976. In 1978, he and David E. Nichols published a report on the drug's psychoactive effect in humans. They described MDMA as inducing \"an easily controlled altered state of consciousness with emotional and sensual overtones\" comparable \"to marijuana, to psilocybin devoid of the hallucinatory component, or to low levels of MDA\".\nWhile not finding his own experiences with MDMA particularly powerful, Shulgin was impressed with the drug's disinhibiting effects and thought it could be useful in therapy. Believing MDMA allowed users to strip away habits and perceive the world clearly, Shulgin called the drug \"window\". Shulgin occasionally used MDMA for relaxation, referring to it as \"my low-calorie martini\", and gave the drug to friends, researchers, and others who he thought could benefit from it. One such person was Leo Zeff, a psychotherapist who had been known to use psychedelic substances in his practice. When he tried the drug in 1977, Zeff was impressed with the effects of MDMA and came out of his semi-retirement to promote its use in therapy. Over the following years, Zeff traveled around the United States and occasionally to Europe, eventually training an estimated four thousand psychotherapists in the therapeutic use of MDMA. Zeff named the drug \"Adam\", believing it put users in a state of primordial innocence.\nPsychotherapists who used MDMA believed the drug eliminated the typical fear response and increased communication. Sessions were usually held in the home of the patient or the therapist. The role of the therapist was minimized in favor of patient self-discovery accompanied by MDMA induced feelings of empathy. Depression, substance use disorders, relationship problems, premenstrual syndrome, and autism were among several psychiatric disorders MDMA assisted therapy was reported to treat. According to psychiatrist George Greer, therapists who used MDMA in their practice were impressed by the results. Anecdotally, MDMA was said to greatly accelerate therapy. According to David Nutt, MDMA was widely used in the western US in couples counseling, and was called \"empathy\". Only later was the term \"ecstasy\" used for it, coinciding with rising opposition to its use.\nRising recreational use.\nIn the late 1970s and early 1980s, \"Adam\" spread through personal networks of psychotherapists, psychiatrists, users of psychedelics, and yuppies. Hoping MDMA could avoid criminalization like LSD and mescaline, psychotherapists and experimenters attempted to limit the spread of MDMA and information about it while conducting informal research. Early MDMA distributors were deterred from large scale operations by the threat of possible legislation. Between the 1970s and the mid-1980s, this network of MDMA users consumed an estimated 500,000 doses.\nA small recreational market for MDMA developed by the late 1970s, consuming perhaps 10,000 doses in 1976. By the early 1980s MDMA was being used in Boston and New York City nightclubs such as Studio 54 and Paradise Garage. Into the early 1980s, as the recreational market slowly expanded, production of MDMA was dominated by a small group of therapeutically minded Boston chemists. Having commenced production in 1976, this \"Boston Group\" did not keep up with growing demand and shortages frequently occurred.\nPerceiving a business opportunity, Michael Clegg, the Southwest distributor for the Boston Group, started his own \"Texas Group\" backed financially by Texas friends. In 1981, Clegg had coined \"Ecstasy\" as a slang term for MDMA to increase its marketability. Starting in 1983, the Texas Group mass-produced MDMA in a Texas lab or imported it from California and marketed tablets using pyramid sales structures and toll-free numbers. MDMA could be purchased via credit card and taxes were paid on sales. Under the brand name \"Sassyfras\", MDMA tablets were sold in brown bottles. The Texas Group advertised \"Ecstasy parties\" at bars and discos, describing MDMA as a \"fun drug\" and \"good to dance to\". MDMA was openly distributed in Austin and Dallas\u2013Fort Worth area bars and nightclubs, becoming popular with yuppies, college students, and gays.\nRecreational use also increased after several cocaine dealers switched to distributing MDMA following experiences with the drug. A California laboratory that analyzed confidentially submitted drug samples first detected MDMA in 1975. Over the following years the number of MDMA samples increased, eventually exceeding the number of MDA samples in the early 1980s. By the mid-1980s, MDMA use had spread to colleges around the United States.\nMedia attention and scheduling.\nUnited States.\nIn an early media report on MDMA published in 1982, a Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) spokesman stated the agency would ban the drug if enough evidence for abuse could be found. By mid-1984, MDMA use was becoming more noticed. Bill Mandel reported on \"Adam\" in a 10 June San Francisco Chronicle article, but misidentified the drug as methyloxymethylenedioxyamphetamine (MMDA). In the next month, the World Health Organization identified MDMA as the only substance out of twenty phenethylamines to be seized a significant number of times.\nAfter a year of planning and data collection, MDMA was proposed for scheduling by the DEA on 27 July 1984 with a request for comments and objections. The DEA was surprised when a number of psychiatrists, psychotherapists, and researchers objected to the proposed scheduling and requested a hearing. In a Newsweek article published the next year, a DEA pharmacologist stated that the agency had been unaware of its use among psychiatrists. An initial hearing was held on 1 February 1985 at the DEA offices in Washington, D.C. with administrative law judge Francis L. Young presiding. It was decided there to hold three more hearings that year: Los Angeles on 10 June, Kansas City, Missouri on 10\u201311 July, and Washington, D.C. on 8\u201311 October.\nSensational media attention was given to the proposed criminalization and the reaction of MDMA proponents, effectively advertising the drug. In response to the proposed scheduling, the Texas Group increased production from 1985 estimates of 30,000 tablets a month to as many as 8,000 per day, potentially making two million ecstasy tablets in the months before MDMA was made illegal. By some estimates the Texas Group distributed 500,000 tablets per month in Dallas alone. According to one participant in an ethnographic study, the Texas Group produced more MDMA in eighteen months than all other distribution networks combined across their entire histories. By May 1985, MDMA use was widespread in California, Texas, southern Florida, and the northeastern United States. According to the DEA there was evidence of use in twenty-eight states and Canada. Urged by Senator Lloyd Bentsen, the DEA announced an emergency Schedule I classification of MDMA on 31 May 1985. The agency cited increased distribution in Texas, escalating street use, and new evidence of MDA (an analog of MDMA) neurotoxicity as reasons for the emergency measure. The ban took effect one month later on 1 July 1985 in the midst of Nancy Reagan's \"Just Say No\" campaign.\nAs a result of several expert witnesses testifying that MDMA had an accepted medical usage, the administrative law judge presiding over the hearings recommended that MDMA be classified as a Schedule III substance. Despite this, DEA administrator John C. Lawn overruled and classified the drug as Schedule I. Later Harvard psychiatrist Lester Grinspoon sued the DEA, claiming that the DEA had ignored the medical uses of MDMA, and the federal court sided with Grinspoon, calling Lawn's argument \"strained\" and \"unpersuasive\", and vacated MDMA's Schedule I status. Despite this, less than a month later Lawn reviewed the evidence and reclassified MDMA as Schedule I again, claiming that the expert testimony of several psychiatrists claiming over 200 cases where MDMA had been used in a therapeutic context with positive results could be dismissed because they weren't published in medical journals. No double blind studies had yet been conducted as to the efficacy of MDMA for therapy. In 2017 the FDA granted breakthrough therapy designation for its use with psychotherapy for PTSD.\nUnited Nations.\nWhile engaged in scheduling debates in the United States, the DEA also pushed for international scheduling. In 1985 the World Health Organization's Expert Committee on Drug Dependence recommended that MDMA be placed in Schedule I of the 1971 United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances. The committee made this recommendation on the basis of the pharmacological similarity of MDMA to previously scheduled drugs, reports of illicit trafficking in Canada, drug seizures in the United States, and lack of well-defined therapeutic use. While intrigued by reports of psychotherapeutic uses for the drug, the committee viewed the studies as lacking appropriate methodological design and encouraged further research. Committee chairman Paul Grof dissented, believing international control was not warranted at the time and a recommendation should await further therapeutic data. The Commission on Narcotic Drugs added MDMA to Schedule I of the convention on 11 February 1986.\nPost-scheduling.\nThe use of MDMA in Texas clubs declined rapidly after criminalization, although by 1991 the drug remained popular among young middle-class whites and in nightclubs. In 1985, MDMA use became associated with Acid House on the Spanish island of Ibiza. Thereafter in the late 1980s, the drug spread alongside rave culture to the UK and then to other European and American cities. Illicit MDMA use became increasingly widespread among young adults in universities and later, in high schools. Since the mid-1990s, MDMA has become the most widely used amphetamine-type drug by college students and teenagers. MDMA became one of the four most widely used illicit drugs in the US, along with cocaine, heroin, and cannabis.\nAccording to some estimates as of 2004, only marijuana attracts more first time users in the US.\nAfter MDMA was criminalized, most medical use stopped, although some therapists continued to prescribe the drug illegally. Later, Charles Grob initiated an ascending-dose safety study in healthy volunteers. Subsequent legally-approved MDMA studies in humans have taken place in the US. in Detroit (Wayne State University), Chicago (University of Chicago), San Francisco (UCSF and California Pacific Medical Center), Baltimore (NIDA\u2013NIH Intramural Program), and South Carolina, as well as in Switzerland (University Hospital of Psychiatry, Z\u00fcrich), the Netherlands (Maastricht University), and Spain (Universitat Aut\u00f2noma de Barcelona).\n\"Molly\", short for 'molecule', was recognized as a slang term for crystalline or powder MDMA in the 2000s.\nIn 2010, the BBC reported that use of MDMA had decreased in the UK in previous years. This may be due to increased seizures during use and decreased production of the precursor chemicals used to manufacture MDMA. Unwitting substitution with other drugs, such as mephedrone and methamphetamine, as well as legal alternatives to MDMA, such as BZP, MDPV, and methylone, are also thought to have contributed to its decrease in popularity.\nIn 2017 it was found that some pills being sold as MDMA contained pentylone, which can cause very unpleasant agitation and paranoia.\nAccording to David Nutt, when safrole was restricted by the United Nations in order to reduce the supply of MDMA, producers in China began using anethole instead, but this gives para-methoxyamphetamine (PMA, also known as \"Dr Death\"), which is much more toxic than MDMA and can cause overheating, muscle spasms, seizures, unconsciousness, and death. People wanting MDMA are sometimes sold PMA instead.\nSociety and culture.\nLegal status.\nMDMA is legally controlled in most of the world under the UN Convention on Psychotropic Substances and other international agreements, although exceptions exist for research and limited medical use. In general, the unlicensed use, sale or manufacture of MDMA are all criminal offences.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, MDMA was declared an illegal substance in 1986 because of its harmful effects and potential for misuse. It is classed as a Schedule 9 Prohibited Substance in the country, meaning it is available for scientific research purposes only. Any other type of sale, use or manufacture is strictly prohibited by law. Permits for research uses on humans must be approved by a recognized ethics committee on human research.\nIn Western Australia under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1981 4.0g of MDMA is the amount required determining a court of trial, 2.0g is considered a presumption with intent to sell or supply and 28.0g is considered trafficking under Australian law.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, MDMA was made illegal in 1977 by a modification order to the existing Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. Although MDMA was not named explicitly in this legislation, the order extended the definition of Class A drugs to include various ring-substituted phenethylamines. The drug is therefore illegal to sell, buy, or possess without a licence in the UK. Penalties include a maximum of seven years and/or unlimited fine for possession; life and/or unlimited fine for production or trafficking.\nSome researchers such as David Nutt have criticized the current scheduling of MDMA, which he determines to be a relatively harmless drug. An editorial he wrote in the Journal of Psychopharmacology, where he compared the risk of harm for horse riding (1 adverse event in 350) to that of ecstasy (1 in 10,000) resulted in his dismissal as well as the resignation of his colleagues from the ACMD.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, MDMA is currently placed in Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act. In a 2011 federal court hearing, the American Civil Liberties Union successfully argued that the sentencing guideline for MDMA/ecstasy is based on outdated science, leading to excessive prison sentences. Other courts have upheld the sentencing guidelines. The United States District Court for the Eastern District of Tennessee explained its ruling by noting that \"an individual federal district court judge simply cannot marshal resources akin to those available to the Commission for tackling the manifold issues involved with determining a proper drug equivalency.\"\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, the Expert Committee on the List (Expertcommissie Lijstensystematiek Opiumwet) issued a report in June 2011 which discussed the evidence for harm and the legal status of MDMA, arguing in favor of maintaining it on List I.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, MDMA is listed as a Schedule 1 as it is an analogue of amphetamine. The CDSA was updated as a result of the Safe Streets and Communities Act changing amphetamines from Schedule III to Schedule I in March 2012.\nDemographics.\nIn 2014, 3.5% of 18 to 25 year-olds had used MDMA in the United States. In the European Union as of 2018, 4.1% of adults (15\u201364 years old) have used MDMA at least once in their life, and 0.8% had used it in the last year. Among young adults, 1.8% had used MDMA in the last year.\nIn Europe, an estimated 37% of regular club-goers aged 14 to 35 used MDMA in the past year according to the 2015 European Drug report. The highest one-year prevalence of MDMA use in Germany in 2012 was 1.7% among people aged 25 to 29 compared with a population average of 0.4%. Among adolescent users in the United States between 1999 and 2008, girls were more likely to use MDMA than boys.\nEconomics.\nEurope.\nIn 2008 the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction noted that although there were some reports of tablets being sold for as little as \u20ac1, most countries in Europe then reported typical retail prices in the range of \u20ac3 to \u20ac9 per tablet, typically containing 25\u201365\u00a0mg of MDMA. By 2014 the EMCDDA reported that the range was more usually between \u20ac5 and \u20ac10 per tablet, typically containing 57\u2013102\u00a0mg of MDMA, although MDMA in powder form was becoming more common.\nNorth America.\nThe United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime stated in its 2014 World Drug Report that US ecstasy retail prices range from US$1 to $70 per pill, or from $15,000 to $32,000 per kilogram. A new research area named Drug Intelligence aims to automatically monitor distribution networks based on image processing and machine learning techniques, in which an Ecstasy pill picture is analyzed to detect correlations among different production batches. These novel techniques allow police scientists to facilitate the monitoring of illicit distribution networks.\n, most of the MDMA in the United States is produced in British Columbia, Canada and imported by Canada-based Asian transnational criminal organizations. The market for MDMA in the United States is relatively small compared to methamphetamine, cocaine, and heroin. In the United States, about 0.9 million people used ecstasy in 2010.\nAustralia.\nMDMA is particularly expensive in Australia, costing A$15\u2013A$30 per tablet. In terms of purity data for Australian MDMA, the average is around 34%, ranging from less than 1% to about 85%. The majority of tablets contain 70\u201385\u00a0mg of MDMA. Most MDMA enters Australia from the Netherlands, the UK, Asia, and the US.\nCorporate logos on pills.\nA number of ecstasy manufacturers brand their pills with a logo, often being the logo of an unrelated corporation. Some pills depict logos of products or shows popular with children, such as Shaun the Sheep.\nResearch.\nIn 2017, doctors in the UK began the first clinical study of MDMA in alcohol use disorder.\nThe potential for MDMA to be used as a rapid-acting antidepressant has been studied in clinical trials, but as of 2017 the evidence on efficacy and safety were insufficient to reach a conclusion. A 2014 review of the safety and efficacy of MDMA as a treatment for various disorders, particularly PTSD, indicated that MDMA has therapeutic efficacy in some patients; however, it emphasized that issues regarding the controlability of MDMA-induced experiences and neurochemical recovery must be addressed. The author noted that oxytocin and -cycloserine are potentially safer co-drugs in PTSD treatment, albeit with limited evidence of efficacy. This review and a second corroborating review by a different author both concluded that, because of MDMA's demonstrated potential to cause lasting harm in humans (e.g., serotonergic neurotoxicity and persistent memory impairment), \"considerably more research must be performed\" on its efficacy in PTSD treatment to determine if the potential treatment benefits outweigh its potential to harm to a patient.\nMDMA in combination with psychotherapy has been studied as a treatment for post-traumatic stress disorder, and four clinical trials provide moderate evidence in support of this treatment."}
{"id": "10025", "revid": "41405785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10025", "title": "Flag of Europe", "text": "The flag of Europe or the European flag is an official symbol used by two separate organisations, the Council of Europe (CoE) - as a symbol representing Europe, and the European Union (EU). It consists of a circle of twelve five-pointed golden stars on a blue field.\nThe design was conceived in 1955, and officially adopted later that year by the Council of Europe as a symbol for the whole of Europe. The Council of Europe urged that it be adopted by other European organisations, and in 1985 the European Communities (EC) adopted it.\nThe EU also inherited the emblem's use when it was formed in 1993, being the successor organisation to the EC starting from 1 December 2009 (date of entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty). It has been in wide official use by the EC since the 1990s, but it has never been given official status in any of the EU's treaties. Its adoption as an official symbol of the EU was planned as part of the proposed 2004 European Constitution, which failed to be ratified in 2005.\nThe flag is used by different European organisations as well as by unified European sporting teams under the name of Team Europe.\nBlazon.\nThe blazon given by the EU in 1996 describe the design as: \"On an azure field a circle of twelve golden mullets, their points not touching.\"\nSymbolism.\nThe flag used is the Flag of Europe, which consists of a circle of twelve golden stars on a blue background. Originally designed in 1955 for the Council of Europe, the flag was adopted by the European Communities, the predecessors of the present European Union, in 1986. The Council of Europe gave the flag a symbolic description in the following terms, though the official symbolic description adopted by the EU omits the reference to the \"Western world\":\nOther symbolic interpretations have been offered based on the account of its design by Paul M. Levy. The five-pointed star is used on many national flags and represents aspiration and education. Their golden colour is that of the sun, which is said to symbolise glory and enlightenment.\nTheir arrangement in a circle represents the constellation of Corona Borealis and can be seen as a crown and the stability of government. The blue background resembles the sky and symbolises truth and the intellect. It is also the colour traditionally used to represent the Virgin Mary. In many paintings of the Virgin Mary as Stella Maris she is crowned with a circle of twelve stars.\nMarian interpretation.\nIn 1987, following the adoption of the flag by the EC, Ars\u00e8ne Heitz (1908\u20131989), one of the designers who had submitted proposals for the flag's design, suggested a religious inspiration for it. He claimed that the circle of stars was based on the iconographic tradition of showing the Blessed Virgin Mary as the Woman of the Apocalypse, wearing a \"crown of twelve stars\".\nHeitz also made a connection to the date of the flag's adoption, 8 December 1955, coinciding with the Catholic Feast of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary.\nPaul M. G. L\u00e9vy, then Director of Information at the Council of Europe responsible for designing the flag, in a 1989 statement maintained that he had not been aware of any religious connotations.\nIn an interview given 26 February 1998, L\u00e9vy denied not only awareness of the \"Marian\" connection, but also denied that the final design of a circle of twelve stars was Heitz's. To the question \"Who really designed the flag?\" L\u00e9vy replied:\nI did, and I calculated the proportions to be used for the geometric design. Ars\u00e8ne Heitz, who was an employee in the mail service, put in all sorts of proposals, including the 15-star design. But he submitted too many designs. He wanted to do the European currencies with 15 stars in the corner. He wanted to do national flags incorporating the Council of Europe flag.\nCarlo Curti Gialdino (2005) has reconstructed the design process to the effect that Heitz's proposal contained varying numbers of stars, from which the version with twelve stars was chosen by the Committee of Ministers meeting at Deputy level in January 1955 as one out of two remaining candidate designs.\nL\u00e9vy's 1998 interview apparently gave rise to a new variant of the \"Marian\" anecdote. An article published in \"\" in August 1998 alleged that it was L\u00e9vy himself who was inspired to introduce a \"Marian\" element as he walked past a statue of the Blessed Virgin Mary.\nAn article posted in \"La Raison\" in February 2000 further connected the donation of a stained glass window for Strasbourg Cathedral by the Council of Europe on 21 October 1956. This window, a work by Parisian master Max Ingrand, shows a blessing Madonna underneath a circle of 12 stars on dark blue ground. The overall design of the Madonna is inspired by the banner of the cathedral's \"Congr\u00e9gation Mariale des Hommes\", and the twelve stars are found on the statue venerated by this congregation inside the cathedral (twelve is also the number of members of the congregation's council). The Regional Office for Cultural Affairs describe this stained glass window called \"Le vitrail de l'Europe de Max Ingrand\" (The Glass Window of Europe of Max Ingrand).\nAdoption and usage.\nVexillological.\nSpecifications.\nAccording to graphical specifications published online by the Council of Europe in 2004, the flag is rectangular with 2:3 proportions: its fly (width) is one and a half times the length of its hoist (height). Twelve yellow stars are centred in a circle (the radius of which is a third of the length of the hoist) upon a blue background. All the stars are upright (one point straight up), have five points and are spaced equally, like the hour positions on the face of a clock. The diameter of each star is equal to one-ninth of the height of the hoist.\nThe colours are regulated in the 1996 guide by the EC, and equivalently in the 2004 guide by the Council of Europe. The base colour of the flag is defined as Pantone \"Reflex Blue\", while the golden stars are portrayed in Pantone \"Yellow\":\nThe 2013 logo of the Council of Europe has the colours:\nThe twelve-star \"flag of Europe\" was designed in 1950 and officially adopted by the Council of Europe in 1955. The same flag was adopted by the European Parliament in 1983. The European Council adopted it was an \"emblem\" for the European Communities in 1985. Its status in the European Communities was inherited by the European Union upon its formation in 1993. The proposal to adopt it as official flag of the European Union failed with the ratification of the European Constitution in 2005, and mention of all emblems suggesting statehood was removed from the Treaty of Lisbon of 2007, although sixteen member states signed a declaration supporting the continued use of the flag. In 2007, the European Parliament officially adopted the flag for its own use.\n1950\u2013present: Council of Europe.\nThe Council of Europe in 1950 appointed a committee to study the question of adopting a symbol.\nNumerous proposals were looked into.\nAmong the unsuccessful proposals was the flag of Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi's International Paneuropean Union, which he had himself recently adopted for the European Parliamentary Union.\nThe design was a blue field with a red cross inside an orange circle at the centre. \nKalergi was very committed to defending the cross as \"the great symbol of Europe's moral unity\", the Red Cross in particular being \"recognized by the whole world, by Christian and non-Christian nations[,] as a symbol of international charity and of the brotherhood of man\", but the proposal was rejected by Turkey (a member of the Council of Europe since 1949) on grounds of its religious associations in spite of Kalergi's suggestion of adding a crescent alongside the cross to overcome the Muslim objections.\nOther proposals included the flag was the European Movement, which had a large green E on a white background,\na design was based on the Olympic rings, eight silver rings on a blue background, rejected due to the rings' similarity with \"dial\", \"chain\" and \"zeros\", or a large yellow star on a blue background, rejected due to its similarity with the so-called Burnet flag and the flag of the Belgian Congo.\nThe Consultative Assembly narrowed their choice to two designs. One was by Salvador de Madariaga, the founder of the College of Europe, who suggested a constellation of stars on a blue background (positioned according to capital cities, with a large star for Strasbourg, the seat of the Council). He had circulated his flag round many European capitals and the concept had found favour. \nThe second was a variant by Ars\u00e8ne Heitz, who worked for the Council's postal service and had submitted dozens of designs, one of which was accepted by the Assembly. The design was similar to Salvador de Madariaga's, but rather than a constellation, the stars were arranged in a circle. \nIn 1987, Heitz would claim that his inspiration had been the crown of twelve stars of the Woman of the Apocalypse, often found in Marian iconography (see below).\nOn 25 September 1953, the Consultative Assembly of the Council of Europe recommended that a blue flag with fifteen gold stars be adopted as an emblem for the organisation, the number fifteen reflecting the number of states of the Council of Europe. West Germany objected to the fifteen-star design, as one of the members was Saar Protectorate, and to have its own star would imply sovereignty for the region. The Committee of Ministers (the Council's main decision making body) agreed with the Assembly that the flag should be a circle of stars, but opted for a fixed number of twelve stars, \"representing perfection and entirety\". The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on 25 October 1955 agreed to this. Paul M. G. L\u00e9vy drew up the exact design of the new flag. Officially adopted on 8 December 1955, the flag was unveiled at the Ch\u00e2teau de la Muette in Paris on 13 December 1955.\nFor the flag of the Council of Europe, many stylistic proposals were made in regards to colours and symbolism. These first proposals were made 19 January 1950 by Paul Levy in a letter to the Secretary-General. He proposed that the flag should contain a cross for several reasons. Firstly, the cross symbolizes roads crossing, and also represents the east, the west, the north, and the south with its arms. Furthermore, the cross appears in most of the European Council members' flags, and it is the oldest and most noble symbol in Europe. Moreover, the cross depicted Christianity. As far as the colours are concerned, he proposed them to be white and green, colours of the European Movement, which was of great significance since 1947. Green also depicted hope, and the green cross over a white background was a design that had not been used yet. Finally, Levy proposed that the arms of Strasbourg was an important element to be added as it represented where the council would be, and being located in the heart of the cross meant that the council was the point where the European roads met.\nShortly after this design considerations by Paul Levy, on 27 July 1950, Richard Coudenhove-Kalergi, president of the Pan-European movement wrote a memorandum which contained some rules that a flag for such union should follow. The rules he stated where:\nAfter these statements, Coudenhove-Kalergi proposed that the Pan-European movement flag would be the perfect one to fit this criteria\n15 July 1951, the consultative assembly put forward a final memorandum on the European flag. The symbols proposed where the following\nFurthermore, several colours were also proposed:\nIn the end, the flag of Europe was chosen to have 12 five-pointed golden stars in a circle over a blue background, probably inspired by the Pan-European flag and other designs such as Salvador de Madriaga's and Ars\u00e8ne Heitz's proposals.\n1983\u2013present: From European Communities to European Union.\nFollowing Expo 58 in Brussels, the flag caught on and the Council of Europe lobbied for other European organisations to adopt the flag as a sign of European unity. \nThe European Parliament took the initiative in seeking a flag to be adopted by the European Communities. Shortly after the first direct elections in 1979 a draft resolution was put forward on the issue. The resolution proposed that the Communities' flag should be that of the Council of Europe and it was adopted by the Parliament on 11 April 1983.\nThe June 1984 European Council (the Communities' leaders) summit in Fontainebleau stressed the importance of promoting a European image and identity to citizens and the world. The European Council appointed an \"ad hoc\" committee, named \"Committee for 'a People's Europe'\" (Adonnino Committee).\nThis committee submitted a substantial report, including wide-ranging suggestions, from organising a \"European lottery\" to campaigning for the introduction of local voting rights for foreign nationals throughout Europe. Under the header of \"strengthening of the Community's image and identity\", the Committee suggested the introduction of \"a flag and an emblem\", recommending a design based on the Council of Europe flag, but with the addition of \"a gold letter E\" in the center of the circle of stars. The European Council held in Milan on 28/29 June 1985 largely followed the recommendations of the Adonnino Committee. But as the adoption of a flag was strongly reminiscent of a national flag representing statehood and was extremely controversial with some member states (in particular the United Kingdom), the Council of Europe's \"flag of Europe\" design was adopted only with the official status of a \"logo\". This compromise was widely disregarded from the beginning, and the \"European logo\", in spite of the explicit language of giving it the status of a \"logo\", was referred to as the \"Community flag\" or even \"European flag\" from the outset.\nThe Communities began to use the \"emblem\" as its \"de facto\" flag from 1986, raising it outside the Berlaymont building (the seat of the European Commission) for the first time on 29 May 1986.\nThe European Union, which was established by the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 to replace the European Communities and encompass its functions, has retained \"de facto\" use of the \"Community logo\" of the EC. Technically and officially, the \"European flag\" as used by the European Union remains not a \"flag\" but \"a Community 'logo' \u2014 or 'emblem' \u2014 [...] eligible to be reproduced on rectangular pieces of fabric\".\nIn 1997, the \"Central and Eastern Eurobarometer\" poll included a section intending to \"discover the level of public awareness of the European Union\" in what were then candidate countries in Central and Eastern Europe. Interviewees were shown \"a sticker of the European flag\" and asked to identify it. Responses considered correct were: the European Union, the European Community, the Common Market, and \"Europe in general\". 52% of those interviewed gave one of the correct answers, 15% gave a wrong answer (naming another institution, such as NATO or the United Nations), and 35% could or would not identify it.\nIn 2002, Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas designed a new flag, dubbed the \"barcode\", as it displayed the colours of the national flags of the EU member states in vertical stripes. It was never officially adopted by the EU or any organisation, but it was used as the logo of the Austrian EU Presidency in 2006.\nThe official status of the emblem as the flag of the European Union was to be formalised as part of the Constitution of the European Union. However, as the proposed constitution failed ratification, the mention of all state-like emblems, including the flag, were removed from the replacement Treaty of Lisbon of 2007.\nInstead, a separate declaration by sixteen Member States was included in the final act of the Treaty of Lisbon stating that the flag, the anthem, the motto and the currency and Europe Day \"will for them continue as symbols to express the sense of community of the people in the European Union and their allegiance to it.\"\nIn reaction to the removal of the flag from the treaty, the European Parliament, which had supported the inclusion of such symbols, backed a proposal to use these symbols \"more often\" on behalf of the Parliament itself; Jo Leinen, MEP for Germany, suggested that the Parliament should take \"an \"avant-garde\" role\" in their use.\nIn September 2008, the Parliament's Committee on Constitutional Affairs proposed a formal change in the institution's rules of procedure to make \"better use of the symbols\". Specifically, the flag would be present in all meeting rooms (not just the hemicycle) and at all official events. The proposal was passed on 8 October 2008 by 503 votes to 96 (15 abstentions).\nIn 2015, a set of commemorative Euro coin was issued on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the adoption of the emblem by the European Communities.\nIn April 2004, the European flag was flown on behalf of the European Space Agency, by Dutch astronaut Andr\u00e9 Kuipers while on board the International Space Station, in reference to the Framework Agreement establishing the legal basis for co-operation between the European Space Agency and the European Union.\nFollowing the 2004 Summer Olympics, President Romano Prodi expressed his hope \"to see the EU Member State teams in Beijing [viz., the 2008 games] carry the flag of the European Union alongside their own national flag as a symbol of our unity\".\nUse of the flag has also been reported as representing the European team at the Ryder Cup golf competition in the early 2000s, although most European participants preferred to use their own national flags.\nThe flag has been widely used by advocates of European integration since the late 1990s or early 2000s. It is often displayed in the context of Europe Day, on 9 May. \nOutside the EU, it was used in the context of several of the \"colour revolutions\" during the 2000s. In Belarus, it was used on protest marches alongside the banned former national flag and flags of opposition movements during the protests of 2004\u20132006. The flag was used widely in a 2007 pro-EU march in Minsk. Similar uses were reported from Moldova.\nIn Georgia, the flag has been on most government buildings since the coming to power of Mikheil Saakashvili (2007), who used it during his inauguration, stating: \"[the European] flag is Georgia's flag as well, as far as it embodies our civilisation, our culture, the essence of our history and perspective, and our vision for the future of Georgia.\"\nIt was used in 2008 by pro-western Serbian voters ahead of an election.\nThe flag became a symbol of European integration of Ukraine in the 2010s, particularly after Euromaidan. Ukraine is not a part of the EU but is a member of the Council of Europe. The flag is used by the Cabinet of Ukraine, Prime Minister of Ukraine, and MFA UA during official meetings. It was flown during the 2013 Euromaidan protests in Ukraine,\nand in 2016 by the pro-EU faction in the EU membership referendum campaigns in the United Kingdom.\nThe flag has also been adopted as a symbol for EU policies and expansionism by EU-sceptics. \nIn an early instance, Macedonian protesters burned \"the flag of the EU\" in the context of EU involvement in the 2001 insurgency in the Republic of Macedonia.\nIn the 2005 Islamic protests \nagainst the \"Jyllands-Posten Muhammad\" cartoons, the Danish flag was most frequently burned, but (as the cartoons were reprinted in many European countries), some protesters opted for burning \"the EU flag\" instead.\nProtesters during the Greek government-debt crisis of 2012 \"burned the EU flag and shouted 'EU out' \".\nBurning of the EU flag has been reported from other anti-EU rallies since.\nBy the 2010s, the association of the emblem with the EU had become so strong that the Council of Europe saw it necessary to design a new logo, to \"avoid confusion\", officially adopted in 2013.\nThe EU emblem (\"EU flag\") is depicted on the euro banknotes. Euro coins also display a circle of twelve stars on both the national and common sides.\nIt is also depicted on many driving licences and vehicle registration plates issued in the Union. Diplomatic missions of EU member states fly the EU flag alongside their national flag. In October 2000, the then-new British Embassy in Berlin sparked controversy between the UK and Germany and the EU when the embassy did not have a second external flagpole for the EU flag. After diplomatic negotiations, it was agreed that the outside flagpole would have the diplomatic Union Flag while inside the embassy, the EU flag would accompany the UK flag. Some member states' national airlines such as Lufthansa have the EU flag alongside their national flags on aircraft as part of their aircraft registration codes, but this is not an EU-mandated directive.\nA number of logos used by EU institutions, bodies and agencies are derived from the design and colours of the EU emblem.\nOther emblems make reference to the European flag, such as the EU organic food label that uses the twelve stars but reorders them into the shape of a leaf on a green background. The original logo of the European Broadcasting Union used the twelve stars on a blue background adding ray beams to connect the countries.\nThere was a proposal in 2003 to deface national civil ensigns with the EU emblem. The proposal was rejected by Parliament in 2004.\nThe flag is usually flown by the government of the country holding the rotating presidency Council of Ministers.\nIn 2009, Czech President V\u00e1clav Klaus, a eurosceptic, refused to fly the flag from his castle. In response, Greenpeace projected an image of the flag onto the castle and attempted to fly the flag from the building themselves.\nExtraordinary flying of the flag is common on Europe Day, celebrated annually on 9 May. On Europe Day 2008, the flag was flown for the first time above the German Reichstag.\nThe flag has also been displayed in the context of EU military operations (EUFOR Althea).\nSixteen out of twenty-seven member states in 2007 signed the declaration recognising \"the flag with a circle of twelve golden stars on a blue background\" as representing \"the sense of community of the people in the European Union and their allegiance to it.\"\nIn 2017, president of France Emmanuel Macron signed a declaration endorsing the 2007 statement,\nso that, as of 2018, 17 out of 27 members have recognised the emblem as a flag representing \"allegiance to the EU\":\nAustria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia and Spain.\nItaly has incorporated the EU flag into its flag code. According to an Italian law passed in 2000, it is mandatory for most public offices and buildings to hoist the European Flag alongside the Italian national flag (Law 22/1998 and Presidential Decree 121/2000). Outside official use, the flag may not be used for \"aims incompatible with European values\".\nThe 2000 Italian flag code expressly replaces the Italian flag with the European flag in precedence when dignitaries from other EU countries visit \u2013 for example the EU flag would be in the middle of a group of three flags rather than the Italian flag. In Germany, the federal flag code of 1996 is only concerned with the German flag, but some of the states have legislated additional provisions for the European flag, such as Bavaria in its flag regulation of 2001, which mandates that the European flag take the third order of precedence, after the federal and state flags, except on Europe Day, where it is to take the first order of precedence.\nIn Ireland \non occasions of \"European Union Events\" (for example, at a European Council meeting), where the European flag is flown alongside all national flags of member states, the national flags are placed in alphabetical order (according to their name in the main language of that state) with the European flag either at the head, or the far-right, of the order of flags.\nIn most member states, use of the EU flag is only \"de facto\" and not regulated by legislation, and as such subject to \"ad hoc\" revision. In national usage, national protocol usually demands the national flag takes precedence over the European flag (which is usually displayed to the right of the national flag from the observer's perspective). In November 2014, the speaker of the Hungarian Parliament L\u00e1szl\u00f3 K\u00f6v\u00e9r ordered the removal of the EU flag from the parliament building, following an incident in which a member of parliament had \"defenestrated\" two EU flags from a fourth story window. In November 2015, the newly elected Polish government under Beata Szyd\u0142o removed the EU flag from government press conferences.\nDerivative designs.\nThe design of the European flag has been used in a variation, such as that of the Council of Europe mentioned above, and also to a greater extent such as the flag of the Western European Union (WEU; now defunct), which uses the same colours and the stars but has a number of stars based on membership and in a semicircle rather than a circle. It is also defaced with the initials of the former Western European Union in two languages.\nThe European Parliament used its own flag from 1973, but never formally adopted it. It fell out of use with the adoption of the twelve-star flag by the Parliament in 1983. The flag followed the yellow and blue colour scheme however instead of twelve stars there were the letters EP and PE (initials of the European Parliament in the six community languages at the time) surrounded by a wreath. Sometime later, the Parliament chose to use a logo consisting of a stylised hemicycle and the EU flag at the bottom right.\nThe flag of Bosnia and Herzegovina, imposed by High Representative Carlos Westendorp, after the country's parliament failed to agree on a design, is reminiscent of the symbolism of the EU flag, using the same blue and yellow colours, and the stars, although of a different number and colour, are a direct reference to those of the European flag.\nLikewise, Kosovo uses blue, yellow and stars in its flag, which has been mocked as a \"none too subtle nod to the flag of the European Union, which is about to become Kosovo's new best friend as it takes over protector status from the United Nations\".\nThe flag of the Brussels-Capital Region (introduced in 2016) consists of a yellow iris with a white outline upon a blue background. Its colours are based on the colours of the Flag of Europe, because Brussels is considered the unofficial capital of the EU.\nHeraldic.\nThe coat of arms of the Chairman of the European Union Military Committee (CEUMC), the highest-ranking officer within the EU's Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), depicts the European emblem as a coat of arms, i.e. emblazoned on an escutcheon. In heraldic terms, the European flag is the banner of arms, i.e. the flag design derived from the coat of arms.\nSeveral EU publications related to the CSDP generally, and its prospective development as a defence arm, have also displayed the European emblem in this manner, albeit as a graphical design element rather than an official symbol."}
{"id": "10026", "revid": "41405785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10026", "title": "Anthem of Europe", "text": "\"Anthem of Europe\" is the anthem used by both the European Union to represent the union and its people, while also being used by the Council of Europe to represent Europe. It is based on \"Ode to Joy\" from the final movement of Beethoven's 9th Symphony composed in 1823. The anthem is played on official occasions such as political or civil events.\nHistory.\nFriedrich Schiller wrote the poem \"An die Freude\" (\"To Joy\") in 1785 as a \"celebration of the brotherhood of man\". In later life, the poet was contemptuous of this popularity and dismissed the poem as typical of \"the bad taste of the age\" in which it had been written. After Schiller's death, the poem provided the words for the choral movement of Ludwig van Beethoven's 9th Symphony.\nIn 1971 the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe decided to propose adopting the prelude to the \"Ode to Joy\" from Beethoven's 9th Symphony as the anthem, taking up a suggestion made by Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi in 1955. Beethoven was generally seen as the natural choice for a European anthem. The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe officially announced the European Anthem on 19 January 1972 at Strasbourg: the prelude to \"Ode to Joy\", 4th movement of Ludwig van Beethoven's 9th symphony. In 1974 the same piece of music was adopted as the national anthem of the unrecognized state of Rhodesia.\nConductor Herbert von Karajan was asked to write three instrumental arrangements \u2013 for solo piano, for wind instruments and for symphony orchestra and he conducted the performance used to make the official recording. He wrote his decisions on the score, notably those concerning the tempo. Karajan decided on minim (half note) = 80 whereas Beethoven had written crotchet (quarter note) = 120.\nThe anthem was launched via a major information campaign on Europe Day in 1972. In 1985, it was adopted by EU heads of state and government as the official anthem of the then European Community \u2013 since 1993 the European Union. It is not intended to replace the national anthems of the member states but rather to celebrate the values they all share and their unity in diversity. It expresses the ideals of a united Europe: freedom, peace, and solidarity.\nIt was to have been included in the European Constitution along with the other European symbols; however, the treaty failed ratification and was replaced by the Treaty of Lisbon, which does not include any symbols. A declaration was attached to the treaty, in which sixteen member states formally recognised the proposed symbols. In response, the European Parliament decided that it would make greater use of the anthem, for example at official occasions. In October 2008, the Parliament changed its rules of procedure to have the anthem played at the opening of Parliament after elections and at formal sittings.\nUsage.\n\"Ode to Joy\" is the anthem of the Council of Europe (CoE) and the European Union (EU). In the context of the CoE, the anthem is used to represent all of Europe. In the context of the EU, the anthem is used to represent the union and its people. It is used on occasions such as Europe Day and formal events such as the signing of treaties. The European Parliament seeks to make greater use of the music; then-Parliament President Hans-Gert P\u00f6ttering stated he was moved when the anthem was played for him on his visit to Israel and ought to be used in Europe more often.\nIn 1992 the anthem was used by the CIS national football team at the 1992 UEFA European Football Championship.\nThe German public radio station Deutschlandfunk has broadcast the anthem together with the Deutschlandlied shortly before midnight since New Year's Eve 2006. The two anthems were specially recorded by the Berlin Radio Symphony Orchestra in versions characterized by \"modesty and intensity\".\nAt the 2007 signing ceremony for the Treaty of Lisbon, the plenipotentiaries of the European Union's twenty-seven member states stood in attendance while the \"Ode to Joy\" was played and a choir of 26 Portuguese children sang the original German lyrics.\nIn 2008 it was used by Kosovo as its national anthem until it adopted its own, and it was played at its declaration of independence, as a nod to the EU's role in its independence from Serbia.\n\"Ode to Joy\", automatically orchestrated in seven different styles, has been used on 18 June 2015 during the ceremony celebrating the 5000th ERC grantee as anthem of the European Research Council to represent achievements of European research.\n\"Ode to Joy\" is used as the theme song to the 2016 UEFA Euro qualifying and the European qualifying of the 2018 FIFA World Cup football competition at the introduction of every match.\nIn 2017, members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom from the Scottish National Party first whistled and then sang \"Ode to Joy\" during a vote at the House of Commons to protest against Brexit.\nIn 2018, the anthem of Japan and the anthem of the EU were performed in Tokyo during the official signing of the EU-Japan Economic Partnership Agreement. The European anthem often gets played at the signed of official economic or political agreements with foreign governments."}
{"id": "10027", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10027", "title": "Eugene Paul Wigner", "text": ""}
{"id": "10029", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10029", "title": "Timeline of the evolutionary history of life", "text": "This timeline of the evolutionary history of life represents the current scientific theory outlining the major events during the development of life on planet Earth. In biology, evolution is any change across successive generations in the heritable characteristics of biological populations. Evolutionary processes give rise to diversity at every level of biological organization, from kingdoms to species, and individual organisms and molecules, such as DNA and proteins. The similarities between all present day organisms indicate the presence of a common ancestor from which all known species, living and extinct, have diverged through the process of evolution. More than 99 percent of all species, amounting to over five billion species, that ever lived on Earth are estimated to be extinct. Estimates on the number of Earth's current species range from 10 million to 14 million, of which about 1.2 million have been documented and over 86 percent have not yet been described. However, a May 2016 scientific report estimates that 1 trillion species are currently on Earth, with only one-thousandth of one percent described.\nWhile the dates given in this article are estimates based on scientific evidence, there has been controversy between more traditional views of increased biodiversity through a cone of diversity with the passing of time and the view that the basic pattern on Earth has been one of annihilation and diversification and that in certain past times, such as the Cambrian explosion, there was great diversity.\nExtinction.\nSpecies go extinct constantly as environments change, as organisms compete for environmental niches, and as genetic mutation leads to the rise of new species from older ones. Occasionally biodiversity on Earth takes a hit in the form of a mass extinction in which the extinction rate is much higher than usual. A large extinction-event often represents an accumulation of smaller extinction- events that take place in a relatively brief period of time.\nThe first known mass extinction in earth's history was the Great Oxygenation Event 2.4 billion years ago. That event led to the loss of most of the planet's obligate anaerobes. Researchers have identified five major extinction events in earth's history since:\nSmaller extinction-events have occurred in the periods between these larger catastrophes, with some standing at the delineation points of the periods and epochs recognized by scientists in geologic time. The Holocene extinction event is currently under way.\nFactors in mass extinctions include continental drift, changes in atmospheric and marine chemistry, volcanism and other aspects of mountain formation, changes in glaciation, changes in sea level, and impact events.\nDetailed timeline.\nIn this timeline, Ma (for \"megaannum\") means \"million years ago,\" ka (for \"kiloannum\") means \"thousand years ago,\" and ya means \"years ago.\"\nHadean Eon.\n4000 Ma and earlier.\nArchean Eon.\n4000 Ma \u2013 2500 Ma\nProterozoic Eon.\n2500 Ma \u2013 542 Ma. Contains the Palaeoproterozoic, Mesoproterozoic and Neoproterozoic eras.\nPhanerozoic Eon.\n542 Ma \u2013 present\nThe Phanerozoic Eon, literally the \"period of well-displayed life,\" marks the appearance in the fossil record of abundant, shell-forming and/or trace-making organisms. It is subdivided into three eras, the Paleozoic, Mesozoic and Cenozoic, which are divided by major mass extinctions.\nPalaeozoic Era.\n542 Ma \u2013 251.0 Ma and contains the Cambrian, Ordovician, Silurian, Devonian, Carboniferous and Permian periods.\nMesozoic Era.\nFrom 251.4 Ma to 66 Ma and containing the Triassic, Jurassic and Cretaceous periods.\nCenozoic Era.\n66 Ma \u2013 present"}
{"id": "10030", "revid": "37810350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10030", "title": "Edmund Burke", "text": "Edmund Burke (; 12 January [NS] 1729 \u2013 9 July 1797) was an Irish statesman, economist, and philosopher. Born in Dublin, Burke served as a member of parliament (MP) between 1766 and 1794 in the House of Commons of Great Britain with the Whig Party after moving to London in 1750.\nBurke was a proponent of underpinning virtues with manners in society and of the importance of religious institutions for the moral stability and good of the state. These views were expressed in his \"A Vindication of Natural Society\". He criticised the actions of the British government towards the American colonies, including its taxation policies. Burke also supported the rights of the colonists to resist metropolitan authority, although he opposed the attempt to achieve independence. He is remembered for his support for Catholic emancipation, the impeachment of Warren Hastings from the East India Company, and his staunch opposition to the French Revolution.\nIn his \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\", Burke asserted that the revolution was destroying the fabric of good society and traditional institutions of state and society and condemned the persecution of the Catholic Church that resulted from it. This led to his becoming the leading figure within the conservative faction of the Whig Party which he dubbed the Old Whigs as opposed to the pro\u2013French Revolution New Whigs led by Charles James Fox.\nIn the 19th century, Burke was praised by both conservatives and liberals. Subsequently in the 20th century, he became widely regarded as the philosophical founder of modern conservatism.\nEarly life.\nBurke was born in Dublin, Ireland. His mother Mary, \"n\u00e9e\" Nagle (c. 1702\u20131770), was a Roman Catholic who hailed from a d\u00e9class\u00e9 County Cork family and a cousin of the Catholic educator Nano Nagle whereas his father Richard (died 1761), a successful solicitor, was a member of the Church of Ireland. It remains unclear whether this is the same Richard Burke who converted from Catholicism. The Burke dynasty descends from an Anglo-Norman knight surnamed de Burgh (Latinised as \"de Burgo\"), who arrived in Ireland in 1185 following Henry II of England's 1171 invasion of Ireland and is among the chief Gall or Old English families that assimilated into Gaelic society, becoming \"more Irish than the Irish themselves\".\nBurke adhered to his father's faith and remained a practising Anglican throughout his life, unlike his sister Juliana who was brought up as and remained a Roman Catholic. Later, his political enemies repeatedly accused him of having been educated at the Jesuit College of St. Omer, near Calais, France; and of harbouring secret Catholic sympathies at a time when membership of the Catholic Church would disqualify him from public office per Penal Laws in Ireland. As Burke told Frances Crewe:\nMr. Burke's Enemies often endeavoured to convince the World that he had been bred up in the Catholic Faith, &amp; that his Family were of it, &amp; that he himself had been educated at St. Omer\u2014but this was false, as his father was a regular practitioner of the Law at Dublin, which he could not be unless of the Established Church: &amp; it so happened that though Mr. B\u2014was twice at Paris, he never happened to go through the Town of St. Omer.\nAfter being elected to the House of Commons, Burke was required to take the oath of allegiance and abjuration, the oath of supremacy and declare against transubstantiation. Although never denying his Irishness, Burke often described himself as \"an Englishman\". According to the British historian J. C. D. Clark, this was in an age \"before 'Celtic nationalism' sought to make Irishness and Englishness incompatible\".\nAs a child, Burke sometimes spent time away from the unhealthy air of Dublin with his mother's family near Killavullen in the Blackwater Valley in County Cork. He received his early education at a Quaker school in Ballitore, County Kildare, some from Dublin; and possibly like his cousin Nano Nagle at a Hedge school near Killavullen. He remained in correspondence with his schoolmate from there, Mary Leadbeater, the daughter of the school's owner, throughout his life.\nIn 1744, Burke started at Trinity College Dublin, a Protestant establishment which up until 1793 did not permit Catholics to take degrees. In 1747, he set up a debating society Edmund Burke's Club which in 1770 merged with TCD's Historical Club to form the College Historical Society, the oldest undergraduate society in the world. The minutes of the meetings of Burke's Club remain in the collection of the Historical Society. Burke graduated from Trinity in 1748. Burke's father wanted him to read Law and with this in mind he went to London in 1750, where he entered the Middle Temple, before soon giving up legal study to travel in Continental Europe. After eschewing the Law, he pursued a livelihood through writing.\nEarly writing.\nThe late Lord Bolingbroke's \"Letters on the Study and Use of History\" was published in 1752 and his collected works appeared in 1754. This provoked Burke into writing his first published work, \"A Vindication of Natural Society: A View of the Miseries and Evils Arising to Mankind\", appearing in Spring 1756. Burke imitated Bolingbroke's style and ideas in a \"reductio ad absurdum\" of his arguments for atheistic rationalism in order to demonstrate their absurdity.\nBurke claimed that Bolingbroke's arguments against revealed religion could apply to all social and civil institutions as well. Lord Chesterfield and Bishop Warburton as well as others initially thought that the work was genuinely by Bolingbroke rather than a satire. All the reviews of the work were positive, with critics especially appreciative of Burke's quality of writing. Some reviewers failed to notice the ironic nature of the book which led to Burke stating in the preface to the second edition (1757) that it was a satire.\nRichard Hurd believed that Burke's imitation was near-perfect and that this defeated his purpose, arguing that an ironist \"should take care by a constant exaggeration to make the \"ridicule\" shine through the Imitation. Whereas this \"Vindication\" is everywhere enforc'd, not only in the language, and on the principles of L. Bol., but with so apparent, or rather so real an earnestness, that half his purpose is sacrificed to the other\". A minority of scholars have taken the position that in fact Burke did write the \"Vindication\" in earnest, later disowning it only for political reasons.\nIn 1757, Burke published a treatise on aesthetics titled \"A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful\" that attracted the attention of prominent Continental thinkers such as Denis Diderot and Immanuel Kant. It was his only purely philosophical work and when asked by Sir Joshua Reynolds and French Laurence to expand it thirty years later, Burke replied that he was no longer fit for abstract speculation (Burke had written it before he was nineteen years of age).\nOn 25 February 1757, Burke signed a contract with Robert Dodsley to write a \"history of England from the time of Julius Caesar to the end of the reign of Queen Anne\", its length being eighty quarto sheets (640 pages), nearly 400,000 words. It was to be submitted for publication by Christmas 1758. Burke completed the work to the year 1216 and stopped; it was not published until after Burke's death, in an 1812 collection of his works, \"An Essay Towards an Abridgement of the English History\". G. M. Young did not value Burke's history and claimed that it was \"demonstrably a translation from the French\". On commenting on the story that Burke stopped his history because David Hume published his, Lord Acton said \"it is ever to be regretted that the reverse did not occur\".\nDuring the year following that contract, Burke founded with Dodsley the influential \"Annual Register\", a publication in which various authors evaluated the international political events of the previous year. The extent to which Burke contributed to the \"Annual Register\" is unclear. In his biography of Burke, Robert Murray quotes the \"Register\" as evidence of Burke's opinions, yet Philip Magnus in his biography does not cite it directly as a reference. Burke remained the chief editor of the publication until at least 1789 and there is no evidence that any other writer contributed to it before 1766.\nOn 12 March 1757, Burke married Jane Mary Nugent (1734\u20131812), daughter of Dr. Christopher Nugent, a Catholic physician who had provided him with medical treatment at Bath. Their son Richard was born on 9 February 1758 while an elder son, Christopher, died in infancy. Burke also helped raise a ward, Edmund Nagle (later Admiral Sir Edmund Nagle), the son of a maternal cousin orphaned in 1763.\nAt about this same time, Burke was introduced to William Gerard Hamilton (known as \"Single-speech Hamilton\"). When Hamilton was appointed Chief Secretary for Ireland, Burke accompanied him to Dublin as his private secretary, a position he held for three years. In 1765, Burke became private secretary to the liberal Whig politician Charles, Marquess of Rockingham, then Prime Minister of Great Britain, who remained Burke's close friend and associate until his untimely death in 1782. Rockingham also introduced Burke as a Freemason.\nMember of Parliament.\nIn December 1765, Burke entered the House of Commons of the British Parliament as Member for Wendover in Buckinghamshire, a pocket borough in the gift of Lord Fermanagh, later 2nd Earl Verney and a close political ally of Rockingham. After Burke delivered his maiden speech, William Pitt the Elder said he had \"spoken in such a manner as to stop the mouths of all Europe\" and that the Commons should congratulate itself on acquiring such a Member.\nThe first great subject Burke addressed was the controversy with the American colonies which soon developed into war and ultimate separation. In reply to the 1769 Grenvillite pamphlet \"The Present State of the Nation\", he published his own pamphlet titled \"Observations on a Late State of the Nation\". Surveying the finances of France, Burke predicts \"some extraordinary convulsion in that whole system\".\nDuring the same year, with mostly borrowed money, Burke purchased \"Gregories\", a estate near Beaconsfield. Although the estate included saleable assets such as art works by Titian, \"Gregories\" proved a heavy financial burden in the following decades and Burke was never able to repay its purchase price in full. His speeches and writings, having made him famous, led to the suggestion that he was the author of the \"Letters of Junius\".\nAt about this time, Burke joined the circle of leading intellectuals and artists in London of whom Samuel Johnson was the central luminary. This circle also included David Garrick, Oliver Goldsmith and Joshua Reynolds. Edward Gibbon described Burke as \"the most eloquent and rational madman that I ever knew\". Although Johnson admired Burke's brilliance, he found him a dishonest politician.\nBurke took a leading role in the debate regarding the constitutional limits to the executive authority of the King. He argued strongly against unrestrained royal power and for the role of political parties in maintaining a principled opposition capable of preventing abuses, either by the monarch, or by specific factions within the government. His most important publication in this regard was his \"Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discontents\" of 23 April 1770. Burke identified the \"discontents\" as stemming from the \"secret influence\" of a neo-Tory group he labelled as the \"king's friends\", whose system \"comprehending the exterior and interior administrations, is commonly called, in the technical language of the Court, \"Double Cabinet\"\". Britain needed a party with \"an unshaken adherence to principle, and attachment to connexion, against every allurement of interest\". Party divisions, \"whether operating for good or evil, are things inseparable from free government\".\nDuring 1771, Burke wrote a bill that would have given juries the right to determine what was libel, if passed. Burke spoke in favour of the bill, but it was opposed by some, including Charles James Fox, not becoming law. When introducing his own bill in 1791 in opposition, Fox repeated almost verbatim the text of Burke's bill without acknowledgement. Burke was prominent in securing the right to publish debates held in Parliament.\nSpeaking in a parliamentary debate on the prohibition on the export of grain on 16 November 1770, Burke argued in favour of a free market in corn: \"There are no such things as a high, &amp; a low price that is encouraging, &amp; discouraging; there is nothing but a natural price, which grain brings at an universal market\". In 1772, Burke was instrumental in the passing of the Repeal of Certain Laws Act 1772 which repealed various old laws against dealers and forestallers in corn.\nIn the \"Annual Register\" for 1772 (published in July 1773), Burke condemned the partition of Poland. He saw it as \"the first very great breach in the modern political system of Europe\" and as upsetting the balance of power in Europe.\nOn 4 November 1774, Burke was elected Member for Bristol, at the time \"England's second city\" and a large constituency with a genuine electoral contest. At the conclusion of the poll, he made his \"Speech to the Electors of Bristol at the Conclusion of the Poll\", a remarkable disclaimer of the constituent-imperative form of democracy, for which he substituted his statement of the \"representative mandate\" form. He failed to win re-election for that seat.\nIn May 1778, Burke supported a parliamentary motion revising restrictions on Irish trade. His constituents, citizens of the great trading city of Bristol, urged Burke to oppose free trade with Ireland. Burke resisted their protestations and said: \"If, from this conduct, I shall forfeit their suffrages at an ensuing election, it will stand on record an example to future representatives of the Commons of England, that one man at least had dared to resist the desires of his constituents when his judgment assured him they were wrong\".\nBurke published \"Two Letters to Gentlemen of Bristol on the Bills relative to the Trade of Ireland\" in which he espoused \"some of the chief principles of commerce; such as the advantage of free intercourse between all parts of the same kingdom, [\u2026] the evils attending restriction and monopoly, [\u2026] and that the gain of others is not necessarily our loss, but on the contrary an advantage by causing a greater demand for such wares as we have for sale\".\nBurke also supported the attempts of Sir George Savile to repeal some of the penal laws against Catholics. Burke also called capital punishment \"the Butchery which we call justice\" in 1776 and in 1780 condemned the use of the pillory for two men convicted for attempting to practice sodomy.\nThis support for unpopular causes, notably free trade with Ireland and Catholic emancipation, led to Burke losing his seat in 1780. For the remainder of his parliamentary career, Burke represented Malton, another pocket borough under the Marquess of Rockingham's patronage.\nAmerican War of Independence.\nBurke expressed his support for the grievances of the American Thirteen Colonies under the government of King George III and his appointed representatives. On 19 April 1774, Burke made a speech, \"On American Taxation\" (published in January 1775), on a motion to repeal the tea duty:\nAgain and again, revert to your old principles\u2014seek peace and ensue it; leave America, if she has taxable matter in her, to tax herself. I am not here going into the distinctions of rights, nor attempting to mark their boundaries. I do not enter into these metaphysical distinctions; I hate the very sound of them. Leave the Americans as they anciently stood, and these distinctions, born of our unhappy contest, will die along with it. [\u2026] Be content to bind America by laws of trade; you have always done it [\u2026] Do not burthen them with taxes [\u2026] But if intemperately, unwisely, fatally, you sophisticate and poison the very source of government by urging subtle deductions, and consequences odious to those you govern, from the unlimited and illimitable nature of supreme sovereignty, you will teach them by these means to call that sovereignty itself in question. [\u2026] If that sovereignty and their freedom cannot be reconciled, which will they take? They will cast your sovereignty in your face. No body of men will be argued into slavery.\nOn 22 March 1775, Burke delivered in the House of Common a speech (published during May 1775) on reconciliation with America. Burke appealed for peace as preferable to civil war and reminded the House of Commons of America's growing population, its industry and its wealth. He warned against the notion that the Americans would back down in the face of force since most Americans were of British descent:\n[T]he people of the colonies are descendants of Englishmen. [\u2026] They are therefore not only devoted to liberty, but to liberty according to English ideas and on English principles. The people are Protestants, [\u2026] a persuasion not only favourable to liberty, but built upon it. [\u2026] My hold of the colonies is in the close affection which grows from common names, from kindred blood, from similar privileges, and equal protection. These are ties which, though light as air, are as strong as links of iron. Let the colonies always keep the idea of their civil rights associated with your government\u2014they will cling and grapple to you, and no force under heaven will be of power to tear them from their allegiance. But let it be once understood that your government may be one thing and their privileges another, that these two things may exist without any mutual relation\u2014the cement is gone, the cohesion is loosened, and everything hastens to decay and dissolution. As long as you have the wisdom to keep the sovereign authority of this country as the sanctuary of liberty, the sacred temple consecrated to our common faith, wherever the chosen race and sons of England worship freedom, they will turn their faces towards you. The more they multiply, the more friends you will have; the more ardently they love liberty, the more perfect will be their obedience. Slavery they can have anywhere. It is a weed that grows in every soil. They may have it from Spain, they may have it from Prussia. But, until you become lost to all feeling of your true interest and your natural dignity, freedom they can have from none but you.\nBurke prized peace with America above all else, pleading with the House of Commons to remember that the interest by way of money received from the American colonies was far more attractive than any sense of putting the colonists in their place:\nThe proposition is peace. Not peace through the medium of war, not peace to be hunted through the labyrinth of intricate and endless negotiations, not peace to arise out of universal discord. [\u2026] [I]t is simple peace, sought in its natural course and in its ordinary haunts. It is peace sought in the spirit of peace, and laid in principles purely pacific.\nBurke was not merely presenting a peace agreement to Parliament, but rather he stepped forward with four reasons against using force, carefully reasoned. He laid out his objections in an orderly manner, focusing on one before moving to the next. His first concern was that the use of force would have to be temporary and that the uprisings and objections to British governance in Colonial America would not be. Second, Burke worried about the uncertainty surrounding whether Britain would win a conflict in America. \"An armament\", Burke said, \"is not a victory\". Third, Burke brought up the issue of impairment, stating that it would do the British government no good to engage in a scorched earth war and have the object they desired (America) become damaged or even useless. The American colonists could always retreat into the mountains, but the land they left behind would most likely be unusable, whether by accident or design. The fourth and final reason to avoid the use of force was experience as the British had never attempted to rein in an unruly colony by force and they did not know if it could be done, let alone accomplished thousands of miles away from home. Not only were all of these concerns reasonable, but some turned out to be prophetic\u2014the American colonists did not surrender, even when things looked extremely bleak and the British were ultimately unsuccessful in their attempts to win a war fought on American soil.\nIt was not temporary force, uncertainty, impairment, or even experience that Burke cited as the number one reason for avoiding war with the American colonies. Rather, it was the character of the American people themselves: \"In this character of Americans, a love of freedom is the predominating feature which marks and distinguishes the whole. [\u2026] [T]his fierce spirit of liberty is stronger in the English colonies, probably, than in any other people of the earth. [\u2026] [The] men [are] acute, inquisitive, dextrous, prompt in attack, ready in defence, full of resources\". Burke concludes with another plea for peace and a prayer that Britain might avoid actions which in Burke's words \"may bring on the destruction of this Empire\".\nBurke proposed six resolutions to settle the American conflict peacefully:\nHad they been passed, the effect of these resolutions can never be known. Unfortunately, Burke delivered this speech just less than a month before the explosive conflict at Concord and Lexington. As these resolutions were not enacted, little was done that would help to dissuade conflict.\nAmong the reasons this speech was so greatly admired was its passage on Lord Bathurst (1684\u20131775) in which Burke describes an angel in 1704 prophesying to Bathurst the future greatness of England and also of America: \"Young man, There is America\u2014which at this day serves little more than to amuse you with stories of savage men, and uncouth manners; yet shall, before you taste of death, shew itself equal to the whole of that commerce which now attracts the envy of the world\". Samuel Johnson was so irritated at hearing it continually praised that he made a parody of it, where the devil appears to a young Whig and predicts that in short time Whiggism will poison even the paradise of America.\nThe administration of Lord North (1770\u20131782) tried to defeat the colonist rebellion by military force. British and American forces clashed in 1775 and in 1776 came the American Declaration of Independence. Burke was appalled by celebrations in Britain of the defeat of the Americans at New York and Pennsylvania. He claimed the English national character was being changed by this authoritarianism. Burke wrote: \"As to the good people of England, they seem to partake every day more and more of the Character of that administration which they have been induced to tolerate. I am satisfied, that within a few years there has been a great Change in the National Character. We seem no longer that eager, inquisitive, jealous, fiery people, which we have been formerly\".\nIn Burke's view, the British government was fighting \"the American English\" (\"our English Brethren in the Colonies\"), with a Germanic king employing \"the hireling sword of German boors and vassals\" to destroy the English liberties of the colonists. On American independence, Burke wrote: \"I do not know how to wish success to those whose Victory is to separate from us a large and noble part of our Empire. Still less do I wish success to injustice, oppression and absurdity\".\nDuring the Gordon Riots in 1780, Burke became a target of hostility and his home was placed under armed guard by the military.\nPaymaster of the Forces.\nThe fall of North led to Rockingham being recalled to power in March 1782. Burke was appointed Paymaster of the Forces and a Privy Counsellor, but without a seat in Cabinet. Rockingham's unexpected death in July 1782 and replacement with Shelburne as Prime Minister put an end to his administration after only a few months, but Burke did manage to introduce two Acts.\nThe Paymaster General Act 1782 ended the post as a lucrative sinecure. Previously, Paymasters had been able to draw on money from HM Treasury at their discretion. Instead, now they were required to put the money they had requested to withdraw from the Treasury into the Bank of England, from where it was to be withdrawn for specific purposes. The Treasury would receive monthly statements of the Paymaster's balance at the Bank. This Act was repealed by Shelburne's administration, but the Act that replaced it repeated verbatim almost the whole text of the Burke Act.\nThe Civil List and Secret Service Money Act 1782 was a watered down version of Burke's original intentions as outlined in his famous \"Speech on Economical Reform\" of 11 February 1780. However, he managed to abolish 134 offices in the royal household and civil administration. The third Secretary of State and the Board of Trade were abolished and pensions were limited and regulated. The Act was anticipated to save \u00a372,368 a year.\nIn February 1783, Burke resumed the post of Paymaster of the Forces when Shelburne's government fell and was replaced by a coalition headed by North that included Charles James Fox. That coalition fell in 1783 and was succeeded by the long Tory administration of William Pitt the Younger which lasted until 1801. Accordingly, having supported Fox and North, Burke was in opposition for the remainder of his political life.\nRepresentative Democracy.\nIn 1774, Burke's \"Speech to the Electors at Bristol at the Conclusion of the Poll\" was noted for its defence of the principles of representative government against the notion that those elected to assemblies like Parliament are, or should be, merely delegates:\nCertainly, Gentlemen, it ought to be the happiness and glory of a Representative, to live in the strictest union, the closest correspondence, and the most unreserved communication with his constituents. Their wishes ought to have great weight with him; their opinion, high respect; their business, unremitted attention. It is his duty to sacrifice his repose, his pleasures, his satisfactions, to theirs; and above all, ever, and in all cases, to prefer their interest to his own. But his unbiassed opinion, his mature judgment, his enlightened conscience, he ought not to sacrifice to you, to any man, or to any sett of men living. These he does not derive from your pleasure; no, nor from the Law and the Constitution. They are a trust from Providence, for the abuse of which he is deeply answerable. Your Representative owes you, not his industry only, but his judgment; and he betrays, instead of serving you, if he sacrifices it to your opinion.My worthy Colleague says, his Will ought to be subservient to yours. If that be all, the thing is innocent. If Government were a matter of Will upon any side, yours, without question, ought to be superior. But Government and Legislation are matters of reason and judgement, and not of inclination; and, what sort of reason is that, in which the determination precedes the discussion; in which one sett of men deliberate, and another decide; and where those who form the conclusion are perhaps three hundred miles distant from those who hear the arguments?\nBurke, as detailed below, was an opponent of slavery, an interest in which many of his Bristol electors were involved.\nPolitical scientist Hanna Pitkin points out that Burke linked the interest of the district with the proper behaviour of its elected official, explaining: \"Burke conceives of broad, relatively fixed interest, few in number and clearly defined, of which any group or locality has just one. These interests are largely economic or associated with particular localities whose livelihood they characterize, in his over-all prosperity they involve\".\nBurke was a leading sceptic with respect to democracy. While admitting that theoretically in some cases it might be desirable, he insisted a democratic government in Britain in his day would not only be inept, but also oppressive. He opposed democracy for three basic reasons. First, government required a degree of intelligence and breadth of knowledge of the sort that occurred rarely among the common people. Second, he thought that if they had the vote, common people had dangerous and angry passions that could be aroused easily by demagogues, fearing that the authoritarian impulses that could be empowered by these passions would undermine cherished traditions and established religion, leading to violence and confiscation of property. Third, Burke warned that democracy would create a tyranny over unpopular minorities, who needed the protection of the upper classes.\nConservative opposition to the slave trade.\nBurke proposed a bill to ban slaveholders from being able to sit in the House of Commons, claiming they were a danger incompatible with traditional notions of British liberty. While Burke did believe that Africans were \"barbaric\" and needed to be \"civilised\" by Christianity, Gregory Collins argues that this was not an unusual attitude amongst abolitionists at the time. Furthermore, Burke seemed to believe that Christianity would provide a civilising benefit to any group of people, as he believed Christianity had \"tamed\" European civilisation and regarded Southern European peoples as equally savage and barbarous. Collins also suggests that Burke viewed the \"uncivilised\" behaviour of African slaves as being partially caused by slavery itself, as he believed that making someone a slave stripped them of any virtues and rendered them mentally deficient, regardless of race. Burke proposed a gradual program of emancipation called \"Sketch of a Negro Code\", which Collins argues was quite detailed for the time. Collins concludes that Burke's \"gradualist\" position on the emancipation of slaves, while perhaps seeming ridiculous to some modern-day readers, was nonetheless sincere.\nIndia and the impeachment of Warren Hastings.\nFor years, Burke pursued impeachment efforts against Warren Hastings, formerly Governor-General of Bengal, that resulted in the trial during 1786. His interaction with the British dominion of India began well before Hastings' impeachment trial. For two decades prior to the impeachment, Parliament had dealt with the Indian issue. This trial was the pinnacle of years of unrest and deliberation. In 1781, Burke was first able to delve into the issues surrounding the East India Company when he was appointed Chairman of the Commons Select Committee on East Indian Affairs\u2014from that point until the end of the trial, India was Burke's primary concern. This committee was charged \"to investigate alleged injustices in Bengal, the war with Hyder Ali, and other Indian difficulties\". While Burke and the committee focused their attention on these matters, a second secret committee was formed to assess the same issues. Both committee reports were written by Burke. Among other purposes, the reports conveyed to the Indian princes that Britain would not wage war on them, along with demanding that the East India Company should recall Hastings. This was Burke's first call for substantive change regarding imperial practices. When addressing the whole House of Commons regarding the committee report, Burke described the Indian issue as one that \"began 'in commerce' but 'ended in empire'\".\nOn 28 February 1785, Burke delivered a now-famous speech, \"The Nabob of Arcot's Debts\", wherein he condemned the damage to India by the East India Company. In the province of the Carnatic, the Indians had constructed a system of reservoirs to make the soil fertile in a naturally dry region, and centred their society on the husbandry of water:\nThese are the monuments of real kings, who were the fathers of their people; testators to a posterity which they embraced as their own. These are the grand sepulchres built by ambition; but by the ambition of an insatiable benevolence, which, not contented with reigning in the dispensation of happiness during the contracted term of human life, had strained, with all the reachings and graspings of a vivacious mind, to extend the dominion of their bounty beyond the limits of nature, and to perpetuate themselves through generations of generations, the guardians, the protectors, the nourishers of mankind.\nBurke claimed that the advent of East India Company domination in India had eroded much that was good in these traditions and that as a consequence of this and the lack of new customs to replace them the Indian populace under Company rule was needlessly suffering. He set about establishing a set of imperial expectations, whose moral foundation would in his opinion warrant an overseas empire.\nOn 4 April 1786, Burke presented the House of Commons with the \"Article of Charge of High Crimes and Misdemeanors\" against Hastings. The impeachment in Westminster Hall which did not begin until 14 February 1788 would be the \"first major public discursive event of its kind in England\", bringing the morality of imperialism to the forefront of public perception. Burke was already known for his eloquent rhetorical skills and his involvement in the trial only enhanced its popularity and significance. Burke's indictment, fuelled by emotional indignation, branded Hastings a \"captain-general of iniquity\" who never dined without \"creating a famine\", whose heart was \"gangrened to the core\" and who resembled both a \"spider of Hell\" and a \"ravenous vulture devouring the carcasses of the dead\". The House of Commons eventually impeached Hastings, but subsequently the House of Lords acquitted him of all charges.\nFrench Revolution: 1688 versus 1789.\nInitially, Burke did not condemn the French Revolution. In a letter of 9 August 1789, he wrote: \"England gazing with astonishment at a French struggle for Liberty and not knowing whether to blame or to applaud! The thing indeed, though I thought I saw something like it in progress for several years, has still something in it paradoxical and Mysterious. The spirit it is impossible not to admire; but the old Parisian ferocity has broken out in a shocking manner\". The events of 5\u20136 October 1789, when a crowd of Parisian women marched on Versailles to compel King Louis XVI to return to Paris, turned Burke against it. In a letter to his son Richard Burke dated 10 October, he said: \"This day I heard from Laurence who has sent me papers confirming the portentous state of France\u2014where the Elements which compose Human Society seem all to be dissolved, and a world of Monsters to be produced in the place of it\u2014where Mirabeau presides as the Grand Anarch; and the late Grand Monarch makes a figure as ridiculous as pitiable\". On 4 November, Charles-Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Depont wrote to Burke, requesting that he endorse the Revolution. Burke replied that any critical language of it by him should be taken \"as no more than the expression of doubt\", but he added: \"You may have subverted Monarchy, but not recover'd freedom\". In the same month, he described France as \"a country undone\". Burke's first public condemnation of the Revolution occurred on the debate in Parliament on the army estimates on 9 February 1790 provoked by praise of the Revolution by Pitt and Fox:\nSince the House had been prorogued in the summer much work was done in France. The French had shewn themselves the ablest architects of ruin that had hitherto existed in the world. In that very short space of time they had completely pulled down to the ground, their monarchy; their church; their nobility; their law; their revenue; their army; their navy; their commerce; their arts; and their manufactures. [\u2026] [There was a danger of] an imitation of the excesses of an irrational, unprincipled, proscribing, confiscating, plundering, ferocious, bloody and tyrannical democracy. [\u2026] [In religion] the danger of their example is no longer from intolerance, but from Atheism; a foul, unnatural vice, foe to all the dignity and consolation of mankind; which seems in France, for a long time, to have been embodied into a faction, accredited, and almost avowed.\nIn January 1790, Burke read Richard Price's sermon of 4 November 1789 entitled \"A Discourse on the Love of Our Country\" to the Revolution Society. That society had been founded to commemorate the Glorious Revolution of 1688. In this sermon, Price espoused the philosophy of universal \"Rights of Men\". Price argued that love of our country \"does not imply any conviction of the superior value of it to other countries, or any particular preference of its laws and constitution of government\". Instead, Price asserted that Englishmen should see themselves \"more as citizens of the world than as members of any particular community\".\nA debate between Price and Burke ensued that was \"the classic moment at which two fundamentally different conceptions of national identity were presented to the English public\". Price claimed that the principles of the Glorious Revolution included \"the right to choose our own governors, to cashier them for misconduct, and to frame a government for ourselves\".\nImmediately after reading Price's sermon, Burke wrote a draft of what eventually became \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\". On 13 February 1790, a notice in the press said that shortly Burke would publish a pamphlet on the Revolution and its British supporters, but he spent the year revising and expanding it. On 1 November, he finally published the \"Reflections\" and it was an immediate best-seller. Priced at five shillings, it was more expensive than most political pamphlets, but by the end of 1790 it had gone through ten printings and sold approximately 17,500 copies. A French translation appeared on 29 November and on 30 November the translator Pierre-Ga\u00ebton Dupont wrote to Burke saying 2,500 copies had already been sold. The French translation ran to ten printings by June 1791.\nWhat the Glorious Revolution had meant was as important to Burke and his contemporaries as it had been for the last one hundred years in British politics. In the \"Reflections\", Burke argued against Price's interpretation of the Glorious Revolution and instead, gave a classic Whig defence of it. Burke argued against the idea of abstract, metaphysical rights of humans and instead advocated national tradition:\nThe Revolution was made to preserve our \"antient\" indisputable laws and liberties, and that \"antient\" constitution of government which is our only security for law and liberty [\u2026] The very idea of the fabrication of a new government, is enough to fill us with disgust and horror. We wished at the period of the Revolution, and do now wish, to derive all we possess as \"an inheritance from our forefathers\". Upon that body and stock of inheritance we have taken care not to inoculate any cyon [scion] alien to the nature of the original plant. [\u2026] Our oldest reformation is that of Magna Charta. You will see that Sir Edward Coke, that great oracle of our law, and indeed all the great men who follow him, to Blackstone, are industrious to prove the pedigree of our liberties. They endeavour to prove that the ancient charter [\u2026] were nothing more than a re-affirmance of the still more ancient standing law of the kingdom. [\u2026] In the famous law [\u2026] called the \"Petition of Right\", the parliament says to the king, \"Your subjects have \"inherited\" this freedom\", claiming their franchises not on abstract principles \"as the rights of men\", but as the rights of Englishmen, and as a patrimony derived from their forefathers.\nBurke said: \"We fear God, we look up with awe to kings; with affection to parliaments; with duty to magistrates; with reverence to priests; and with respect to nobility. Why? Because when such ideas are brought before our minds, it is \"natural\" to be so affected\". Burke defended this prejudice on the grounds that it is \"the general bank and capital of nations, and of ages\" and superior to individual reason, which is small in comparison. \"Prejudice\", Burke claimed, \"is of ready application in the emergency; it previously engages the mind in a steady course of wisdom and virtue, and does not leave the man hesitating in the moment of decision, sceptical, puzzled, and unresolved. Prejudice renders a man's virtue his habit\". Burke criticised social contract theory by claiming that society is indeed a contract, although it is \"a partnership not only between those who are living, but between those who are living, those who are dead, and those who are to be born\".\nThe most famous passage in Burke's \"Reflections\" was his description of the events of 5\u20136 October 1789 and the part of Marie-Antoinette in them. Burke's account differs little from modern historians who have used primary sources. His use of flowery language to describe it provoked both praise and criticism. Philip Francis wrote to Burke saying that what he wrote of Marie-Antoinette was \"pure foppery\". Edward Gibbon reacted differently: \"I adore his chivalry\". Burke was informed by an Englishman who had talked with the Duchesse de Biron that when Marie-Antoinette was reading the passage she burst into tears and took considerable time to finish reading it. Price had rejoiced that the French king had been \"led in triumph\" during the October Days, but to Burke this symbolised the opposing revolutionary sentiment of the Jacobins and the natural sentiments of those who shared his own view with horror\u2014that the ungallant assault on Marie-Antoinette was a cowardly attack on a defenceless woman.\nLouis XVI translated the \"Reflections\" \"from end to end\" into French. Fellow Whig MPs Richard Sheridan and Charles James Fox disagreed with Burke and split with him. Fox thought the \"Reflections\" to be \"in very bad taste\" and \"favouring Tory principles\". Other Whigs such as the Duke of Portland and Earl Fitzwilliam privately agreed with Burke, but they did not wish for a public breach with their Whig colleagues. Burke wrote on 29 November 1790: \"I have received from the Duke of Portland, Lord Fitzwilliam, the Duke of Devonshire, Lord John Cavendish, Montagu (Frederick Montagu MP), and a long et cetera of the old Stamina of the Whiggs a most full approbation of the principles of that work and a kind indulgence to the execution\". The Duke of Portland said in 1791 that when anyone criticised the \"Reflections\" to him, he informed them that he had recommended the book to his sons as containing the true Whig creed.\nIn the opinion of Paul Langford, Burke crossed something of a Rubicon when he attended a levee on 3 February 1791 to meet the King, later described by Jane Burke as follows:\nOn his coming to Town for the Winter, as he generally does, he went to the Levee with the Duke of \"Portland\", who went with Lord William to kiss hands on his going into the Guards\u2014while Lord William was kissing hands, The King was talking to The Duke, but his Eyes were fixed on [Burke] who was standing in the Crowd, and when He said His say to The Duke, without waiting for [Burke]'s coming up in his turn, The King went up to him, and, after the usual questions of how long have you been in Town and the weather, He said you have been very much employed of late, and very much confined. [Burke] said, no, Sir, not more than usual\u2014You have and very well employed too, but there are none so deaf as those that w'ont hear, and none so blind as those that w'ont see\u2014[Burke] made a low bow, Sir, I certainly now understand you, but was afraid my vanity or presumption might have led me to imagine what Your Majesty has said referred to what I have done\u2014You cannot be vain\u2014You have been of \"use to us all\", it is a general opinion, is it not so Lord Stair? who was standing near. It is said Lord Stair;\u2014Your Majesty's adopting it, Sir, will make the opinion general, said [Burke]\u2014I know it is the general opinion, and I know that there is no Man who calls himself a Gentleman that must not think himself obliged to you, for you have supported the cause of the Gentlemen\u2014You know the tone at Court is a whisper, but The King said all this loud, so as to be heard by every one at Court.\nBurke's \"Reflections\" sparked a pamphlet war. Mary Wollstonecraft was one of the first into print, publishing \"A Vindication of the Rights of Men\" a few weeks after Burke. Thomas Paine followed with the \"Rights of Man\" in 1791. James Mackintosh, who wrote \"Vindiciae Gallicae\", was the first to see the \"Reflections\" as \"the manifesto of a Counter Revolution\". Mackintosh later agreed with Burke's views, remarking in December 1796 after meeting him that Burke was \"minutely and accurately informed, to a wonderful exactness, with respect to every fact relating to the French Revolution\". Mackintosh later said: \"Burke was one of the first thinkers as well as one of the greatest orators of his time. He is without parallel in any age, excepting perhaps Lord Bacon and Cicero; and his works contain an ampler store of political and moral wisdom than can be found in any other writer whatever\".\nIn November 1790, Fran\u00e7ois-Louis-Thibault de Menonville, a member of the National Assembly of France, wrote to Burke, praising \"Reflections\" and requesting more \"very refreshing mental food\" that he could publish. This Burke did in April 1791 when he published \"A Letter to a Member of the National Assembly\". Burke called for external forces to reverse the Revolution and included an attack on the late French philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau as being the subject of a personality cult that had developed in revolutionary France. Although Burke conceded that Rousseau sometimes showed \"a considerable insight into human nature\", he mostly was critical. Although he did not meet Rousseau on his visit to Britain in 1766\u20131767, Burke was a friend of David Hume, with whom Rousseau had stayed. Burke said Rousseau \"entertained no principle either to influence of his heart, or to guide his understanding\u2014but \"vanity\"\"\u2014which he \"was possessed to a degree little short of madness\". He also cited Rousseau's \"Confessions\" as evidence that Rousseau had a life of \"obscure and vulgar vices\" that was not \"chequered, or spotted here and there, with virtues, or even distinguished by a single good action\". Burke contrasted Rousseau's theory of universal benevolence and his having sent his children to a foundling hospital, stating that he was \"a lover of his kind, but a hater of his kindred\".\nThese events and the disagreements that arose from them within the Whig Party led to its break-up and to the rupture of Burke's friendship with Fox. In debate in Parliament on Britain's relations with Russia, Fox praised the principles of the Revolution, although Burke was not able to reply at this time as he was \"overpowered by continued cries of question from his own side of the House\". When Parliament was debating the Quebec Bill for a constitution for Canada, Fox praised the Revolution and criticised some of Burke's arguments such as hereditary power. On 6 May 1791, Burke used the opportunity to answer Fox during another debate in Parliament on the Quebec Bill and condemn the new French Constitution and \"the horrible consequences flowing from the French idea of the Rights of Man\". Burke asserted that those ideas were the antithesis of both the British and the American constitutions. Burke was interrupted and Fox intervened, saying that Burke should be allowed to carry on with his speech. However, a vote of censure was moved against Burke for noticing the affairs of France which was moved by Lord Sheffield and seconded by Fox. Pitt made a speech praising Burke and Fox made a speech\u2014both rebuking and complimenting Burke. He questioned the sincerity of Burke, who seemed to have forgotten the lessons he had learned from him, quoting from Burke's own speeches of fourteen and fifteen years before. Burke's response was as follows:\nIt certainly was indiscreet at any period, but especially at his time of life, to parade enemies, or give his friends occasion to desert him; yet if his firm and steady adherence to the British constitution placed him in such a dilemma, he would risk all, and, as public duty and public experience taught him, with his last words exclaim, \"Fly from the French Constitution\".\nAt this point, Fox whispered that there was \"no loss of friendship\". \"I regret to say there is\", Burke replied, \"I have indeed made a great sacrifice; I have done my duty though I have lost my friend. There is something in the detested French constitution that envenoms every thing it touches\". This provoked a reply from Fox, yet he was unable to give his speech for some time since he was overcome with tears and emotion. Fox appealed to Burke to remember their inalienable friendship, but he also repeated his criticisms of Burke and uttered \"unusually bitter sarcasms\". This only aggravated the rupture between the two men. Burke demonstrated his separation from the party on 5 June 1791 by writing to Fitzwilliam, declining money from him.\nBurke was dismayed that some Whigs, instead of reaffirming the principles of the Whig Party he laid out in the \"Reflections\", had rejected them in favour of \"French principles\" and that they criticised Burke for abandoning Whig principles. Burke wanted to demonstrate his fidelity to Whig principles and feared that acquiescence to Fox and his followers would allow the Whig Party to become a vehicle for Jacobinism.\nBurke knew that many members of the Whig Party did not share Fox's views and he wanted to provoke them into condemning the French Revolution. Burke wrote that he wanted to represent the whole Whig Party \"as tolerating, and by a toleration, countenancing those proceedings\" so that he could \"stimulate them to a public declaration of what every one of their acquaintance privately knows to be [\u2026] their sentiments\". On 3 August 1791, Burke published his \"Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs\" in which he renewed his criticism of the radical revolutionary programmes inspired by the French Revolution and attacked the Whigs who supported them as holding principles contrary to those traditionally held by the Whig Party.\nBurke owned two copies of what has been called \"that practical compendium of Whig political theory\", namely \"The Tryal of Dr. Henry Sacheverell\" (1710). Burke wrote of the trial: \"It rarely happens to a party to have the opportunity of a clear, authentic, recorded, declaration of their political tenets upon the subject of a great constitutional event like that of the [Glorious] Revolution\". Writing in the third person, Burke asserted in his \"Appeal\":\n[The] foundations laid down by the Commons, on the trial of Doctor Sacheverel, for justifying the revolution of 1688, are the very same laid down in Mr. Burke's Reflections; that is to say,\u2014a breach of the \"original contract\", implied and expressed in the constitution of this country, as a scheme of government fundamentally and inviolably fixed in King, Lords and Commons.\u2014That the fundamental subversion of this antient constitution, by one of its parts, having been attempted, and in effect accomplished, justified the Revolution. That it was justified \"only\" upon the \"necessity\" of the case; as the \"only\" means left for the recovery of that \"antient\" constitution, formed by the \"original contract\" of the British state; as well as for the future preservation of the \"same\" government. These are the points to be proved.\nBurke then provided quotations from Paine's \"Rights of Man\" to demonstrate what the New Whigs believed. Burke's belief that Foxite principles corresponded to Paine's was genuine. Finally, Burke denied that a majority of \"the people\" had, or ought to have, the final say in politics and alter society at their pleasure. People had rights, but also duties and these duties were not voluntary. According to Burke, the people could not overthrow morality derived from God.\nAlthough Whig grandees such as Portland and Fitzwilliam privately agreed with Burke's \"Appeal\", they wished he had used more moderate language. Fitzwilliam saw the \"Appeal\" as containing \"the doctrines I have sworn by, long and long since\". Francis Basset, a backbench Whig MP, wrote to Burke that \"though for reasons which I will not now detail I did not then deliver my sentiments, I most perfectly differ from Mr. Fox &amp; from the great Body of opposition on the French Revolution\". Burke sent a copy of the \"Appeal\" to the King and the King requested a friend to communicate to Burke that he had read it \"with great Satisfaction\". Burke wrote of its reception: \"Not one word from one of our party. They are secretly galled. They agree with me to a title; but they dare not speak out for fear of hurting Fox. [\u2026] They leave me to myself; they see that I can do myself justice\". Charles Burney viewed it as \"a most admirable book\u2014the best &amp; most useful on political subjects that I have ever seen\", but he believed the differences in the Whig Party between Burke and Fox should not be aired publicly.\nEventually, most of the Whigs sided with Burke and gave their support to William Pitt the Younger's Tory government which in response to France's declaration of war against Britain declared war on France's Revolutionary Government in 1793.\nIn December 1791, Burke sent government ministers his \"Thoughts on French Affairs\" where he put forward three main points, namely that no counter-revolution in France would come about by purely domestic causes; that the longer the Revolutionary Government exists, the stronger it becomes; and that the Revolutionary Government's interest and aim is to disturb all of the other governments of Europe.\nAs a Whig, Burke did not wish to see an absolute monarchy again in France after the extirpation of Jacobinism. Writing to an \"\u00e9migr\u00e9\" in 1791, Burke expressed his views against a restoration of the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\":\nWhen such a complete convulsion has shaken the State, and hardly left any thing whatsoever, either in civil arrangements, or in the Characters and disposition of men's minds, exactly where it was, whatever shall be settled although in the former persons and upon old forms, will be in some measure a new thing and will labour under something of the weakness as well as other inconveniences of a Change. My poor opinion is that you mean to establish what you call 'L'ancien R\u00e9gime,' If any one means that system of Court Intrigue miscalled a Government as it stood, at Versailles before the present confusions as the thing to be established, that I believe will be found absolutely impossible; and if you consider the Nature, as well of persons, as of affairs, I flatter myself you must be of my opinion. That was tho' not so violent a State of Anarchy as well as the present. If it were even possible to lay things down exactly as they stood, before the series of experimental politicks began, I am quite sure that they could not long continue in that situation. In one Sense of L'Ancien R\u00e9gime I am clear that nothing else can reasonably be done.\nBurke delivered a speech on the debate of the Aliens Bill on 28 December 1792. He supported the Bill as it would exclude \"murderous atheists, who would pull down Church and state; religion and God; morality and happiness\". The peroration included a reference to a French order for 3,000 daggers. Burke revealed a dagger he had concealed in his coat and threw it to the floor: \"This is what you are to gain by an alliance with France\". Burke picked up the dagger and continued:\nWhen they smile, I see blood trickling down their faces; I see their insidious purposes; I see that the object of all their cajoling is\u2014blood! I now warn my countrymen to beware of these execrable philosophers, whose only object it is to destroy every thing that is good here, and to establish immorality and murder by precept and example\u2014'Hic niger est hunc tu Romane caveto' ['Such a man is evil; beware of him, Roman'. Horace, \"Satires\" I. 4. 85.].\nBurke supported the war against Revolutionary France, seeing Britain as fighting on the side of the royalists and \"\u00e9migres\" in a civil war, rather than fighting against the whole nation of France. Burke also supported the royalist uprising in La Vend\u00e9e, describing it on 4 November 1793 in a letter to William Windham as \"the sole affair I have much heart in\". Burke wrote to Henry Dundas on 7 October urging him to send reinforcements there as he viewed it as the only theatre in the war that might lead to a march on Paris, but Dundas did not follow Burke's advice.\nBurke believed the British government was not taking the uprising seriously enough, a view reinforced by a letter he had received from the Prince Charles of France (\"S.A.R. le comte d'Artois\"), dated 23 October, requesting that he intercede on behalf of the royalists to the government. Burke was forced to reply on 6 November: \"I am not in His Majesty's Service; or at all consulted in his Affairs\". Burke published his \"Remarks on the Policy of the Allies with Respect to France\", begun in October, where he said: \"I am sure every thing has shewn us that in this war with France, one Frenchman is worth twenty foreigners. La Vend\u00e9e is a proof of this\".\nOn 20 June 1794, Burke received a vote of thanks from the House of Commons for his services in the Hastings Trial and he immediately resigned his seat, being replaced by his son Richard. A tragic blow fell upon Burke with the loss of Richard in August 1794, to whom he was tenderly attached and in whom he saw signs of promise which were not patent to others and which in fact appear to have been non-existent, although this view may have rather reflected the fact that his son Richard had worked successfully in the early battle for Catholic emancipation. King George III, whose favour he had gained by his attitude on the French Revolution, wished to create him Earl of Beaconsfield, but the death of his son deprived the opportunity of such an honour and all its attractions, so the only award he would accept was a pension of \u00a32,500. Even this modest reward was attacked by the Duke of Bedford and the Earl of Lauderdale, to whom Burke replied in his \"Letter to a Noble Lord\" (1796): \"It cannot at this time be too often repeated; line upon line; precept upon precept; until it comes into the currency of a proverb, \"To innovate is not to reform\"\". He argued that he was rewarded on merit, but the Duke of Bedford received his rewards from inheritance alone, his ancestor being the original pensioner: \"Mine was from a mild and benevolent sovereign; his from Henry the Eighth\". Burke also hinted at what would happen to such people if their revolutionary ideas were implemented and included a description of the British Constitution:\nBut as to \"our\" country and \"our\" race, as long as the well compacted structure of our church and state, the sanctuary, the holy of holies of that ancient law, defended by reverence, defended by power, a fortress at once and a temple, shall stand inviolate on the brow of the British Sion\u2014as long as the British Monarchy, not more limited than fenced by the orders of the State, shall, like the proud Keep of Windsor, rising in the majesty of proportion, and girt with the double belt of its kindred and coeval towers, as long as this awful structure shall oversee and guard the subjected land\u2014so long as the mounds and dykes of the low, fat, Bedford level will have nothing to fear from all the pickaxes of all the levellers of France.\nBurke's last publications were the \"Letters on a Regicide Peace\" (October 1796), called forth by negotiations for peace with France by the Pitt government. Burke regarded this as appeasement, injurious to national dignity and honour. In his \"Second Letter\", Burke wrote of the French Revolutionary government: \"Individuality is left out of their scheme of government. The State is all in all. Everything is referred to the production of force; afterwards, everything is trusted to the use of it. It is military in its principle, in its maxims, in its spirit, and in all its movements. The State has dominion and conquest for its sole objects\u2014dominion over minds by proselytism, over bodies by arms\".\nThis is held to be the first explanation of the modern concept of totalitarian state. Burke regarded the war with France as ideological, against an \"armed doctrine\". He wished that France would not be partitioned due to the effect this would have on the balance of power in Europe and that the war was not against France, but against the revolutionaries governing her. Burke said: \"It is not France extending a foreign empire over other nations: it is a sect aiming at universal empire, and beginning with the conquest of France\".\nLater life.\nIn November 1795, there was a debate in Parliament on the high price of corn and Burke wrote a memorandum to Pitt on the subject. In December, Samuel Whitbread MP introduced a bill giving magistrates the power to fix minimum wages and Fox said he would vote for it. This debate probably led Burke to editing his memorandum as there appeared a notice that Burke would soon publish a letter on the subject to the Secretary of the Board of Agriculture Arthur Young, but he failed to complete it. These fragments were inserted into the memorandum after his death and published posthumously in 1800 as \"Thoughts and Details on Scarcity\". In it, Burke expounded \"some of the doctrines of political economists bearing upon agriculture as a trade\". Burke criticised policies such as maximum prices and state regulation of wages and set out what the limits of government should be:\nThat the State ought to confine itself to what regards the State, or the creatures of the State, namely, the exterior establishment of its religion; its magistracy; its revenue; its military force by sea and land; the corporations that owe their existence to its fiat; in a word, to every thing that is \"truly and properly\" public, to the public peace, to the public safety, to the public order, to the public prosperity.\nThe economist Adam Smith remarked that Burke was \"the only man I ever knew who thinks on economic subjects exactly as I do, without any previous communications having passed between us\".\nWriting to a friend in May 1795, Burke surveyed the causes of discontent: \"I think I can hardly overrate the malignity of the principles of Protestant ascendency, as they affect Ireland; or of Indianism [i.e. corporate tyranny, as practiced by the British East Indies Company], as they affect these countries, and as they affect Asia; or of Jacobinism, as they affect all Europe, and the state of human society itself. The last is the greatest evil\". By March 1796, Burke had changed his mind: \"Our Government and our Laws are beset by two different Enemies, which are sapping its foundations, Indianism, and Jacobinism. In some Cases they act separately, in some they act in conjunction: But of this I am sure; that the first is the worst by far, and the hardest to deal with; and for this amongst other reasons, that it weakens discredits, and ruins that force, which ought to be employed with the greatest Credit and Energy against the other; and that it furnishes Jacobinism with its strongest arms against all \"formal\" Government\".\nFor more than a year prior to his death, Burke knew that his stomach was \"irrecoverably ruind\". After hearing that Burke was nearing death, Fox wrote to Mrs. Burke enquiring after him. Fox received the reply the next day:\nMrs. Burke presents her compliments to Mr. Fox, and thanks him for his obliging inquiries. Mrs. Burke communicated his letter to Mr. Burke, and by his desire has to inform Mr. Fox that it has cost Mr. Burke the most heart-felt pain to obey the stern voice of his duty in rending asunder a long friendship, but that he deemed this sacrifice necessary; that his principles continue the same; and that in whatever of life may yet remain to him, he conceives that he must live for others and not for himself. Mr. Burke is convinced that the principles which he has endeavoured to maintain are necessary to the welfare and dignity of his country, and that these principles can be enforced only by the general persuasion of his sincerity.\nBurke died in Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, on 9 July 1797 and was buried there alongside his son and brother.\nLegacy.\nBurke is regarded by most political historians in the English-speaking world as a liberal conservative and the father of modern British conservatism. Burke was utilitarian and empirical in his arguments while Joseph de Maistre, a fellow conservative from the Continent, was more providentialist and sociological and deployed a more confrontational tone in his arguments.\nBurke believed that property was essential to human life. Because of his conviction that people desire to be ruled and controlled, the division of property formed the basis for social structure, helping develop control within a property-based hierarchy. He viewed the social changes brought on by property as the natural order of events which should be taking place as the human race progressed. With the division of property and the class system, he also believed that it kept the monarch in check to the needs of the classes beneath the monarch. Since property largely aligned or defined divisions of social class, class too was seen as natural\u2014part of a social agreement that the setting of persons into different classes, is the mutual benefit of all subjects. Concern for property is not Burke's only influence. Christopher Hitchens summarises as follows: \"If modern conservatism can be held to derive from Burke, it is not just because he appealed to property owners in behalf of stability but also because he appealed to an everyday interest in the preservation of the ancestral and the immemorial\".\nBurke's support for the causes of the \"oppressed majorities\", such as Irish Catholics and Indians, led him to be at the receiving end of hostile criticism from Tories; while his opposition to the spread of the French Republic (and it's radical ideals) across Europe led to similar charges from Whigs. As a consequence, Burke often became isolated in Parliament.\nIn the 19th century, Burke was praised by both liberals and conservatives. Burke's friend Philip Francis wrote that Burke \"was a man who truly &amp; prophetically foresaw all the consequences which would rise from the adoption of the French principles\", but because Burke wrote with so much passion, people were doubtful of his arguments. William Windham spoke from the same bench in the House of Commons as Burke had when he had separated from Fox and an observer said Windham spoke \"like the ghost of Burke\" when he made a speech against peace with France in 1801. William Hazlitt, a political opponent of Burke, regarded him as amongst his three favourite writers (the others being Junius and Rousseau) and made it \"a test of the sense and candour of any one belonging to the opposite party, whether he allowed Burke to be a great man\". William Wordsworth was originally a supporter of the French Revolution and attacked Burke in \"A Letter to the Bishop of Llandaff\" (1793), but by the early 19th century he had changed his mind and came to admire Burke. In his \"Two Addresses to the Freeholders of Westmorland\", Wordsworth called Burke \"the most sagacious Politician of his age\", whose predictions \"time has verified\". He later revised his poem \"The Prelude\" to include praise of Burke (\"Genius of Burke! forgive the pen seduced/By specious wonders\") and portrayed him as an old oak. Samuel Taylor Coleridge came to have a similar conversion as he had criticised Burke in \"The Watchman\", but in his \"Friend\" (1809\u20131810) had defended Burke from charges of inconsistency. Later in his \"Biographia Literaria\" (1817), Coleridge hails Burke as a prophet and praises Burke for referring \"habitually to \"principles\". He was a \"scientific\" statesman; and therefore a \"seer\"\". Henry Brougham wrote of Burke that \"all his predictions, save one momentary expression, had been more than fulfilled: anarchy and bloodshed had borne sway in France; conquest and convulsion had desolated Europe. [\u2026] [T]he providence of mortals is not often able to penetrate so far as this into futurity\". George Canning believed that Burke's \"Reflections\" \"has been justified by the course of subsequent events; and almost every prophecy has been strictly fulfilled\". In 1823, Canning wrote that he took Burke's \"last works and words [as] the manual of my politics\". The Conservative Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli \"was deeply penetrated with the spirit and sentiment of Burke's later writings\".\nThe 19th-century Liberal Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone considered Burke \"a magazine of wisdom on Ireland and America\" and in his diary recorded: \"Made many extracts from Burke\u2014\"sometimes almost divine\"\". The Radical MP and anti-Corn Law activist Richard Cobden often praised Burke's \"Thoughts and Details on Scarcity\". The Liberal historian Lord Acton considered Burke one of the three greatest Liberals, along with Gladstone and Thomas Babington Macaulay. Lord Macaulay recorded in his diary: \"I have now finished reading again most of Burke's works. Admirable! The greatest man since Milton\". The Gladstonian Liberal MP John Morley published two books on Burke (including a biography) and was influenced by Burke, including his views on prejudice. The Cobdenite Radical Francis Hirst thought Burke deserved \"a place among English libertarians, even though of all lovers of liberty and of all reformers he was the most conservative, the least abstract, always anxious to preserve and renovate rather than to innovate. In politics he resembled the modern architect who would restore an old house instead of pulling it down to construct a new one on the site\". Burke's \"Reflections on the Revolution in France\" was controversial at the time of its publication, but after his death it was to become his best known and most influential work and a manifesto for Conservative thinking.\nTwo contrasting assessments of Burke also were offered long after his death by Karl Marx and Winston Churchill. In \"Das Kapital\", Marx wrote:\nThe sycophant\u2014who in the pay of the English oligarchy played the romantic \"laudator temporis acti\" against the French Revolution just as, in the pay of the North American colonies at the beginning of the American troubles, he had played the liberal against the English oligarchy\u2014was an out-and-out vulgar bourgeois. \"The laws of commerce are the laws of Nature, and therefore the laws of God.\" (E. Burke, l.c., pp. 31, 32) No wonder that, true to the laws of God and Nature, he always sold himself in the best market.\nIn \"Consistency in Politics\", Churchill wrote:\nOn the one hand [Burke] is revealed as a foremost apostle of Liberty, on the other as the redoubtable champion of Authority. But a charge of political inconsistency applied to this life appears a mean and petty thing. History easily discerns the reasons and forces which actuated him, and the immense changes in the problems he was facing which evoked from the same profound mind and sincere spirit these entirely contrary manifestations. His soul revolted against tyranny, whether it appeared in the aspect of a domineering Monarch and a corrupt Court and Parliamentary system, or whether, mouthing the watch-words of a non-existent liberty, it towered up against him in the dictation of a brutal mob and wicked sect. No one can read the Burke of Liberty and the Burke of Authority without feeling that here was the same man pursuing the same ends, seeking the same ideals of society and Government, and defending them from assaults, now from one extreme, now from the other.\nThe historian Piers Brendon asserts that Burke laid the moral foundations for the British Empire, epitomised in the trial of Warren Hastings, that was ultimately to be its undoing. When Burke stated that \"[t]he British Empire must be governed on a plan of freedom, for it will be governed by no other\", this was \"an ideological bacillus that would prove fatal. This was Edmund Burke's paternalistic doctrine that colonial government was a trust. It was to be so exercised for the benefit of subject people that they would eventually attain their birthright\u2014freedom\". As a consequence of these opinions, Burke objected to the opium trade which he called a \"smuggling adventure\" and condemned \"the great Disgrace of the British character in India\".\nA Royal Society of Arts blue plaque commemorates Burke at 37 Gerrard Street now in London's Chinatown.\nStatues of Burke are in Bristol, England, Trinity College Dublin and Washington, D.C. Burke is also the namesake of a private college preparatory school in Washington, Edmund Burke School.\nCriticism.\nOne of Burke's largest and most developed critics was the American political theorist Leo Strauss. In his book \"Natural Right and History\", Strauss makes a series of points in which he somewhat harshly evaluates Burke's writings.\nOne of the topics that he first addresses is the fact that Burke creates a definitive separation between happiness and virtue and explains that \"Burke, therefore, seeks the foundation of government 'in a conformity to our duties' and not in 'imaginary rights of man\" Strauss views Burke as believing that government should focus solely on the duties that a man should have in society as opposed to trying to address any additional needs or desires. Government is simply a practicality to Burke and not necessarily meant to function as a tool to help individuals live their best lives. Strauss also argues that in a sense Burke's theory could be seen as opposing the very idea of forming such philosophies. Burke expresses the view that theory cannot adequately predict future occurrences and therefore men need to have instincts that cannot be practised or derived from ideology.\nThis leads to an overarching criticism that Strauss holds regarding Burke which is his rejection of the use of logic. Burke dismisses a widely held view amongst theorists that reason should be the primary tool in the forming of a constitution or contract. Burke instead believes that constitutions should be made based on natural processes as opposed to rational planning for the future. However, Strauss points out that criticising rationality actually works against Burke's original stance of returning to traditional ways because some amount human reason is inherent and therefore is in part grounded in tradition. In regards to this formation of legitimate social order, Strauss does not necessarily support Burke's opinion\u2014that order cannot be established by individual wise people, but exclusively by a culmination of individuals with historical knowledge of past functions to use as a foundation. Strauss notes that Burke would oppose more newly formed republics due to this thought, although Lenzner adds the fact that he did seem to believe that America's constitution could be justified given the specific circumstances. On the other hand, France's constitution was much too radical as it relied too heavily on enlightened reasoning as opposed to traditional methods and values.\nReligious thought.\nBurke's religious writing comprises published works and commentary on the subject of religion. Burke's religious thought was grounded in the belief that religion is the foundation of civil society. He sharply criticised deism and atheism and emphasised Christianity as a vehicle of social progress. Born in Ireland to a Catholic mother and a Protestant father, Burke vigorously defended the Anglican Church, but he also demonstrated sensitivity to Catholic concerns. He linked the conservation of a state-established religion with the preservation of citizens' constitutional liberties and highlighted Christianity's benefit not only to the believer's soul, but also to political arrangements.\nFalse quotations.\n\"When good men do nothing\".\nThe statement that \"The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing\" is often attributed to Burke despite the debated origin of this quote. In 1770, it is known that Burke wrote in \"Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discontents\":\nIn 1867, John Stuart Mill made a similar statement in an inaugural address delivered before the University of St. Andrews:"}
{"id": "10033", "revid": "34452882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10033", "title": "Early music", "text": "Early music generally comprises Medieval music (500\u20131400) and Renaissance music (1400\u20131600), but can also include Baroque music (1600\u20131750). Early music is a broad musical era for the beginning of Western classical music.\nTerminology.\nInterpretations of historical scope of \"early music\" vary. The original Academy of Ancient Music formed in 1726 defined \"Ancient\" music as works written by composers who lived before the end of the 16th century. Johannes Brahms and his contemporaries would have understood Early music to range from the High Renaissance and Baroque, while some scholars consider that Early music should include the music of ancient Greece or Rome before 500 AD (a period that is generally covered by the term Ancient music). Music critic Michael Kennedy excludes Baroque, defining Early music as \"musical compositions from [the] earliest times up to and including music of [the] Renaissance period\".\nMusicologist Thomas Forrest Kelly considers that the essence of Early music is the revival of \"forgotten\" musical repertoire and that the term is intertwined with the rediscovery of old performance practice. According to the UK's National Centre for Early Music, the term \"early music\" refers to both a repertory (European music written between 1250 and 1750 embracing Medieval, Renaissance and the Baroque) \u2013 and a historically informed approach to the performance of that music. \nToday, the understanding of \"Early music\" has come to include \"any music for which a historically appropriate style of performance must be reconstructed on the basis of surviving scores, treatises, instruments and other contemporary evidence.\"\nRevival.\nIn the later 20th century there was a resurgence of interest in the performance of music from the Medieval and Renaissance eras, and a number of instrumental consorts and choral ensembles specialising in Early music repertoire were formed. Groups such as the Tallis Scholars, the Early Music Consort and the Taverner Consort and Players have been influential in bringing Early music to modern audiences through performances and popular recordings.\nPerformance practice.\nThe revival of interest in Early music has given rise to a scholarly approach to the performance of music. Through academic musicological research of music treatises, urtext editions of musical scores and other historical evidence, performers attempt to be faithful to the performance style of the musical era in which a work was originally conceived. Additionally, there has been a rise in the use of original or reproduction period instruments as part of the performance of Early music, such as the revival of the harpsichord or the viol.\nThe practice of \"historically informed performance\" is nevertheless dependent on stylistic inference. According to Margaret Bent, Renaissance notation is not as prescriptive as modern scoring, and there is much that was left to the performer's interpretation: \"Renaissance notation is under-prescriptive by our standards; when translated into modern form it acquires a prescriptive weight that overspecifies and distorts its original openness. Accidentals \u2026 may or may not have been notated, but what modern notation requires would then have been perfectly apparent without notation to a singer versed in counterpoint\"."}
{"id": "10035", "revid": "861759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10035", "title": "Elfenland", "text": "Elfenland is a German-style board game designed by Alan R. Moon and published by Amigo Spiele in German and Rio Grande Games in English in 1998.\nIt is originally based on his earlier game \"Elfenroads\" (published by White Wind), but since \"Elfenroads\" took about four hours for a game, the play was simplified to reduce the time closer to an hour, making it appeal more as a family game.\nIt won the Spiel des Jahres award in 1998 and won the third place Deutscher Spiele Preis award in 1998.\nGameplay.\nThe game is played by 2\u20136 players, with 4\u20135 making for the best game. \nEach player tries to reach as many cities as possible and then return to his \"home city.\" \nHome cities are drawn at the beginning of the game from a pack of city cards and they remain hidden throughout the game.\nThe game is thus reminiscent of the traveling salesman problem.\nPlayers move using transportation cards. \nElves can travel on a wide variety of vehicles including troll wagons, elf cycles, rafts, giant pigs, unicorns, dragons and magic clouds. \nDifferent types of transportation will travel better over different terrain, and some methods of transport cannot cross certain terrains at all. \nThere is only one problem: you cannot travel over a route (except water) unless there is a tile on that road, and only the type of transport shown on the tile can be used to move along that road. Before anyone can move, tiles are drawn and laid out across the board. This part is the one that calls for the most strategy, as players try to line up their tiles to set up a nice route for themselves and a difficult one for their opponents at the same time.\nAs well as normal tiles, each player receives one trouble tile for use during the game.\nThese hinder other players by forcing them to use an extra transportation card at that point. \nAlso, any player can simply use any three cards to pass over any route that has a tile already there, allowing the type of transport shown on the tile to be ignored.\nThe game has subtle strategies to make others navigate through the cities. \nWhen a player puts a transportation type you don't want in your path then you have to find a way around it. \nAll of the aspects of the game make for a very exciting race to visit the most cities while never quite being sure who is winning until the last round.\nExpansion.\nThere was an expansion for \"Elfenland\" published, called \"Elfengold\". \nNote that this is different from the original \"Elfengold\" published by White Wind. \nThe expansion, however, is hard to find."}
{"id": "10037", "revid": "24323093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10037", "title": "Euroscepticism", "text": "Euroscepticism, also known as EU-scepticism, means criticism of the European Union (EU) and European integration. It ranges from those who oppose some EU institutions and policies and seek reform (Eurorealism, Eurocritical or soft Euroscepticism), to those who oppose EU membership outright and see the EU as unreformable (hard Euroscepticism or anti-European Unionism/anti-EUism). The opposite of Euroscepticism is known as pro-Europeanism, or European Unionism.\nThe main sources of Euroscepticism have been beliefs that integration undermines national sovereignty and the nation state, that the EU is elitist and lacks democratic legitimacy and transparency, that it is too bureaucratic and wasteful, that it encourages high levels of migration, or perceptions that it is a neoliberal organisation serving the business elite at the expense of the working class, responsible for austerity and driving privatization.\nEuroscepticism is found in groups across the political spectrum, both left-wing and right-wing and is often found in populist parties. Although they criticise the EU for many of the same reasons, Eurosceptic left-wing populists focus more on economic issues (such as the European debt crisis and TTIP) while Eurosceptic right-wing populists focus more on nationalism and immigration (such as the European migrant crisis). The rise in radical right-wing parties since the 2000s is strongly linked to a rise in Euroscepticism.\nEurobarometer surveys of EU citizens show that trust in the EU and its institutions has declined strongly since a peak in 2007. Since then, it has been consistently below 50%. A 2009 survey showed that support for EU membership was lowest in the United Kingdom (UK), Latvia and Hungary. By 2016, the countries viewing the EU most unfavourably were the UK, Greece, France and Spain. A referendum on continued EU membership was held in the UK in 2016 which resulted in a 51.9% vote in favour of leaving the EU. The UK officially left the EU on 31 January 2020. Since 2015, trust in the EU has risen slightly in most EU countries as a result of falling unemployment rates and accelerating economic growth.\nPost 2019 election survey \"Eurobarometer\" report showed that 68% citizens support the European Union, the highest level since 1983; at the same time sentiment among Europeans that things are not going in the right direction in both the EU and in their own countries had increased to 50%.\nReasoning.\nThe main reasons for Euroscepticism include beliefs that:\nTerminology.\nThere can be considered to be several different types of Eurosceptic thought, which differ in the extent to which adherents reject integration between member states of the European Union (EU) and in their reasons for doing so. Aleks Szczerbiak and Paul Taggart described two of these as hard and soft Euroscepticism.\nAt the same time, some have said that there is no clear line between the presumed 'hard' and 'soft' Euroscepticism. Kopecky and Mudde have said that if the demarcation line is the number of and which policies a party opposes, then the question arises of how many must a party oppose and which ones should a party oppose that makes them 'hard' Eurosceptic instead of 'soft'.\nHard Euroscepticism.\nAccording to Taggart and Szczerbiak, hard Euroscepticism (also called anti-EU-ism) is \"a principled opposition to the EU and European integration and therefore can be seen in parties who think that their countries should withdraw from membership, or whose policies towards the EU are tantamount to being opposed to the whole project of European integration as it is currently conceived.\"\nThe Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy group in the European Parliament, typified by such parties as the Brexit Party and UK Independence Party (UKIP), displays hard Euroscepticism. In western European EU member countries, hard Euroscepticism is currently a characteristic of many anti-establishment parties.\nSome hard Eurosceptics prefer to call themselves \"Eurorealists\" rather than \"sceptics\", and regard their position as pragmatic rather than \u2018in principle\u2019. Additionally, Tony Benn, a left-wing Labour Party MP who fought against European integration in 1975 by opposing membership of the European Communities in that year's referendum on the issue, emphasised his opposition to xenophobia and his support of democracy, saying: \"My view about the European Union has always been not that I am hostile to foreigners, but that I am in favour of democracy [...] I think they're building an empire there, they want us to be a part of their empire and I don't want that.\"\nThe Czech president V\u00e1clav Klaus rejected the term \u2019Euroscepticism\u2019 for its purported negative undertones, saying (at a meeting in April 2012) that the expressions for a Eurosceptic and their opponent should be \"a Euro-realist\" and someone who is \"Euro-na\u00efve\", respectively.\nFran\u00e7ois Asselineau of the French Popular Republican Union has criticised the use of the term 'sceptic' to describe hard Eurosceptics, and would rather advocate the use of the term \"Euro opponent\". He believes the use of the term 'sceptic' for soft Eurosceptics to be correct, since other Eurosceptic parties in France are \"merely criticising\" the EU without taking into account the fact that the Treaty of Rome can only be modified with a unanimous agreement of all the EU member states, something he considers impossible to achieve.\nSoft Euroscepticism.\nSoft Euroscepticism is support for the existence of, and membership of, a form of European Union, but with opposition to specific EU policies; or, in Taggart's and Szczerbiak's words, \"where there is NOT a principled objection to European integration or EU membership but where concerns on one (or a number) of policy areas lead to the expression of qualified opposition to the EU, or where there is a sense that 'national interest' is currently at odds with the EU's trajectory.\" The European Conservatives and Reformists group, typified by centre-right parties such as Czech Civic Democratic Party, along with the European United Left\u2013Nordic Green Left which is an alliance of the left-wing parties in the European Parliament, display soft Euroscepticism.\nAnti-Europeanism.\nWhile having some overlaps, Euroscepticism and anti-Europeanism are different. Euroscepticism is criticism of the European Union (EU) and European integration. Anti-Europeanism is sentiment or policies in opposition to Europe. For example, American exceptionalism in the United States has long led to criticism of European domestic policy (such as the size of the welfare state in European countries) and foreign policy (such as European countries that did not support the US led 2003 invasion of Iraq).\nOther terms.\nSome scholars consider the gradual difference in terminology between 'hard' and 'soft' Euroscepticism inadequate to accommodate the large differences in terms of political agenda. Therefore, \"hard Euroscepticism\" has also been referred to as \"Europhobia\" as opposed to mere \"Euroscepticism\". Other alternative names for 'hard' and 'soft' Euroscepticism include, respectively, \"withdrawalist\" and \"reformist\" Euroscepticism.\nEurobarometer surveys.\nA survey in , conducted by TNS Opinion and Social on behalf of the European Commission, showed that, across the EU as a whole, those with a positive image of the EU were down from a high of 52% in 2007 to 37% in autumn 2015; this compares with 23% with a negative image of the EU, and 38% with a neutral image.\nAbout 43% of Europeans thought things were \"going in the wrong direction\" in the EU, compared with 23% who thought things were going \"in the right direction\" (11% \"don't know\").\nAbout 32% of EU citizens tend to trust the EU as an institution, and about 55% do not tend to trust it (13% \"don't know\"). Distrust of the EU was highest in Greece (81%), Cyprus (72%), Austria (65%), France (65%), the United Kingdom (UK) and the Czech Republic (both 63%). Overall, more respondents distrusted their own government (66%) than they distrusted the EU (55%). Distrust of national government was highest in Greece (82%), Slovenia (80%), Portugal (79%), Cyprus (76%) and France (76%).\nA Eurobarometer survey carried out four days prior to and six days after the U.S. presidential election in November 2016 revealed that the surprise victory of Donald Trump caused an increase in the popularity of the European Union in Europe. The increase was strongest among the political right and among respondents who perceived their country as economically struggling.\nA survey carried out in April 2018 for the European Parliament by Kantar Public consulting found that support for the EU was \"the highest score ever measured since 1983\". Support for the EU was up in 26 out of 28 EU countries, the exceptions being Germany and the UK, where support had dropped by about 2% since the previous survey. Almost half (48%) of the 27,601 EU citizens surveyed agreed that their voice counted in the EU, up from 37% in 2016, whereas 46% disagreed with this statement. Two-thirds (67%) of respondents felt that their country had benefited from EU membership and 60% said that being part of the bloc was a good thing, as opposed to 12% who felt the opposite. At the height of the EU's financial and economic crises in 2011, just 47% had been of the view that EU membership was a good thing. Support for EU membership was greatest in Malta (93%), Ireland (91%), Lithuania (90%), Poland (88%), Luxembourg (88%), Estonia (86%) and Denmark (84%) and lowest in Greece (57%), Bulgaria (57%), Cyprus (56%), Austria (54%), the UK (53%) and Italy (44%).\nWhen asked which issues should be a priority for the European Parliament, survey respondents picked terrorism as the most pressing topic of discussion, ahead of youth unemployment and immigration. Not all countries shared the same priorities. Immigration topped the list in Italy (66% of citizens surveyed considered it a priority issue), Malta (65%) and Hungary (62%) but fighting youth unemployment and support for economic growth were top concerns in Spain, Greece, Portugal, Cyprus and Croatia. Social protection of citizens was the top concern for Dutch, Swedish and Danish respondents.\nThe April 2019 Eurobarometer showed that despite the challenges of the past years \u2013 and in cases such as the ongoing debate surrounding Brexit, possibly even because of it \u2013 the European sense of togetherness had not weakened, with 68% of respondents across the EU27 believing that their countries have benefited from being part of the EU, a historically high level since 1983. On the other hand, more Europeans (27%) were uncertain and saw the EU as \"neither a good thing nor a bad thing\" \u2013 an increase in 19 countries. Despite the overall positive attitude towards the EU, but in line with the uncertainty expressed by a growing number of Europeans, the feeling that things were not going in the right direction in both the EU and in their own countries had increased to 50% on EU average since September 2018.\nHistory in the European Parliament.\n1999\u20132004.\nA study analysed voting records of the Fifth European Parliament and ranked groups, concluding: \"Towards the top of the figure are the more pro-European parties (PES, EPP-ED, and ALDE), whereas towards the bottom of the figure are the more anti-European parties (EUL/NGL, G/EFA, UEN and EDD).\"\n2004\u20132009.\nIn 2004, 37 Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) from the UK, Poland, Denmark and Sweden founded a new European Parliament group called \"Independence and Democracy\" from the old Europe of Democracies and Diversities (EDD) group.\nThe main goal of the ID group was to reject the proposed Treaty establishing a constitution for Europe. Some delegations within the group, notably that from UKIP, also advocated the complete withdrawal of their country from the EU, while others only wished to limit further European integration.\n2009 elections.\nThe elections of 2009 saw a significant fall in support in some areas for Eurosceptic parties, with all such MEPs from Poland, Denmark and Sweden losing their seats. In the UK, the Eurosceptic UKIP achieved second place in the election, finishing ahead of the governing Labour Party, and the British National Party (BNP) won its first-ever two MEPs. Although new members joined the ID group from Greece and the Netherlands, it was unclear whether the group would reform in the new parliament.\nThe ID group did reform, as the Europe of Freedom and Democracy (EFD) and is represented by 32 MEPs from nine countries.\n2014 elections.\nThe elections of 2014 saw a big anti-establishment vote in favour of Eurosceptic parties, which took around a quarter of the seats available. Those that came first their national elections included: UKIP in the UK (the first time since 1906 that a party other than Labour or the Conservatives had won a national vote), the National Front in France, the People's Party in Denmark and Syriza in Greece. Second places were taken by Sinn F\u00e9in in Ireland and the Five Star Movement in Italy. Herman Van Rompuy, the President of the European Council, agreed following the election to re-evaluate the economic area's agenda and to launch consultations on future policy areas with the 28 member states.\n2019 elections.\nThe elections of 2019 saw the centre-left and centre-right parties suffer significant losses including losing their overall majority, while green, pro-EU liberal, and some Eurosceptic right wing parties saw significant gains. Those that came first in their national elections included: the Brexit Party in the UK (which was only launched on 12 April 2019 by former UKIP leader Nigel Farage), the National Rally of France (formerly the National Front party until June 2018), Fidesz in Hungary, Lega in Italy, and Law and Justice in Poland. There were also notable falls in support for the Danish People's Party (previously topped the 2014 European election). Whilst Vox got elected with 3 seats, Spain's first Eurosceptic party and Belgium's Vlaams Belang rallied to gain second place after its poor 2014 result.\nIn EU member states.\nAustria.\nThe Freiheitliche Partei \u00d6sterreichs (FP\u00d6), established in 1956, is a right-wing populist party that mainly attracts support from young people and workers. In 1989, it changed its stance over the EU to Euroscepticism. It opposed Austria joining the EU in 1994, and opposed the introduction of the euro in 1998. The party would like to leave the EU if it threatens to develop into a country, or if Turkey joins. The FP\u00d6 received 20\u201327% of the national vote in the 1990s, and more recently received 17.5% in 2008. Following the 2017 Austrian legislative election, it has 51/183 National Council seats, 16/62 Federal Council seats, and 4/19 European Parliament seats.\nThe B\u00fcndnis Zukunft \u00d6sterreich (BZ\u00d6), established in 2005, is a socially conservative party that has always held Eurosceptic elements. In 2011 the party openly supported leaving the eurozone, and in 2012 it announced that it supported a full withdrawal from the European Union. The party has also called upon a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty. In polls it currently receives around 10%\u201315%, although in one state it did receive 45% of the vote in 2009. Since the 2017 election, it has 0/183 National Council seats, 0/62 Federal Council seats, and 0/19 European Parliament seats.\nTeam Stronach, established in 2012, has campaigned to reform the European Union, as well as to replace the euro with an Austrian Euro. In 2012, it regularly received 8\u201310% support in national polls. Politicians from many different parties (including the Social Democratic Party and the BZ\u00d6) as well as previous independents switched their allegiances to the new party upon creation. In two local elections in March 2013, it won 11% of the vote in Carinthia, and 10% of the vote in Lower Austria. It dissolved in 2017\nEwald Stadler, a former member of FP\u00d6 (and later of BZ\u00d6) was very Eurosceptic, but in 2011 became a member of the European Parliament due to the Lisbon Treaty. Before Stadler accepted the seat, this led to heavy critics by J\u00f6rg Leichtfried (SP\u00d6) \"Stadler wants to just rescue his political career\" because Stadler before mentioned he would never accept a seat as MEP if this was only due to the Lisbon Treaty. On 23 December 2013 he founded a conservative and Eurosceptic party called The Reform Conservatives, although it has been inactive since June 2016.\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election, the FP\u00d6 increased its vote to 19.72% (up 7.01%), gaining 2 new MEPs, making a total of 4; the party came third, behind the \u00d6VP and the SP\u00d6. EU-STOP (the electoral alliance of the EU Withdrawal Party and the Neutral Free Austria Federation) polled 2.76%, gaining no seats, and the Reform Conservatives 1.18%, with Team Stronach putting up no candidates.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the FP\u00d6 came 3rd with 17.2% of the vote which was only slightly down on 2014 despite a scandal allegedly promising public contracts to a woman posing as a Russian backer. This precipitated the collapse of the ruling coalition and a new election being called.\nBelgium.\nAccording to Eurostat, in the fall of 2018, 44% of Belgium people stated that they did not trust the European Union. The main Eurosceptic party in Belgium is Vlaams Belang which is active in the Dutch-speaking part of Belgium. In the 2014 European Parliament election, Belgium's Vlaams Belang lost over half of its previous vote share, polling 4.26% (down 5.59%) and losing 1 of its 2 members of the European Parliament.\nDespite the presence of Eurosceptic parties in Belgium, their weight is relatively low, as Belgium is predominantly Europeanist.\nIn 2019, Belgium's Vlaams Belang stated in its program for the European election that it opposes the creation of a European State, would like to change the Economic and monetary union, and to end the Schengen Area, and refuses the accession of Turkey to the European Union. More widely, the euro-sceptic arguments of the Vlaams Belang are based on four pillars:\nDuring the 2019 European election and the 2019 Belgian Federal Election \"Vlaams Belang\" made substantial gains in both and polled in second place in Flemish region. At the beginning of 2019 the Party was enrolled in the group of European Alliance of People and Nations in the European Parliament.\nThe New Flemish Alliance (N-VA) is a soft euro-sceptic party in the Dutch-speaking region of Belgium. Before 2010, the N-VA was pro-European and supported the idea of a democratic European confederation, but has since altered this policy to a more sceptical stance on further European integration and now calls for more democratic transparency within the EU, changes to the EU's common asylum policy and economic reforms to the Eurozone. The N-VA has obtained 26.83% of the votes or 4 seats of the Dutch-language college out of 12 (21 MEPs for Belgium) in the 2014 European Parliament election. In April 2019 it stood in European Conservatives and Reformists of the European Parliament, and can be considered a moderate Eurosceptic party.\nIn the French-speaking part of Belgium there are four Eurosceptic parties. The first one is Nation Movement, a far-right party which was a member of the Alliance for Peace and Freedom in the European Parliament.\nThe second one is National Front, also a far right party which criticizes the European bureaucracy, intends to guarantee and preserve national independence and freedom in a liberated Europe; it also reaffirms the Christian roots of Europe.\nThe third one is the People's Party, classified as right or extreme right. In its program for the European election of 2019 the People's Party proposes to abolish the European Commission, reduce the number of European parliamentarians and fight against the worker-posted directive. For this party, European Union must be led by a president elected by universal suffrage with clear but limited competences. It also wants to renegotiate the European Union treaties, restrict the judicial activism of the European Court of Human Rights. It declares itself against the Global Compact for Migration.\nThe last one is the . In early 2019, the Party aims to reduce the powers of the European Commission, to abolish the Common Agricultural Policy, to abandon common defense projects, to simplify the exit procedure of the European Union, to reject federalism and to forbid the European Union to direct economic, fiscal or social policy,\nFinally, the Worker's Party of Belgium is an electoral and unitary party. It also intends to revise the European treaties considered too liberal. One of the Party's currencies is \"The left that stings, against the Europe of money\".\nBulgaria.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views are Union of Communists in Bulgaria, NFSB, Attack, and VMRO \u2013 BND, which is a member of the Eurosceptic European Conservatives and Reformists).\nBulgaria's Minister of Finance, Simeon Djankov, stated in 2011 that ERM II membership to enter the Euro zone would be postponed until after the Eurozone crisis had stabilised.\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election Bulgaria remained overwhelmingly pro-EU, with the Eurosceptic Attack party receiving 2.96% of the vote, down 9%, with the splinter group National Front for the Salvation of Bulgaria taking 3.05%; neither party secured any MEPs. A coalition between VMRO \u2013 BND and Bulgaria Without Cencorship secured an MEP position for Angel Dzhambazki from IMRO, who is a soft Eurosceptic.\nFollowers of Eurosceptic Attack tore down and trampled the European flag on 3 March 2016 at a meeting of the party in the Bulgarian capital Sofia, dedicated to the commemoration of the 138th anniversary of the liberation of Bulgaria from the Ottoman Empire.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, Bulgaria remained overwhelmingly pro-EU with the ruling centre-right Gerb party winning with 30.6%, against 26% for the socialist BSP.\nCroatia.\nParties with Eurosceptic views are mainly small right-wing parties like Croatian Party of Rights, Croatian Party of Rights dr. Ante Star\u010devi\u0107, Croatian Pure Party of Rights, Autochthonous Croatian Party of Rights, Croatian Christian Democratic Party and Only Croatia \u2013 Movement for Croatia.\nThe only parliamentary party that is vocally Eurosceptic is the Human Shield that won 5 out of 151 seats at the 2016 parliamentary election. Their position is generally considered to waver between hard and soft Euroscepticism; it requests thorough reform of the EU so that all member states would be perfectly equal.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the Human Shield gained its first seat in the European Parliament with 5.7% of the vote putting it in 5th place.\nCyprus.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views in Cyprus are New Internationalist Left, the Progressive Party of Working People, Committee for a Radical Left Rally and ELAM.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, there was little change politically - the conservatives won narrowly, the ruling DISY taking two seats with 29%, followed by socialist AKEL (27.5%, two seats) with no seats taken by Eurosceptic parties.\nCzech Republic.\nIn May 2010, the Czech president V\u00e1clav Klaus said that they \"needn't hurry to enter the Eurozone\".\nPetr Mach, an economist, a close associate of president V\u00e1clav Klaus and a member of the Civic Democratic Party between 1997 and 2007, founded the Free Citizens Party in 2009. The party aims to mainly attract dissatisfied Civic Democratic Party voters. At the time of the Lisbon Treaty ratification, they were actively campaigning against it, supported by the president Vaclav Klaus, who demanded opt-outs such as were granted to the United Kingdom and Poland, unlike the governing Civic Democratic Party, who endorsed it in the Chamber of Deputies. After the treaty has been ratified, Mach's party is in favour of withdrawing from the European Union completely. In the 2014 European Parliament election, the Free Citizens Party won one mandate and allied with UKIP in the Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy (EFD).\nThe 2017 Czech legislative election brought into Parliament two soft eurosceptic parties: centre-right Civic Democratic Party (ODS) (11%) and far-left Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia (KS\u010cM) (8%). And one hard eurosceptic party, far-right Freedom and Direct Democracy (SPD) (11%).\nAn April 2016 survey by the CVVM Institute indicated that 25% of Czechs were satisfied with EU membership, down from 32% the previous year.\nDividends worth CZK 270 billion were paid to the foreign owners of Czech companies in 2017, which has become a political issue in the Czech Republic.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the Civic Democratic Party saw its vote share rise to 14.5% and its seats doubled from 2 to 4. The Freedom and Direct Democracy party took 2 seats with 9.14% of the vote. KS\u010cM dropped 2 seats leaving it with only one and a vote share of 6.9%\nDenmark.\nThe People's Movement against the EU only takes part in European Parliament elections and has one member in the European Parliament. The soft Eurosceptic June Movement, originally a split-off from the People's Movement against the EU, existed from 1992 to 2009.\nIn the Danish Parliament, the Red-Green Alliance has withdrawal from the EU as a policy. The Danish People's Party also advocates withdrawal, but says it supports some EU structures such as the internal market, and supported the EU-positive Liberal-Conservative coalition between 2001 and 2011 and again from 2015 to 2019.\nThe Socialist People's Party, minorities within the Social Liberal Party and Social Democratic Party, and some smaller parties were against accession to the European Union in 1972. Still in 1986, these parties advocated a no vote in the Single European Act referendum. Later, the Social Liberal Party changed to a strongly EU-positive party, and EU opposition within the Social Democratic Party faded. The Socialist People's Party were against the Amsterdam Treaty in 1998 and Denmark's joining the euro in 2000, but has become increasingly EU-positive, for example when MEP Margrete Auken left the European United Left\u2013Nordic Green Left and joined The Greens\u2013European Free Alliance in 2004.\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election, the Danish People's Party came first by a large margin with 26.6% of the vote, gaining 2 extra seats for a total of 4 MEPs. The People's Movement against the EU polled 8.1%, retaining its single MEP.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the Danish People's Party lost around two-thirds of their previous vote share dropping from 4 seats to just 1. The People's Movement against the EU lost their seat and the Red-Green Alliance got one seat.\nEstonia.\nThe Independence Party and Centre Party were against accession to the EU, but only the Independence Party still wants Estonia to withdraw from the EU. The Conservative People's Party (EKRE) also has some Eurosceptic policies and increased its vote share from 4% in 2014 to 12.7% in the 2019 European Elections winning one seat.\nFinland.\nThe largest Eurosceptic party in Finland is the Finns Party. In the European Parliament election, 2014, the Finns Party increased their vote share by 3.1% to 12.9%, adding a second MEP. With their 39 seats, the Finns Party are also the second-biggest party in the 200-seat Finnish Eduskunta.\nIn Eurobarometer 77 (fieldwork in Spring 2012), 41% of Finns trusted the European Union (EU-27 average: 31%), 51% trusted The European Parliament (EU-27average: 40%), and 74% were in favour of the euro currency (EU-27 average: 52%).\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the Finns Party increased their vote share slightly from 12.9% to 13.8% and retained their 2 seats.\nFrance.\nIn France there are multiple parties that are Eurosceptic to different degrees, varying from advocating less EU intervention in national affairs, to advocating outright withdrawal from the EU and the Eurozone. These parties belong to all sides of the political spectrum, so the reasons for their Euroscepticism may differ. In the past many French people appeared to be uninterested in such matters, with only 40% of the French electorate voting in the 2009 European Parliament elections.\nRight-wing Eurosceptic parties include the Gaullist \"Debout la R\u00e9publique\", and \"Mouvement pour la France\", which was part of Libertas, a pan-European Eurosceptic party. In the 2009 European Parliament elections, Debout la R\u00e9publique received 1.77% of the national vote, and Libertas 4.8%. In a similar way to some moderate parties, the French right and far-right in general are naturally opposed to the EU, as they criticise France's loss of political and economic sovereignty to a supranational entity. Some of these hard Eurosceptic parties include the Popular Republican Union and the Front National (FN). Front National and Popular Republican Union both seek France's withdrawal from the EU and the euro, although Popular Republican Union also seeks France's withdrawal from NATO. The FN received 33.9% of the votes in the 2017 French presidential election, making it the largest Eurosceptic party in France.\nEurosceptic parties on the left in France tend to criticise what they see as the neoliberal agenda of the EU, as well as the elements of its structure which are undemocatic and seen as top-down. These parties include the \"Parti de Gauche\" and the French Communist Party, which formed the \"Front de Gauche\" for the 2009 European Parliament elections and received 6.3% of the votes. The leader of the Left Front defends a complete reform of the Monetary Union, rather than the withdrawal of France from the Eurozone. Some of the major far-left Eurosceptic parties in France include the New Anticapitalist Party which received 4.8% and Lutte Ouvri\u00e8re which received 1.2%. The Citizen and Republican Movement, a left-wing Eurosceptic and souverainist party, have not participated in any elections for the European Parliament.\nThe party \"Chasse, P\u00eache, Nature &amp; Traditions\", is an agrarianist Eurosceptic party that says it is neither left nor right.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2014, the National Front won the elections with 24.85% of the vote, a swing of 18.55%, winning 24 seats, up from 3 previously. The former French President Fran\u00e7ois Hollande had called for the EU to be reformed and for a scaling back of its power.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the renamed National Rally won the elections with 23.31% of the vote, winning 22 seats, down from 23 previously when their vote share was 24.86%.\nGermany.\nThe Alternative for Germany (AfD) is Germany's largest Eurosceptic party. It was elected into the German Parliament with 94 seats in September 2017. Initially the AfD was a soft Eurosceptic party, that considered itself pro-Europe and pro-EU, but opposed the euro, which it believed had undermined European integration, and called for reforms to the Eurozone.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2014, the Alternative for Germany came 5th with 7% of the vote, winning 7 seats and is a member of the Eurosceptic European Conservatives and Reformists. The Alternative for Germany went on to take seats in three state legislatures in the Autumn of 2014.\nThe party became purely Eurosceptic in 2015, when an internal split occurred, leading to Frauke Petry's leadership and a more hard-line approach to the European Union, including its calling for an end for German Eurozone membership, withdrawal from EU common asylum policies and significantly reducing the power of the EU with some AfD members supporting a complete exit from the EU altogether.\nIn July 2015 an AfD splinter group created a new soft Eurosceptic party called Alliance for Progress and Renewal.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the Alternative for Germany increased their vote share from 7.04% and 7 seats to 10.79% and 11 seats.\nGreece.\nGolden Dawn, Communist Party of Greece (KKE), Greek Solution, ANEL, Course of Freedom, Popular Unity, and LAOS have been the main Eurosceptic parties in Greece. According to the London School of Economics, Greece used to be the second most Eurosceptic country in the European Union, with 50% of Greeks thinking that their country has not benefited at all from the EU (only behind the UK). Meanwhile, 33% of Greeks viewed Greek membership in EU as a good thing, marginally ahead of the UK. 81% of Greeks felt that the EU was going in the wrong direction. These figures represented a major increase in Euroscepticism in Greece since 2009.\nIn June 2012, the Eurosceptic parties in Greece that were represented in the parliament before the Election in January 2015 (ANEL, Golden Dawn, KKE) got 45.8% of the votes and 40.3% of the seats in the parliament. In the legislative election of January 2015 the pro-European (left and right-wing) parties (ND, PASOK, Potami, KIDISO, EK and Prasinoi-DIMAR) got 43.28% of the votes. The Eurosceptic parties got 54.64%. The Eurosceptic left (KKE, ANTARSYA-MARS and KKE (M\u2013L)/M\u2013L KKE) got 42.58% of the votes and the Eurosceptic right (Golden Dawn, ANEL and LAOS) got 12.06% of the votes, with Syriza ahead with 36.34%. The Eurosceptic parties got 194 seats in the new parliament and the pro-EU parties got 106 seats.\nAccording to the polls conducted in June and July 2015 (12 polls), the Eurosceptic left would get on average 48.03% (excluding extraparliamentary parties as ANTARSYA-MARS and KKE (m\u2013l)/ML-KKE), the parliamentary pro-EU parties (Potami, New Democracy and PASOK) would get 33.82%, the extra-parliamentary (not represented in the Hellenic Parliament) pro-EU parties (KIDISO and EK) would get 4.44% and the Eurosceptic right would get 10.2% (excluding extraparliamentary parties, such as LAOS, not displayed on recent opinion polls). The soft Eurosceptic parties would get 42.31%, the hard Eurosceptic parties (including KKE, ANEL and Golden Dawn) would get 15.85%, and the pro-EU parties (including extra-parliamentary parties displayed on opinion polls) would get 38.27% of the votes.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2014, Syriza won the election with 26.58% of the vote (a swing of 21.88%) taking 6 seats (up 5), with Golden Dawn coming 3rd taking 3 seats, the Communist Party taking 2 seats and the Independent Greeks gaining their first ever seat. Syriza's leader Tsipras said he's not anti-European and does not want to leave the euro. According to \"The Economist\", Tsipras is willing to negotiate with Greece's European partners, and it is believed a Syriza victory could encourage radical leftist parties across Europe. Alexis Tsipras vowed to reverse many of the austerity measures adopted by Greece since a series of bailouts began in 2010, at odds with the Eurogroup's positions.\nThe government coalition in Greece was composed by Syriza and ANEL (right-wing hard Eurosceptic party, led by Panos Kammenos, who is the current Minister of Defence).\nEuroscepticism has softened in Greece as the economy improved. According to a research in early 2018, 68% of Greeks judge as positive the participation of Greece in the EU (instead of 53.5% in 2017).\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the New Democracy movement, beat the ruling left-wing Syriza formation with 33.12% and 23.76% of the vote respectively, maintaining Syriza's 6 seats and prompting the Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras to call a legislative election on 7 July 2019. In this election, which was won by ND, the pro-European parties (ND, SYRIZA, KINAL, MeRA25, and the extra-parliamentary Union of Centrists and Recreate Greece) got 84.9% of the vote and the Eurosceptic parties (KKE, Greek Solution, the extraparliamentary Golden Dawn and a host of other small mainly left-wing parties) got 15.1%. That drastic change in the balance is mostly the result of SYRIZA abandoning Euroscepticism.\nHungary.\nViktor Orb\u00e1n is the soft Eurosceptic Prime Minister of Hungary for the national-conservative Fidesz Party. Another Eurosceptic parties have been in Hungary is Jobbik, a radical and far-right party, as well the Our Homeland Movement.\nIn Hungary 39% of the population have a positive image of the EU, 20% have a negative image, and 40% neutral (1% \"Don't know\").\nIn the 2014 Hungarian parliamentary election, Fidesz got 44.54% of the votes, Jobbik got 20.54% of the votes and the communist Hungarian Workers' Party got 0.58% of the votes. Thus, Eurosceptic parties in Hungary obtained 65.66% of the votes, one of the highest figures in Europe.\nThe green-liberal Politics Can Be Different (Lehet M\u00e1s a Politika, LMP) classifies as a soft or reformist Eurosceptic party given its self-professed \"euro-critical\" stance. During the European parliamentary campaign of 2014 party Co-President Andr\u00e1s Schiffer described LMP as having a pronounced pro-integration position on environmental, wage and labour policy as supporting member state autonomy on the self-determination of local communities concerning land resources. So as to combat the differentiated integration of the multi-speed Europe which discriminates against Eastern and Southern member states, LMP would like to initiate an eco-social market economy within the union.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, Fidesz consolidated their position by increasing their vote share to 51.48% and adding a seat to take their tally to 13. Eurosceptic Jobbik dropped to 6.34% of the votes, losing 2 of its 3 seats. The Momentum Movement, a newly created pro-European party, came 3rd with 9.93% of the vote, with the strongly pro-European Democratic Coalition coming second with 16.05% of the vote. Our Homeland Movement got to 3.31% of the votes, gaining no seats.\nIreland.\nEuroscepticism is a minority view in Ireland, with opinion polls from 2016 to 2018 indicating growing support for EU membership, moving from 70% to 92% in that time.\nThe Irish people initially voted against ratifying the Nice and Lisbon Treaties. Following renegotiations, second referendums on both were passed with approximately 2:1 majorities in both cases. Some commentators and smaller political groups questioned the validity of the Irish Government's decision to call second referendums.\nThe left-wing Irish republican party Sinn F\u00e9in expresses soft Eurosceptic positions on the current structure of the European Union and the direction in which it is moving.\nThe party expresses, \"support for Europe-wide measures that promote and enhance human rights, equality and the all-Ireland agenda\", but has a \"principled opposition\" to a European superstate. In its manifesto for the 2015 UK general election, Sinn F\u00e9in pledged that the party would campaign for the UK to stay within the EU. In the last European Parliament election in 2014, Sinn F\u00e9in won 3 seats coming second in seats and third in votes with 19.5% of the vote up 8.3%.\nThe Trotskyist organisation, the Socialist Party, supports Ireland leaving the EU and supported the Brexit result. It argues that the European Union is institutionally capitalist and neoliberal. The Socialist Party campaigned against the Lisbon and Nice Treaties and favours the foundation of an alternative Socialist European Union.\nItaly.\nThe Five Star Movement (M5S), an anti-establishment movement founded by comedian Beppe Grillo, originally set itself out as a Eurosceptic party. The M5S received 25.5% of vote in the 2013 general election, becoming the largest anti-establishment and Eurosceptic party in Europe. The party used to advocate a non-binding referendum on the withdrawal of Italy from the Eurozone (but not from the European Union) and the return to the lira. Since then, the party has toned down its eurosceptic rhetoric and such policy was rejected in 2018, and the M5S's leader has since stated that the \"European Union is the Five Star Movement's home\", clarifying that the party wants Italy to stay in the EU, even though it remains critical of some of its treaties. The M5S's popular support is distributed all across Italy: in the 2018 general election the party won 32.7% of the popular vote nation-wide, and was particularly successful in central and southern Italy.\nA party that retains a Eurosceptic identity is the League (Lega), a regionalist movement led by Matteo Salvini favouring Italy's exit from the Eurozone and the re-introduction of the lira. When in government, Lega approved the Treaty of Lisbon. The party won 6.2% of the vote in the 2014 European Parliament elections, but two of its leading members are presidents of Lombardy and Veneto (where Lega gained 40.9% of the vote in 2015).\nIn the 2014 European Parliament election the Five Star Movement came second, with 17 seats and 21.2% of the vote after contesting EP seats for the first time. Lega Nord had five seats and The Other Europe with Tsipras had three seats.\nOther minor Eurosceptic organizations include right-wing political parties (e.g., Brothers of Italy, Tricolour Flame, New Force, National Front, CasaPound, National Movement for Sovereignty, the No Euro Movement), far-left political parties (e.g., the Communist Party of Marco Rizzo, the Italian Communist Party) and other political movements (e.g., the Sovereignist Front, MMT Italy). In addition, the European Union is criticized (especially for the austerity and the creation of the euro) by some left-wing thinkers, like the trade unionist Giorgio Cremaschi and the journalist Paolo Barnard, and some academics, such as the economists Alberto Bagnai and Vladimiro Giacch\u00e9, the philosopher Diego Fusaro and the mathematician Marino Badiale.\nAccording to the Standard Eurobarometer 87 conducted by the European Commission in spring 2017, 48% of Italians tend not to trust the European Union compared to 36% of Italians who do.\nIn the 2019 European election, the Italian Eurosceptic and souverainist right-wing, represented in large part by the League, increased its number of seats in the EP, but was not assigned any presidency in the committees of the European Parliament. Despite its national political alliance with the League during the Conte Cabinet, the Five Star Movement voted for Ursula von der Leyen, member of pro-EU Christian Democratic Union of Germany, as President of the European Commission.\nIn July 2020, senator Gianluigi Paragone formed Italexit, a new political party with a main goal to withdraw Italy from the European Union.\nLatvia.\nThe National Alliance (For Fatherland and Freedom/LNNK/All for Latvia!), Union of Greens and Farmers and For Latvia from the Heart are parties that are described by some political commentators as bearing soft Eurosceptic views. A small hard Eurosceptic party exists, but it has failed to gain any administrative seats throughout history of its existence.\nLithuania.\nThe Order and Justice party has mainly Eurosceptic views.\nLuxembourg.\nThe Alternative Democratic Reform Party is a soft Eurosceptic party. It is a member of the Alliance of European Conservatives and Reformists.\nMalta.\nThe Labour Party was not in favour of Malta entering the European Union. It was in favour of a partnership with the EU. After a long battle, the Nationalist Party led by Eddie Fenech Adami won the referendum and the following election, making Malta one of the states to enter the European Union on 1 May 2004. The party is now pro-European.\nNetherlands.\nHistorically, the Netherlands have been a very pro-European country, being one of the six founding members of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1952, and campaigning with much effort to include the United Kingdom into the Community in the 1970s and others after that. It has become slightly more Eurosceptic in the 2000s, rejecting the European Constitution in 2005 and complaining about the relatively high financial investment into the Union or the democratic deficit amongst other issues.\nA prominent former Eurosceptic party in the Netherlands was the Pim Fortuyn List (LPF) established by politician and academic Pim Fortuyn in 2002. The party campaigned to reduce Dutch financial contributions to the EU, was against Turkish membership and opposed what it saw as the excessive bureaucracy and threat to national sovereignty posed by the EU. During the 2002 general election, the LPF polled in second place with 17% of the vote. Following the assassination of Fortuyn in the run-up to the election, support for the party declined soon after and it was disbanded in 2008 with many of is former supporters transferring to the Party for Freedom.\nDespite these concerns, in 2014 the majority of the Dutch electorate continued to support parties that favour ongoing European integration: the Social Democrats, the Christian Democrats, the Liberals, but most of all the (Liberal) Democrats.\nIn 2016, a substantial majority in a low-turnout referendum rejected the ratification of an EU trade and association treaty with Ukraine.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, Eurosceptic parties had mixed results with Geert Wilders' Party for Freedom losing all 4 of its seats taking only 3.53% of the vote. The new Forum for Democracy established in late 2016 took 10.96% of the vote and entered the European Parliament with 3 seats.\nPoland.\nThe main party with Eurosceptic views is the Confederation Freedom and Independence.\nFormer president of Poland Lech Kaczy\u0144ski resisted giving his signature on behalf of Poland to the Treaty of Lisbon, objecting specifically to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. Subsequently, Poland got an opt-out from this charter. As Polish President, Kaczy\u0144ski also opposed the Polish government's intentions to join the euro.\nIn 2015, it was reported that Euroscepticism was growing in Poland, which was thought to be due to the \"economic crisis, concern over perceived interference from Brussels and migration\". Polish president Andrzej Duda indicated that he wished for Poland to step back from further EU integration. He suggested that the country should \"hold a referendum on joining the euro, resist further integration and fight the EU\u2019s green policies\", despite getting the largest share of EU cash.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, Law and Justice won the election with a vote share increase up from 31.78% to 45.38%, increasing its seats from 19 to 27.\nPortugal.\nThe main Eurosceptic parties in Portugal are National Renovator Party (PNR), Portuguese Communist Party (PCP), and Left Bloc (BE). Opinion polling in Portugal in 2015 indicated that 48 per cent tended not to trust the EU, while 79 per cent tended not to trust the Portuguese government (then led by Portugal Ahead). Eurosceptic political parties hold a combined total of 34 seats out of 230 in Portugal's parliament (BE 19, PCP 15, PNR 0) and a combined total of 4 out of Portugal's 21 seats in the European Parliament (PCP 3, BE 1, PNR 0).\nIn the last 2014 European Parliament election, the Portuguese Communist Party won three seats and the Left Bloc won one seat.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, Left Bloc took 9.83% and gained 1 seat, Portuguese Communist Party working in coalition with Ecologist Party \"The Greens\" took 6.88% and 2 seats and National Renovator Party (PNR) polled just 0.49%, with no seats.\nRomania.\nSeveral parties espousing Eurosceptic views exist on the right, such as the New Republic, the Greater Romania Party and Noua Dreapt\u0103, but as of June 2020 none of these parties are represented in European Parliament. Euroscepticism is relatively unpopular in Romania; all mainstream political parties are pro-European and a 2015 survey found 65% of Romanians had a positive view of the country's EU membership.\nThe Eurosceptic parties remained unrepresented in the 2019 European Parliament election.\nSlovakia.\nParties with primarily Eurosceptic views represented in the National Council are the People's Party Our Slovakia and Freedom and Solidarity. Prominent Slovak Eurosceptic politicians include Marian Kotleba, Boris Koll\u00e1r, Andrej Danko. Soft Eurosceptic views are represented in We Are Family.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, People's Party - Our Slovakia came 3rd securing 12.07% and winning their first 2 seats in the European Parliament. We Are Family took just over 3% and no seats.\nSlovenia.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views are Slovenian National Party and The Left. Neither won seats in the 2019 European Parliament election in Slovenia.\nSpain.\nThe process of Europeanization changed during the years in Spain. In 1986 Spain entered in the European Community. Since then, Spain has been one of the most Europeanist countries. Therefore, when Spain became part of the European Community, the country had a strong pro-Europeanist feeling, according to Eurobarometer, as it reflected a 60% of the population. In Spain different reasons explain its entrance to the European Community. On the one hand, democracy has just been established in Spain after Francisco Franco dictatorship. On the other hand, the main objectives of Spain were to achieve economic development, and also a social modernization. Spain was one of the few countries to vote Yes for the European Constitution in a referendum in February 2005, though by a lower margin in Catalonia and the Basque Country. In 2008, after the financial crisis reached Spain, the percentage of pro European persons started to fall. Thus, during the five years of the economic crisis, the Eurobarometer shows how the trust in the EU increasingly fell in Spain, and the confidence of the Spanish citizens in the European Union decreased for more than 50 points. Spain became one of the most Eurosceptic countries among all European Union Members, as it happened in pretty much European countries, where nationalist and eurosceptic characterised parties became stronger.\nThe historical two-parties system, composed by the conservative Partido Popular and the social-democratic Partido Socialista Obrero Espa\u00f1ol, collapsed. In the 2000s, the liberal Ciudadanos and leftist party Podemos became part of the political context, gaining electoral consensus, followed years later by conservative party Vox. The new parties were the effect of the disaffection of most Spaniards towards politics and politicians, that increased for several reasons: firstly, corruption at all political levels, reaching the Royal Family too; secondly, recession intensified distrust of the population towards national government; thirdly, a phase of renovation of the autonomous regions which extended the distance between the National government and the Regional ones. Candidatura d'Unitat Popular, a left-wing to far-left political party with about 1,300 members advocates independence for Catalonia outside of the European Union. Up to 2014 European elections, there are no Spanish parties present in the Eurosceptic groups at the European Parliament. In the 2015 Spanish general election, Podemos became the first left-wing Eurosceptic political party to win seats in the Congress of Deputies, obtaining 69 seats, and in the 2019 Spanish general election, Vox became the first right-wing Eurosceptic political party to win seats in the Congress of Deputies, obtaining 24 seats.\nSweden.\nThe Left Party of Sweden is against accession to the eurozone and previously wanted Sweden to leave the European Union until 2019.\nThe right-wing populist party Sweden Democrats support close political, economic and military cooperation with neighboring Nordic countries, but oppose further EU integration and further transfer of Swedish sovereignty to the EU as a whole, Swedish accession to the eurozone, the creation of a combined EU military budget and want to renegotiate Swedish membership of the Schengen Agreement.\nThe June List, a Eurosceptic list consisting of members from both the political right and left won three seats in the 2004 Elections to the European Parliament and sat in the EU-critical IND/DEM group in the European Parliament. The movement favours a withdrawal from the EU.\nAround 75% of the Riksdag members represent parties that officially supports the Sweden membership.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2014, the Sweden Democrats gained 2 seats with 9.67% of the vote, up 6.4%, and the Left Party took one seat with 6.3% of the vote.\nIn the European Parliament election, 2019, the Sweden Democrats increased from 2 to 3 seats with 15.34% of the vote, up from 9.67%, and the Left Party retained its one seat with 6.8% of the vote.\nIn winter 2019\u20132020, in connection with the request from \"poor\" member countries of much higher membership fees for \"rich\" member countries, for the reason of keeping support levels so \"poor\" countries wouldn't suffer from Brexit, where a \"rich\" country left the union in part due to high membership fees, a media and social media debate for a \"Swexit\" increased. This was still rejected by parties representing a majority of the parliament, with the COVID-19 pandemic quickly taking over the debate.\nIn other European countries.\nArmenia.\nProsperous Armenia represents the main Eurosceptic party in Armenia. Following the 2018 Armenian parliamentary election, the party gained 26 seats in the National Assembly. The party is a member of the Alliance of Conservatives and Reformists in Europe.\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nThe Alliance of Independent Social Democrats and the Bosnian Movement of National Pride are eurosceptic parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nGeorgia.\nGeorgian March is the main Eurosceptic party in Georgia. The party supports a slight distancing of Georgia from the West, as well as rejecting the country's entrance into NATO.\nIceland.\nThe three main Eurosceptic parties in Iceland are the Independence Party, Left-Green Movement and the Progressive Party. The Independence Party and the Progressive Party won the parliamentary election in April 2013 and they have halted the current negotiations with the European Union regarding Icelandic membership and tabled a parliamentary resolution on 21 February 2014 to withdraw the application completely.\nIn 2017, Iceland's newly elected government announced that it would hold a vote in parliament on whether to hold a referendum on resuming EU membership negotiations. In November 2017 that government was replaced by a coalition of the Independence Party, the Left Green Movement and the Progressive Party; all of whom oppose membership. Only 11 out of 63 MPs are in favour of EU membership.\nMoldova.\nThe two main Eurosceptic parties in Moldova are the left-wing Party of Socialists of the Republic of Moldova, which officially declared its main purpose to be the integration of Moldova in the Eurasian Economic Union and the Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova, even if nowadays its leader speech became more soft on the issue of Euroscepticism. As of November 2014 both parties are represented in Moldovan Parliament, with 45 MPs out of a total of 101 MPs.\nMontenegro.\nThe right-wing Democratic Front alliance are the main moderate eurosceptic subject in the Parliament of Montenegro, although its initially declaratively supported country's bid for accession to the European Union, all other parliamentary subjects officially advocates Montenegrin access to EU. The only parties that advocates Montenegro's rejecting the European integration are the extra-parliamentary right-wing populist to far-right parties, such as True Montenegro, Party of Serb Radicals, Democratic Party of Unity and the Serb List, all four are known for their close cooperation with the parliamentary Democratic Front.\nNorth Macedonia.\nSince having come into national opposition, and amid disagreements in the Macedonia naming dispute, the VMRO-DPMNE - which does not endorse the name of \"North Macedonia\", instead continuing to refer to \"Republic of Macedonia\" without qualifiers - no longer supports the country's candidacy for EU membership. It has subsequently declared its aspirations towards Russia.\nNorway.\nNorway has rejected EU membership in two referendums, 1972 and 1994. The Centre Party, Christian Democratic Party, Socialist Left Party and Liberal Party were against EU membership in both referendums. The Centre Party, Socialist Left Party, Capitalist Party, Christians and Red Party are also against Norway's current membership of the European Economic Area.\nRussia.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views are the ruling United Russia, and opposition parties the Communist Party of the Russian Federation and Liberal Democratic Party of Russia.\nFollowing the 2014 Crimean crisis, the European Union issued sanctions on the Russian Federation in response to what it regards as the \"illegal\" annexation of Crimea and \"deliberate destabilisation\" of a neighbouring sovereign country. In response to this, Alexey Borodavkin \u2013 Russia's permanent representative with the UN \u2013 said \"The EU is committing a direct violation of human rights by its actions against Russia. The unilateral sanctions introduced against us are not only illegitimate according to international law, they also undermine Russian citizens' freedom of travel, freedom of development, freedom of work and others\". In the same year, Russian president Vladimir Putin said: \"What are the so-called European values? Maintaining the coup, the armed seizure of power and the suppression of dissent with the help of the armed forces?\"\nA February 2014 poll conducted by the Levada Center, Russia's largest independent polling organization, found that nearly 80% of Russian respondents had a \"good\" impression of the EU. This changed dramatically in 2014 with the Ukrainian crisis resulting in 70% taking a hostile view of the EU compared to 20% viewing it positively.\nA Levada poll released in August 2018 found that 68% of Russians polled believe that Russia needs to dramatically improve relations with Western countries. 42% of Russian respondents said they had a positive view of the EU, up from 28% in May 2018.\nSan Marino.\nA referendum was held in the landlocked microstate on 20 October 2013 in which the citizens were asked whether the country should submit an application to join the European Union. The proposal was rejected because of a low turnout, even though 50.3% of voters approved it. The \"Yes\" campaign was supported by the main left-wing parties (Socialist Party, United Left) and the Union for the Republic whereas the Sammarinese Christian Democratic Party suggested voting with a blank ballot, the Popular Alliance declared itself neutral, and We Sammarinese and the RETE movement supported the \"No\" campaign. The Citizens' Rights Directive, which defines the right of free movement for the European citizens, may have been an important reason for those voting no.\nSerbia.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views in Serbia are opposition right-wing Democratic Party of Serbia, Enough is Enough, Healthy Serbia, far-right Serbian Radical Party, Dveri, Russian Party, People's Freedom Movement and the Serbian Party Oathkeepers, as well government members Movement of Socialists, the Serbian People's Party, also the non-parliamentary far-right parties supporting SNS-led regime, such as the Serbian Right and Leviathan Movement.\nSwitzerland.\nSwitzerland has long been known for its neutrality in international politics. Swiss voters rejected EEA membership in 1992, and EU membership in 2001. Despite the passing of several referendums calling for closer relations between Switzerland and the European Union such as the adoption of bilateral treaties and the joining of the Schengen Area, a second referendum of the joining of the EEA or the EU is not expected, and the general public remains opposed to joining.\nIn February 2014, the Swiss voters narrowly approved a referendum limiting the freedom of movement of EU citizens to Switzerland.\nEurosceptic political parties include the Swiss People's Party, which is the largest political party in Switzerland, with 29.4% of the popular vote as of the 2015 federal election. Smaller Eurosceptic parties include, but are not limited to, the Federal Democratic Union, the Ticino League, and the Geneva Citizens' Movement, all of which are considered right-wing parties.\nIn addition, the Campaign for an Independent and Neutral Switzerland is a political organisation in Switzerland that is strongly opposed to Swiss membership of or further integration otherwise with the European Union.\nRegionally, the German-speaking majority as well as the Italian-speaking areas are the most Eurosceptic, while French-speaking Switzerland tends to be more pro-European integration. In the 2001 referendum, the majority of French-speakers voted against EU membership. According to a 2016 survey conducted by M.I.S Trend and published in \"L'Hebdo\", 69 percent of the Swiss population supports systematic border controls, and 53 percent want restrictions on the EU accord of the free movements of peoples and 14 percent want it completely abolished. 54% of the Swiss population said that if necessary, they would ultimately keep the freedom of movement of people's accord.\nTurkey.\nThe two main Eurosceptic parties are the far-right ultranationalist, Nationalist Movement Party (MHP), which secured 11.10% of votes, and 49 seats in the Parliament at the last election, and the Felicity Party (Saadet Partisi), a far-right Sunni Islamist party, which has no seats in the Parliament, as it only secured 0.68% of the votes in the last election, far below the 10% threshold necessary to be represented in the Parliament.\nMany left-wing nationalist and far-left parties hold no seats at parliament but they control many activist and student movements in Turkey. The Patriotic Party (formerly called Workers' Party) consider the European Union as a frontrunner of global imperialism.\nUkraine.\nParties with mainly Eurosceptic views are Opposition Platform \u2014 For life, Opposition Bloc, Party of Shariy and Right Sector.\nThe far-right Ukrainian group Right Sector opposes joining the European Union. It regards the EU as an \"oppressor\" of European nations.\nIn the 2019 parliamentary election the Opposition Platform \u2014 For Life won 37 seats on the nationwide party list and 6 constituency seats.\nThe leader of the Party of Shariy Anatoly Shariy is one of the closest associates of Viktor Medvedchuk, whom Ukraine's special services suspect of financing terrorism.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEuroscepticism in the United Kingdom has been a significant element in British politics ever since the inception of the European Economic Community (EEC), the predecessor to the EU. The European Union strongly divides the British public, political parties, media and civil society.\nThe UK Independence Party has backed the idea of the UK unilaterally leaving the European Union (Brexit) since its foundation in 1993. During the 23 June 2016 referendum on the issue, whilst the Conservatives had no official position, although its leader David Cameron was in favour of remaining in the EU albeit after some renegotiation of the terms of membership, the party remained profoundly split, as it always had been. The Labour Party officially supported remaining in the EU, although party leader Jeremy Corbyn did suggest early on in the campaign that he would consider withdrawal, a position he had personally advocated from the far left for many years, in fact throughout his period as a Labur MP. The Liberal Democrats were the most adamantly pro-EU party, and since the referendum, pro-Europeanism has been their main policy.\nThe referendum resulted in an overall vote to leave the EU, as opposed to remaining an EU member, by 51.9% to 48.1%, on a turnout of 72.2%. The vote was split between the constituent countries of the United Kingdom, with a majority in England and Wales voting to leave, and a majority in Scotland and Northern Ireland, as well as Gibraltar (a British Overseas Territory), voting to remain. As a result of the referendum, the UK Government notified the EU of its intention to withdraw on 29 March 2017 by invoking Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty.\nOn 12 April 2019 a new Eurosceptic party, the Brexit Party was officially launched by former UK Independence Party Leader Nigel Farage.\nIn the 2019 European Parliament election, the Brexit Party topped the national poll by a large margin with 31.69% gaining 29 seats by running on a single policy of leaving the EU, versus the second-placed Liberal Democrats with 18.53% and 16 seats who promoted themselves as the party of Remain (the total vote for Remain-supporting parties was approximately the same as that for parties supporting a 'no-deal' Brexit). The Conservative Party suffered their lowest ever national vote share of 9.1% with just 4 seats following 3 years of Theresa May's unsuccessful Brexit negotiations. The Labour Party's ambiguous position on Brexit led to their vote share dropping significantly to 14.08% resulting in the loss of half their seats, down from 20 to 10. The rapid growth of the Brexit Party was a contributing factor to Theresa May announcing on 24 May that she would step down as Prime Minister on 7 June 2019. After the elections, the Eurosceptic Blue Collar Conservative caucus of Conservative MPs was formed.\nOn 23 January 2020, the Parliament of the United Kingdom ratified a withdrawal agreement from the European Union, which was ratified by the EU Parliament on 30 January. On 31 January, the United Kingdom officially left the European Union after 47 years. During a transition period until 31 December 2020, the UK still followed EU rules and continued free trade and free movement for people within the European Union."}
{"id": "10039", "revid": "6369861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10039", "title": "Ermland", "text": ""}
{"id": "10041", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10041", "title": "European Article Numbering", "text": ""}
{"id": "10042", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10042", "title": "EAN", "text": ""}
{"id": "10043", "revid": "33930988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10043", "title": "Estimator", "text": "In statistics, an estimator is a rule for calculating an estimate of a given quantity based on observed data: thus the rule (the estimator), the quantity of interest (the estimand) and its result (the estimate) are distinguished. For example, the sample mean is a commonly used estimator of the population mean.\nThere are point and interval estimators. The point estimators yield single-valued results. This is in contrast to an interval estimator, where the result would be a range of plausible values. \"Single value\" does not necessarily mean \"single number\", but includes vector valued or function valued estimators.\nEstimation theory is concerned with the properties of estimators; that is, with defining properties that can be used to compare different estimators (different rules for creating estimates) for the same quantity, based on the same data. Such properties can be used to determine the best rules to use under given circumstances. However, in robust statistics, statistical theory goes on to consider the balance between having good properties, if tightly defined assumptions hold, and having less good properties that hold under wider conditions.\nBackground.\nAn \"estimator\" or \"point estimate\" is a statistic (that is, a function of the data) that is used to infer the value of an unknown parameter in a statistical model. The parameter being estimated is sometimes called the \"estimand\". It can be either finite-dimensional (in parametric and semi-parametric models), or infinite-dimensional (semi-parametric and non-parametric models). If the parameter is denoted formula_1 then the estimator is traditionally written by adding a circumflex over the symbol: formula_2. Being a function of the data, the estimator is itself a random variable; a particular realization of this random variable is called the \"estimate\". Sometimes the words \"estimator\" and \"estimate\" are used interchangeably.\nThe definition places virtually no restrictions on which functions of the data can be called the \"estimators\". The attractiveness of different estimators can be judged by looking at their properties, such as unbiasedness, mean square error, consistency, asymptotic distribution, etc. The construction and comparison of estimators are the subjects of the estimation theory. In the context of decision theory, an estimator is a type of decision rule, and its performance may be evaluated through the use of loss functions.\nWhen the word \"estimator\" is used without a qualifier, it usually refers to point estimation. The estimate in this case is a single point in the parameter space. There also exists another type of estimator: interval estimators, where the estimates are subsets of the parameter space.\nThe problem of density estimation arises in two applications. Firstly, in estimating the probability density functions of random variables and secondly in estimating the spectral density function of a time series. In these problems the estimates are functions that can be thought of as point estimates in an infinite dimensional space, and there are corresponding interval estimation problems.\nDefinition.\nSuppose a fixed \"parameter\" formula_3 needs to be estimated. Then an \"estimator\" is a function that maps the sample space to a set of \"sample estimates\". An estimator of formula_3 is usually denoted by the symbol formula_2. It is often convenient to express the theory using the algebra of random variables: thus if \"X\" is used to denote a random variable corresponding to the observed data, the estimator (itself treated as a random variable) is symbolised as a function of that random variable, formula_6. The estimate for a particular observed data value formula_7 (i.e. for formula_8) is then formula_9, which is a fixed value. Often an abbreviated notation is used in which formula_2 is interpreted directly as a random variable, but this can cause confusion.\nQuantified properties.\nThe following definitions and attributes are relevant.\nError.\nFor a given sample formula_11, the \"error\" of the estimator formula_2 is defined as\nwhere formula_14 is the parameter being estimated. The error, \"e\", depends not only on the estimator (the estimation formula or procedure), but also on the sample.\nMean squared error.\nThe \"mean squared error\" of formula_2 is defined as the expected value (probability-weighted average, over all samples) of the squared errors; that is,\nIt is used to indicate how far, on average, the collection of estimates are from the single parameter being estimated. Consider the following analogy. Suppose the parameter is the bull's-eye of a target, the estimator is the process of shooting arrows at the target, and the individual arrows are estimates (samples). Then high MSE means the average distance of the arrows from the bull's-eye is high, and low MSE means the average distance from the bull's-eye is low. The arrows may or may not be clustered. For example, even if all arrows hit the same point, yet grossly miss the target, the MSE is still relatively large. However, if the MSE is relatively low then the arrows are likely more highly clustered (than highly dispersed) around the target.\nSampling deviation.\nFor a given sample formula_11, the \"sampling deviation\" of the estimator formula_2 is defined as\nwhere formula_20 is the expected value of the estimator. The sampling deviation, \"d\", depends not only on the estimator, but also on the sample.\nVariance.\nThe \"variance\" of formula_2 is simply the expected value of the squared sampling deviations; that is, formula_22. It is used to indicate how far, on average, the collection of estimates are from the \"expected value\" of the estimates. (Note the difference between MSE and variance.) If the parameter is the bull's-eye of a target, and the arrows are estimates, then a relatively high variance means the arrows are dispersed, and a relatively low variance means the arrows are clustered. Even if the variance is low, the cluster of arrows may still be far off-target, and even if the variance is high, the diffuse collection of arrows may still be unbiased. Finally, even if all arrows grossly miss the target, if they nevertheless all hit the same point, the variance is zero.\nBias.\nThe \"bias\" of formula_2 is defined as formula_24. It is the distance between the average of the collection of estimates, and the single parameter being estimated. The bias of formula_2 is a function of the true value of formula_3 so saying that the bias of formula_2 is formula_28 means that for every formula_3 the bias of formula_2 is formula_28.\nThe bias also is the expected value of the error, since formula_32. If the parameter is the bull's-eye of a target, and the arrows are estimates, then a relatively high absolute value for the bias means the average position of the arrows is off-target, and a relatively low absolute bias means the average position of the arrows is on target. They may be dispersed, or may be clustered. The relationship between bias and variance is analogous to the relationship between accuracy and precision.\nThe estimator formula_2 is an \"unbiased estimator\" of formula_1 if and only if formula_35. Bias is a property of the estimator, not of the estimate. Often, people refer to a \"biased estimate\" or an \"unbiased estimate,\" but they really are talking about an \"estimate from a biased estimator,\" or an \"estimate from an unbiased estimator.\" Also, people often confuse the \"error\" of a single estimate with the \"bias\" of an estimator. That the error for one estimate is large, does not mean the estimator is biased. In fact, even if all estimates have astronomical absolute values for their errors, if the expected value of the error is zero, the estimator is unbiased. Also, an estimator's being biased does not preclude the error of an estimate from being zero in a particular instance. The ideal situation is to have an unbiased estimator with low variance, and also try to limit the number of samples where the error is extreme (that is, have few outliers). Yet unbiasedness is not essential. Often, if just a little bias is permitted, then an estimator can be found with lower MSE and/or fewer outlier sample estimates.\nAn alternative to the version of \"unbiased\" above, is \"median-unbiased\", where the median of the distribution of estimates agrees with the true value; thus, in the long run half the estimates will be too low and half too high. While this applies immediately only to scalar-valued estimators, it can be extended to any measure of central tendency of a distribution: see median-unbiased estimators.\nBehavioral properties.\nConsistency.\nA consistent sequence of estimators is a sequence of estimators that converge in probability to the quantity being estimated as the index (usually the sample size) grows without bound. In other words, increasing the sample size increases the probability of the estimator being close to the population parameter.\nMathematically, a sequence of estimators } is a consistent estimator for parameter \"\u03b8\" if and only if, for all , no matter how small, we have\nThe consistency defined above may be called weak consistency. The sequence is \"strongly consistent\", if it converges almost surely to the true value.\nAn estimator that converges to a \"multiple\" of a parameter can be made into a consistent estimator by multiplying the estimator by a scale factor, namely the true value divided by the asymptotic value of the estimator. This occurs frequently in estimation of scale parameters by measures of statistical dispersion.\nAsymptotic normality.\nAn asymptotically normal estimator is a consistent estimator whose distribution around the true parameter \"\u03b8\" approaches a normal distribution with standard deviation shrinking in proportion to formula_43 as the sample size \"n\" grows. Using formula_44 to denote convergence in distribution, \"tn\" is asymptotically normal if\nfor some \"V\".\nIn this formulation \"V/n\" can be called the \"asymptotic variance\" of the estimator. However, some authors also call \"V\" the \"asymptotic variance\".\nNote that convergence will not necessarily have occurred for any finite \"n\", therefore this value is only an approximation to the true variance of the estimator, while in the limit the asymptotic variance (V/n) is simply zero. To be more specific, the distribution of the estimator \"tn\" converges weakly to a dirac delta function centered at formula_3.\nThe central limit theorem implies asymptotic normality of the sample mean formula_47 as an estimator of the true mean.\nMore generally, maximum likelihood estimators are asymptotically normal under fairly weak regularity conditions \u2014 see the asymptotics section of the maximum likelihood article. However, not all estimators are asymptotically normal; the simplest examples are found when the true value of a parameter lies on the boundary of the allowable parameter region.\nEfficiency.\nTwo naturally desirable properties of estimators are for them to be unbiased and have minimal mean squared error (MSE). These cannot in general both be satisfied simultaneously: a biased estimator may have lower mean squared error (MSE) than any unbiased estimator; see estimator bias.\nAmong unbiased estimators, there often exists one with the lowest variance, called the minimum variance unbiased estimator (MVUE). In some cases an unbiased efficient estimator exists, which, in addition to having the lowest variance among unbiased estimators, satisfies the Cram\u00e9r\u2013Rao bound, which is an absolute lower bound on variance for statistics of a variable.\nConcerning such \"best unbiased estimators\", see also Cram\u00e9r\u2013Rao bound, Gauss\u2013Markov theorem, Lehmann\u2013Scheff\u00e9 theorem, Rao\u2013Blackwell theorem."}
{"id": "10045", "revid": "41189574", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10045", "title": "Emerald", "text": "Emerald is a gemstone and a variety of the mineral beryl (Be3Al2(SiO3)6) colored green by trace amounts of chromium and/or sometimes vanadium. Beryl has a hardness of 7.5\u20138 on the Mohs scale. Most emeralds are highly included, so their toughness (resistance to breakage) is classified as generally poor. Emerald is a cyclosilicate.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"emerald\" is derived (via and ), from Vulgar Latin: \"esmaralda\"/\"esmaraldus\", a variant of Latin \"smaragdus\", which was a via (smaragdos; \"green gem\") from a Semitic language.\nProperties determining value.\nEmeralds, like all colored gemstones, are graded using four basic parameters\u2013the four \"C\"s of connoisseurship: \"color\", \"clarity,\" \"cut\" and \"carat weight\". Normally, in the grading of colored gemstones, color is by far the most important criterion. However, in the grading of emeralds, clarity is considered a close second. A fine emerald must possess not only a pure verdant green hue as described below, but also a high degree of transparency to be considered a top gemstone.\nIn the 1960s, the American jewelry industry changed the definition of \"emerald\" to include the green vanadium-bearing beryl. As a result, \"vanadium emeralds\" purchased as emeralds in the United States are not recognized as such in the UK and Europe. In America, the distinction between traditional emeralds and the new vanadium kind is often reflected in the use of terms such as \"Colombian emerald\".\nColor.\nIn gemology, color is divided into three components: \"hue\", \"saturation\", and \"tone\". Emeralds occur in hues ranging from yellow-green to blue-green, with the primary hue necessarily being green. Yellow and blue are the normal secondary hues found in emeralds. Only gems that are medium to dark in tone are considered emeralds; light-toned gems are known instead by the species name \"green beryl\". The finest emeralds are approximately 75% tone on a scale where 0% tone is colorless and 100% is opaque black. In addition, a fine emerald will be saturated and have a hue that is bright (vivid). Gray is the normal saturation modifier or mask found in emeralds; a grayish-green hue is a dull-green hue.\nClarity.\nEmeralds tend to have numerous inclusions and surface-breaking fissures. Unlike diamonds, where the loupe standard, i.e. 10\u00d7 magnification, is used to grade clarity, emeralds are graded by eye. Thus, if an emerald has no visible inclusions to the eye (assuming normal visual acuity) it is considered flawless. Stones that lack surface breaking fissures are extremely rare and therefore almost all emeralds are treated (\"oiled\", see below) to enhance the apparent clarity. The inclusions and fissures within an emerald are sometimes described as \"jardin\" (French for \"garden\"), because of their mossy appearance. Imperfections are unique for each emerald and can be used to identify a particular stone. Eye-clean stones of a vivid primary green hue (as described above), with no more than 15% of any secondary hue or combination (either blue or yellow) of a medium-dark tone, command the highest prices. The relative non-uniformity motivates the cutting of emeralds in cabochon form, rather than faceted shapes. Faceted emeralds are most commonly given an oval cut, or the signature emerald cut, a rectangular cut with facets around the top edge.\nTreatments.\nMost emeralds are oiled as part of the post-lapidary process, in order to fill in surface-reaching cracks so that clarity and stability are improved. Cedar oil, having a similar refractive index, is often used in this widely adopted practice. Other liquids, including synthetic oils and polymers with refractive indexes close to that of emeralds, such as \"Opticon\", are also used. The least expensive emeralds are often treated with epoxy resins, which are effective for filling stones with many fractures.These treatments are typically applied in a vacuum chamber under mild heat, to open the pores of the stone and allow the fracture-filling agent to be absorbed more effectively. The U.S. Federal Trade Commission requires the disclosure of this treatment when an oil treated emerald is sold. The use of oil is traditional and largely accepted by the gem trade, although oil treated emeralds are worth much less than un-treated emeralds of similar quality. Untreated emeralds must also be accompanied by a certificate from a licensed, independent gemology laboratory. Other treatments, for example the use of green-tinted oil, are not acceptable in the trade. Gems are graded on a four-step scale; \"none\", \"minor\", \"moderate\" and \"highly\" enhanced. These categories reflect levels of enhancement, not \"clarity\". A gem graded \"none\" on the enhancement scale may still exhibit visible inclusions. Laboratories apply these criteria differently. Some gemologists consider the mere presence of oil or polymers to constitute enhancement. Others may ignore traces of oil if the presence of the material does not improve the look of the gemstone.\nEmerald mines.\nEmeralds in antiquity were mined in Egypt at locations on Mount Smaragdus since 1500 BCE, and India, and Austria since at least the 14th century CE. The Egyptian mines were exploited on an industrial scale by the Roman and Byzantine Empires, and later by Islamic conquerors. Mining in Egypt ceased with the discovery of the Colombian deposits. Today, only ruins remain.\nColombia is by far the world's largest producer of emeralds, constituting 50\u201395% of the world production, with the number depending on the year, source and grade. Emerald production in Colombia has increased drastically in the last decade, increasing by 78% from 2000 to 2010. The three main emerald mining areas in Colombia are Muzo, Coscuez, and Chivor. Rare \"trapiche\" emeralds are found in Colombia, distinguished by ray-like spokes of dark impurities.\nZambia is the world's second biggest producer, with its Kafubu River area deposits (Kagem Mines) about southwest of Kitwe responsible for 20% of the world's production of gem-quality stones in 2004. In the first half of 2011, the Kagem Mines produced 3.74 tons of emeralds.\nEmeralds are found all over the world in countries such as Afghanistan, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, China, Egypt, Ethiopia, France, Germany, India, Italy, Kazakhstan, Madagascar, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Russia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Tanzania, the United States, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. In the US, emeralds have been found in Connecticut, Montana, Nevada, North Carolina, and South Carolina. In 1997, emeralds were discovered in the Yukon Territory of Canada.\nOrigin determinations.\nSince the onset of concerns regarding diamond origins, research has been conducted to determine if the mining location could be determined for an emerald already in circulation. Traditional research used qualitative guidelines such as an emerald's color, style and quality of cutting, type of fracture filling, and the anthropological origins of the artifacts bearing the mineral to determine the emerald's mine location. More recent studies using energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy methods have uncovered trace chemical element differences between emeralds, including ones mined in close proximity to one another. American gemologist David Cronin and his colleagues have extensively examined the chemical signatures of emeralds resulting from fluid dynamics and subtle precipitation mechanisms, and their research demonstrated the chemical homogeneity of emeralds from the same mining location and the statistical differences that exist between emeralds from different mining locations, including those between the three locations: Muzo, Coscuez, and Chivor, in Colombia, South America.\nSynthetic emerald.\nBoth hydrothermal and \"flux-growth\" synthetics have been produced, and a method has been developed for producing an emerald overgrowth on colorless beryl. The first commercially successful emerald synthesis process was that of Carroll Chatham, likely involving a lithium vanadate flux process, as Chatham's emeralds do not have any water and contain traces of vanadate, molybdenum and vanadium. The other large producer of flux emeralds was Pierre Gilson Sr., whose products have been on the market since 1964. Gilson's emeralds are usually grown on natural colorless beryl seeds, which are coated on both sides. Growth occurs at the rate of 1\u00a0mm per month, a typical seven-month growth run produces emerald crystals 7\u00a0mm thick.\nHydrothermal synthetic emeralds have been attributed to IG Farben, Nacken, Tairus, and others, but the first satisfactory commercial product was that of Johann Lechleitner of Innsbruck, Austria, which appeared on the market in the 1960s. These stones were initially sold under the names \"Emerita\" and \"Symeralds\", and they were grown as a thin layer of emerald on top of natural colorless beryl stones. Later, from 1965 to 1970, the Linde Division of Union Carbide produced completely synthetic emeralds by hydrothermal synthesis. According to their patents (attributable to E.M. Flanigen), acidic conditions are essential to prevent the chromium (which is used as the colorant) from precipitating. Also, it is important that the silicon-containing nutrient be kept away from the other ingredients to prevent nucleation and confine growth to the seed crystals. Growth occurs by a diffusion-reaction process, assisted by convection. The largest producer of hydrothermal emeralds today is Tairus, which has succeeded in synthesizing emeralds with chemical composition similar to emeralds in alkaline deposits in Colombia, and whose products are thus known as \u201cColombian created emeralds\u201d or \u201cTairus created emeralds\u201d. Luminescence in ultraviolet light is considered a supplementary test when making a natural versus synthetic determination, as many, but not all, natural emeralds are inert to ultraviolet light. Many synthetics are also UV inert.\nSynthetic emeralds are often referred to as \"created\", as their chemical and gemological composition is the same as their natural counterparts. The U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has very strict regulations as to what can and what cannot be called a \"synthetic\" stone. The FTC says: \"\u00a7 23.23(c) It is unfair or deceptive to use the word \"laboratory-grown\", \"laboratory-created\", \"[manufacturer name]-created\", or \"synthetic\" with the name of any natural stone to describe any industry product unless such industry product has essentially the same optical, physical, and chemical properties as the stone named.\"\nIn culture and lore.\nEmerald is regarded as the traditional birthstone for May as well as the traditional gemstone for the astrological sign of Cancer.\nOne of the quainter anecdotes about emeralds was told by the 16th-century historian Brant\u00f4me, who referred to the many impressive emeralds the Spanish under Cortez had brought back to Europe from Latin America. On one of Cortez's most notable emeralds he had the text engraved, \"Inter Natos Mulierum non sur-rexit mayor\" (\"Among those born of woman there hath not arisen a greater,\" Matthew 11:11) which referred to John the Baptist. Brant\u00f4me considered engraving such a beautiful and simple product of nature sacrilegious and considered this act the cause for Cortez's loss of an extremely precious pearl (to which he dedicated a work, \"A beautiful and incomparable pearl\"), and even for the death of King Charles IX of France, who died soon afterward.\nThe chief deity of one of India's most famous temples, the Meenakshi Amman Temple in Madurai, is the goddess Meenakshi, whose idol is traditionally thought to be made of emerald."}
{"id": "10046", "revid": "14157892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=10046", "title": "Erie Canal", "text": "The Erie Canal in New York is part of the east\u2013west, cross-state route of the New York State Canal System (formerly known as the New York State Barge Canal). It was built to create a navigable water route from New York City and the Atlantic Ocean to the Great Lakes, originally stretching for from the Hudson River in Albany to Lake Erie in Buffalo. Completed in 1825, it was the second longest canal in the world (after the Grand Canal in China) and greatly enhanced the development and economy of the cities of New York, including Albany, Syracuse, Rochester, Buffalo, and New York City, as well as the United States. This was in part due to the new ease of transport of salt and other goods, and industries that developed around those.\nThe canal was first proposed in the 1780s, then re-proposed in 1807. A survey was authorized, funded, and executed in 1808. Proponents of the project gradually wore down opponents; its construction began in 1817, and it opened on October 26, 1825. The canal has 34 numbered locks starting with Black Rock Lock and ending downstream with the Troy Federal Lock. Both are owned by the federal government. It has an elevation difference of about .\nAt the time, bulk goods were limited to pack animals with a maximum and there were no railways, so water was the most cost-effective way to ship bulk goods.\nPolitical opponents to the canal and to New York Governor DeWitt Clinton denigrated it as \"Clinton's Folly\" or \"Clinton's Big Ditch\". It was the first transportation system between the East Coast of the United States and the western interior that did not require portage.\nIt was faster than carts pulled by draft animals and cut transport costs by about 95 percent. The canal gave New York City's port a strong advantage over all other U.S. port cities and ushered in the state's 19th century political and cultural ascendancy. The canal fostered a population surge in western New York and opened regions to settlement farther west. It was enlarged between 1834 and 1862. The canal's peak year was 1855, when 33,000 commercial shipments took place. In 1918, the western part of the canal was enlarged to become part of the New York State Barge Canal, which also extended to the Hudson River running parallel to the eastern half of the Erie Canal.\nIn 2000, Congress designated the Erie Canalway National Heritage Corridor to recognize the national significance of the canal system as the most successful and influential human-built waterway and one of the most important works of civil engineering and construction in North America. The canal has been mainly used by recreational watercraft since the retirement of the commercial ship \"Day Peckinpaugh\" in 1994, although the canal saw a recovery in commercial traffic in 2008.\nAmbiguity in name.\nThe waterway today referred to as the Erie Canal is quite different from the nineteenth-century Erie Canal. More than half of the original Erie Canal was destroyed or abandoned during construction of the New York State Barge Canal in the early 20th century. The sections of the original route remaining in use were widened significantly, mostly west of Syracuse, with bridges rebuilt and locks replaced. It was called the Barge Canal at the time, but that name fell into disuse with the disappearance of commercial traffic and the increase of recreational travel in the later 20th century.\nBackground.\nA recurring problem was that of transportation between the coastal ports and the interior. This was not unique to the Americas, and the problem still exists in those parts of the world where muscle power provides a primary means of transportation within a region. An equally ancient solution was implemented in many culturesfloating vessels move more easily than land vehicles since friction is significantly less. Close to the seacoast, rivers often provided adequate waterways, but the Appalachian Mountains, inland, running over long as a barrier range with just five places where mule trains or wagon roads could be routed, presented a great challenge. Passengers and freight had to travel overland, a journey made more difficult by the rough condition of the roads. In 1800, it typically took 2\u00bd weeks to travel overland from New York to Cleveland, Ohio, () and 4 weeks to Detroit ().\nThe principal exportable product of the Ohio Valley was grain, which was a high-volume, low-priced commodity, bolstered by supplies from the coast. Frequently it was not worth the cost of transporting it to far-away population centers. This was a factor leading to farmers in the west turning their grains into whiskey for easier transport and higher sales, and later the Whiskey Rebellion. In the 18th and early 19th centuries, it became clear to coastal residents that the city or state that succeeded in developing a cheap, reliable route to the West would enjoy economic success, and the port at the seaward end of such a route would see business increase greatly. In time, projects were devised in Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and relatively deep into the coastal states.\nProposals and logistics.\nProposals.\nThe idea of a canal to tie the East Coast to the new western settlements was discussed as early as 1724: New York provincial official Cadwallader Colden made a passing reference (in a report on fur trading) to improving the natural waterways of western New York.\nGouverneur Morris and Elkanah Watson were early proponents of a canal along the Mohawk River. Their efforts led to the creation of the \"Western and Northern Inland Lock Navigation Companies\" in 1792, which took the first steps to improve navigation on the Mohawk and construct a canal between the Mohawk and Lake Ontario, but it was soon discovered that private financing was insufficient.\nChristopher Colles (who was familiar with the Bridgewater Canal) surveyed the Mohawk Valley, and made a presentation to the New York state legislature in 1784, proposing a shorter canal from Lake Ontario. The proposal drew attention and some action but was never implemented.\nJesse Hawley had envisioned encouraging the growing of large quantities of grain on the western New York plains (then largely unsettled) for sale on the Eastern seaboard. However, he went bankrupt trying to ship grain to the coast. While in Canandaigua debtors' prison, Hawley began pressing for the construction of a canal along the -long Mohawk River valley with support from Joseph Ellicott (agent for the Holland Land Company in Batavia). Ellicott realized that a canal would add value to the land he was selling in the western part of the state. He later became the first canal commissioner.\nNew York legislators became interested in the possibility of building a canal across New York in the first decade of the 19th century. Shipping goods west from Albany was a costly and tedious affair; there was no railroad yet, and to cover the distance from Buffalo to New York City by stagecoach took two weeks.\nEngineering requirements.\nThe Mohawk River (a tributary of the Hudson) rises near Lake Ontario and runs in a glacial meltwater channel just north of the Catskill range of the Appalachian Mountains, separating them from the geologically distinct Adirondacks to the north. The Mohawk and Hudson valleys form the only cut across the Appalachians north of Alabama. A navigable canal through the Mohawk Valley would allow an almost complete water route from New York City in the south to Lake Ontario and Lake Erie in the west. Via the canal and these lakes, other Great Lakes, and to a lesser degree, related rivers, a large part of the continent's interior (and many settlements) would be made well connected to the Eastern seaboard.\nThe problem was that the land rises about from the Hudson to Lake Erie. Locks at the time could handle up to of lift, so even with the heftiest cuttings and viaducts, fifty locks would be required along the canal. Such a canal would be expensive to build even with modern technology; in 1800, the expense was barely imaginable. President Thomas Jefferson called it \"little short of madness\" and rejected it; however, Hawley interested New York Governor DeWitt Clinton in the project. There was much opposition, and the project was ridiculed as \"Clinton's folly\" and \"Clinton's ditch\". In 1817, though, Clinton received approval from the legislature for $7 million for construction.\nThe original canal was long, from Albany on the Hudson to Buffalo on Lake Erie. The channel was cut wide and deep, with removed soil piled on the downhill side to form a walkway known as a towpath.\nIts construction, through limestone and mountains, proved a daunting task. In 1823 construction reached the Niagara Escarpment, necessitating the building of five locks along a corridor to carry the canal over the escarpment. To move earth, animals pulled a \"slip scraper\" (similar to a bulldozer). The sides of the canal were lined with stone set in clay, and the bottom was also lined with clay. The Canal was built by Irish laborers and German stone masons. All labor on the canal depended upon human and animal power or the force of water. Engineering techniques developed during its construction included the building of aqueducts to redirect water; one aqueduct was long to span of river. As the canal progressed, the crews and engineers working on the project developed expertise and became a skilled labor force.\nFreight boats.\nCanal boats up to in draft were pulled by horses and mules walking on the towpath. The canal had one towpath, generally on the north side. When canal boats met, the boat with the right of way remained on the towpath side of the canal. The other boat steered toward the berm (or heelpath) side of the canal. The driver (or \"hoggee\", pronounced HO-gee) of the privileged boat kept his towpath team by the canalside edge of the towpath, while the hoggee of the other boat moved to the outside of the towpath and stopped his team. His towline would be unhitched from the horses, go slack, fall into the water and sink to the bottom, while his boat coasted with its remaining momentum. The privileged boat's team would step over the other boat's towline, with its horses pulling the boat over the sunken towline without stopping. Once clear, the other boat's team would continue on its way.\nPulled by teams of horses, canal boats moved slowly, but methodically, shrinking time and distance. Efficiently, the smooth, nonstop method of transportation cut the travel time between Albany and Buffalo nearly in half, moving by day and by night. Migrants took passage on freight boats, camping on deck or on top of crates.\nPassenger boats.\nPacket boats, serving passengers exclusively, reached speeds of up to and ran at much more frequent intervals than the cramped, bumpy stagecoach wagons. These boats, measuring up to long and wide, made ingenious use of space, accommodating up to 40 passengers at night and up to three times as many in the daytime. The best examples, furnished with carpeted floors, stuffed chairs, and mahogany tables stocked with books and current newspapers, served as sitting rooms during the days. At mealtimes, crews transformed the cabin into a dining room. Drawing a curtain across the width of the room divided the cabin into ladies' and gentlemen's sleeping quarters at night. Pull-down tiered beds folded from the walls, and additional cots could be hung from hooks in the ceiling. Some captains hired musicians and held dances.\nMen and women boarded barges to venture west, to visit relatives, or just for a relaxing excursion.\nConstruction.\nThe men who planned and oversaw construction were novices as surveyors and as engineers. There were no civil engineers in the United States. James Geddes and Benjamin Wright, who laid out the route, were judges whose experience in surveying was in settling boundary disputes. Geddes had only used a surveying instrument for a few hours before his work on the Canal. Canvass White was a 27-year-old amateur engineer who persuaded Clinton to let him go to Britain at his own expense to study the canal system there. Nathan Roberts was a mathematics teacher and land speculator. Yet these men \"carried the Erie Canal up the Niagara escarpment at Lockport, maneuvered it onto a towering embankment to cross over Irondequoit Creek, spanned the Genesee River on an awesome aqueduct, and carved a route for it out of the solid rock between Little Falls and Schenectady\u2014and all of those venturesome designs worked precisely as planned\".\nConstruction began on July 4, 1817, at Rome, New York. The first , from Rome to Utica, opened in 1819. At that rate, the canal would not be finished for 30 years. The main delays were caused by felling trees to clear a path through virgin forest and moving excavated soil, which took longer than expected, but the builders devised ways to solve these problems. To fell a tree, they threw rope over the top branches and winched it down. They pulled out the stumps with an innovative stump puller. Two huge wheels were mounted loose on the ends of an axle. A third wheel, slightly smaller than the others, was fixed to the center of the axle. A chain was wrapped around the axle and hooked to the stump. A rope was wrapped around the center wheel and hooked to a team of oxen. The mechanical advantage (torque) obtained ripped the stumps out of the soil. Soil to be moved was shoveled into large wheelbarrows that were dumped into mule-pulled carts. Using a scraper and a plow, a three-man team with oxen, horses and mules could build a mile in a year.\nThe remaining problem was finding labor; increased immigration helped fill the need. Many of the laborers working on the canal were Irish, who had recently come to the United States as a group of about 5,000. Most of them were Roman Catholic, a religion that raised much suspicion in early America due to its hierarchic structure, and many laborers on the canal suffered violent assault as the result of misjudgment and xenophobia.\nConstruction continued at an increased rate as new workers arrived. When the canal reached Montezuma Marsh (at the outlet of Cayuga Lake west of Syracuse), it was rumored that over 1,000 workers died of \"swamp fever\" (malaria), and construction was temporarily stopped. However, recent research has revealed that the death toll was likely much lower, as no contemporary reports mention significant worker mortality, and mass graves from the period have never been found in the area. Work continued on the downhill side towards the Hudson, and the crews worked on the section across the swampland when it froze in winter.\nThe middle section from Utica to Salina (Syracuse) was completed in 1820, and traffic on that section started up immediately. Expansion to the east and west proceeded simultaneously, and the whole eastern section, from Brockport to Albany, opened on September 10, 1823, to great fanfare. The Champlain Canal, a separate but connected north-south route from Watervliet on the Hudson to Lake Champlain, opened on the same date.\nIn 1824, before the canal was completed, a detailed \"Pocket Guide for the Tourist and Traveler, Along the Line of the Canals, and the Interior Commerce of the State of New York\", was published for the benefit of travelers and land speculators.\nAfter Montezuma Marsh, the next difficulties were crossing Irondequoit Creek and the Genesee River near Rochester. The former ultimately required building the long \"Great Embankment,\" to carry the canal at a height of above the level of the creek, which ran through a culvert underneath. The canal crossed the river on a stone aqueduct, long and wide, supported by 11 arches.\nAfter the Genesee, the next obstacle was crossing the Niagara Escarpment, an -high wall of hard dolomitic limestone, to reach the level of Lake Erie. The route followed the channel of a creek that had cut a ravine steeply down the escarpment. The construction and operation of two sets of five locks there soon gave rise to the community of Lockport. The lift-locks had a total lift of , exiting into a deeply cut channel. The final leg had to be cut deep through another limestone mass, the Onondaga ridge. Much of that section was blasted with black powder, and the inexperience of the crews often led to accidents, and sometimes to rocks falling on nearby homes.\nTwo villages competed to be the terminus: Black Rock, on the Niagara River, and Buffalo, at the eastern tip of Lake Erie. Buffalo expended great energy to widen and deepen Buffalo Creek to make it navigable and to create a harbor at its mouth. Buffalo won over Black Rock, and grew into a large city, eventually encompassing its former rival.\nThe entire canal was officially completed on October 26, 1825. The event was marked by a statewide \"Grand Celebration,\" culminating in a series of cannon shots along the length of the canal and the Hudson, a 90-minute cannonade from Buffalo to New York City. A flotilla of boats, led by Governor Dewitt Clinton aboard \"Seneca Chief\", sailed from Buffalo to New York City over ten days. Clinton then ceremonially poured Lake Erie water into New York Harbor to mark the \"Wedding of the Waters\". On its return trip, \"Seneca Chief\" brought back a keg of Atlantic Ocean water, which was poured into Lake Erie by Buffalo's Judge Samuel Wilkeson, who would later become mayor.\nThe Erie Canal was thus completed in eight years at a cost of $7.143 million (). It was acclaimed as an engineering marvel that united the country and helped New York City develop as an international trade center.\nRoute.\n&lt;mapframe width=400 height=200 zoom=6 latitude=42.977 longitude=-76.506 align=left text=\"The original path of the Erie Canal\"&gt;\n \"type\": \"ExternalData\",\n \"service\": \"page\",\n \"title\": \"Original Erie Canal.map\"\n&lt;/mapframe&gt;\nThe canal began on the west side of the Hudson River at Albany, and ran north to Watervliet, where the Champlain Canal branched off. At Cohoes, it climbed the escarpment on the west side of the Hudson River\u201416 locks rising \u2014and then turned west along the south shore of the Mohawk River, crossing to the north side at Crescent and again to the south at Rexford. The canal continued west near the south shore of the Mohawk River all the way to Rome, where the Mohawk turns north.\nAt Rome, the canal continued west parallel to Wood Creek, which flows westward into Oneida Lake, and turned southwest and west cross-country to avoid the lake. From Canastota west, it ran roughly along the north (lower) edge of the Onondaga Escarpment, passing through Syracuse, Onondaga Lake, and Rochester. Before reaching Rochester, the canal uses a series of natural ridges to cross the deep valley of Irondequoit Creek. At Lockport the canal turned southwest to rise to the top of the Niagara Escarpment, using the ravine of Eighteen Mile Creek.\nThe canal continued south-southwest to Pendleton, where it turned west and southwest, mainly using the channel of Tonawanda Creek. From the Tonawanda south toward Buffalo, it ran just east of the Niagara River, where it reached its \"Western Terminus\" at Little Buffalo Creek (later it became the Commercial Slip), which discharged into the Buffalo River just above its confluence with Lake Erie. With Buffalo's re-excavation of the Commercial Slip, completed in 2008, the Canal's original terminus is now re-watered and again accessible by boats. With several miles of the Canal inland of this location still lying under 20th-century fill and urban construction, the effective western navigable terminus of the Erie Canal is found at Tonawanda.\nThe Erie made use of the favorable conditions of New York's unique topography, which provided that area with the only break in the Appalachians south of the Saint Lawrence River. The Hudson is tidal to Troy, and Albany is west of the Appalachians. It allowed for east\u2013west navigation from the coast to the Great Lakes within US territory. The canal system thus gave New York a competitive advantage, helped New York City develop as an international trade center, and allowed Buffalo to grow from just 200 settlers in 1820 to more than 18,000 people by 1840. The port of New York became essentially the Atlantic home port for all of the Midwest\u2014because of this vital connection and others to follow, such as the railroads, New York would become known as the \"Empire State\" or \"the great Empire State\".\nEnlargements and improvements.\n \nProblems developed but were quickly solved. Leaks developed along the entire length of the canal, but these were sealed using cement that hardened underwater (hydraulic cement). Erosion on the clay bottom proved to be a problem and the speed was limited to .\nThe original design planned for an annual tonnage of 1.5 million tons (1.36 million metric tons), but this was exceeded immediately. An ambitious program to improve the canal began in 1834. During this massive series of construction projects, known as the First Enlargement, the canal was widened from and deepened from . Locks were widened and/or rebuilt in new locations, and many new navigable aqueducts were constructed. The canal was straightened and slightly re-routed in some stretches, resulting in the abandonment of short segments of the original 1825 canal. The First Enlargement was completed in 1862, with further minor enlargements in later decades.\nToday, the reconfiguration of the canal created during the First Enlargement is commonly referred to as the \"Improved Erie Canal\" or the \"Old Erie Canal\", to distinguish it from the canal's modern-day course. Existing remains of the 1825 canal abandoned during the Enlargement are officially referred to today as \"Clinton's Ditch\" (which was also the popular nickname for the entire Erie Canal project during its original 1817\u20131825 construction).\nAdditional feeder canals soon extended the Erie Canal into a system. These included the Cayuga-Seneca Canal south to the Finger Lakes, the Oswego Canal from Three Rivers north to Lake Ontario at Oswego, and the Champlain Canal from Troy north to Lake Champlain. From 1833 to 1877, the short Crooked Lake Canal connected Keuka Lake and Seneca Lake. The Chemung Canal connected the south end of Seneca Lake to Elmira in 1833, and was an important route for Pennsylvania coal and timber into the canal system. The Chenango Canal in 1836 connected the Erie Canal at Utica to Binghamton and caused a business boom in the Chenango River valley. The Chenango and Chemung canals linked the Erie with the Susquehanna River system. The Black River Canal connected the Black River to the Erie Canal at Rome and remained in operation until the 1920s. The Genesee Valley Canal was run along the Genesee River to connect with the Allegheny River at Olean, but the Allegheny section, which would have connected to the Ohio and Mississippi rivers, was never built. The Genesee Valley Canal was later abandoned and became the route of the Genesee Valley Canal Railroad.\nIn 1903 the New York State legislature authorized construction of the New York State Barge Canal as the \"Improvement of the Erie, the Oswego, the Champlain, and the Cayuga and Seneca Canals\".\nIn 1905, construction of the Barge Canal began, which was completed in 1918, at a cost of $96.7 million.\nFreight traffic reached a total of 5.2 million short tons (4.7 million metric tons) by 1951, before declining in the face of combined rail and truck competition.\nCompetition.\nAs the canal brought travelers to New York City, it took business away from other ports such as Philadelphia and Baltimore. Those cities and their states started projects to compete with the Erie Canal. In Pennsylvania, the Main Line of Public Works was a combined canal and railroad running west from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh on the Ohio River, opened in 1834. In Maryland, the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad ran west to Wheeling, West Virginia, then a part of Virginia, also on the Ohio River, and was completed in 1853.\nOther competition was more direct. The Mohawk and Hudson Railroad opened in 1837, providing a bypass to the slowest part of the canal between Albany and Schenectady. Other railroads were soon chartered and built to continue the line west to Buffalo, and in 1842 a continuous line (which later became the New York Central Railroad and its Auburn Road in 1853) was open the whole way to Buffalo. As the railroad served the same general route as the canal, but provided for faster travel, passengers soon switched to it. However, as late as 1852, the canal carried thirteen times more freight tonnage than all the railroads in New York State combined; it continued to compete well with the railroads through 1902, when tolls were abolished.\nDuring Rockefeller's consolidations of the late 1860s and early 1870s, he used the canal as a cheaper form of transportation \u2013 in the summer months when it was not frozen \u2013 to get his refined oil from Cleveland to New York City. In the winter months his only options were the three trunk lines: the Erie Railroad, the New York Central Railroad, or the Pennsylvania Railroad.\nThe New York, West Shore and Buffalo Railway was completed in 1884, as a route running closely parallel to both the canal and the New York Central Railroad. However, it went bankrupt and was acquired the next year by the New York Central.\nImpact.\nThe Erie Canal greatly lowered the cost of shipping between the Midwest and the Northeast, bringing much lower food costs to Eastern cities and allowing the East to economically ship machinery and manufactured goods to the Midwest. The canal also made an immense contribution to the wealth and importance of New York City, Buffalo and New York State. Its impact went much further, increasing trade throughout the nation by opening eastern and overseas markets to Midwestern farm products and by enabling migration to the West.\nThe Erie Canal was an immediate success. Tolls collected on freight had already exceeded the state's construction debt in its first year of official operation. By 1828, import duties collected at the New York Customs House supported federal government operations and provided funds for all the expenses in Washington except the interest on the national debt. Additionally, New York State's initial loan for the original canal had been paid by 1837. Although it had been envisioned as primarily a commercial channel for freight boats, passengers also traveled on the canal's packet boats. In 1825 more than 40,000 passengers took advantage of the convenience and beauty of canal travel. The canal's steady flow of tourists, businessmen and settlers lent it to uses never imagined by its initial sponsors. Evangelical preachers made their circuits of the upstate region, and the canal served as the last leg of the Underground Railroad ferrying runaway slaves to Buffalo near the Canada\u2013US border. Aspiring merchants found that tourists were reliable customers. Vendors moved from boat to boat peddling items such as books, watches and fruit, while less scrupulous \"confidence men\" sold remedies for foot corns or passed off counterfeit bills. Tourists were carried along the \"northern tour,\" which ultimately led to the popular honeymoon destination Niagara Falls, just north of Buffalo.\nConsisting of a massive stone aqueduct which carried boats over incredible cascades, Little Falls was one of the most popular stops for American and foreign tourists. This is shown in Scene 4 of William Dunlap's play \"A Trip to Niagara\", where he depicts the general preference of tourists to travel by canal so that they could experience a combination of artificial and natural sights. Canal travel was, for many, an opportunity to take in the sublime and commune with nature. The play also reflects the less enthusiastic view of some who saw movement on the canal as tedious.\nNew ethnic Irish communities formed in some towns along its route after completion, as Irish immigrants were a large portion of the construction labor force. Earth extracted from the canal was transported to the New York City area and used as landfill in New York and New Jersey. A plaque honoring the canal's construction is located in Battery Park in southern Manhattan.\nBecause so many immigrants traveled on the canal, many genealogists have sought copies of canal passenger lists. Apart from the years 1827\u20131829, canal boat operators were not required to record passenger names or report them to the government, which, in this case, was the state of New York. Some passenger lists survive today in the New York State Archives, and other sources of traveler information are sometimes available.\nThe Canal also helped bind the still-new nation closer to Britain and Europe. Repeal of Britain's Corn Law resulted in a huge increase in exports of Midwestern wheat to Britain. Trade between the United States and Canada also increased as a result of the repeal and a reciprocity (free-trade) agreement signed in 1854. Much of this trade flowed along the Erie.\nIts success also prompted imitation: a rash of canal-building followed. Also, the many technical hurdles that had to be overcome made heroes of those whose innovations made the canal possible. This led to an increased public esteem for practical education. Chicago, among other Great Lakes cities, recognized the importance of the canal to its economy, and two West Loop streets are named \"Canal\" and \"Clinton\" (for canal proponent DeWitt Clinton).\nConcern that erosion caused by logging in the Adirondacks could silt up the canal contributed to the creation in 1885 of another New York National Historic Landmark, the Adirondack Park.\nMany notable authors wrote about the canal, including Herman Melville, Frances Trollope, Nathaniel Hawthorne, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Mark Twain, Samuel Hopkins Adams and the Marquis de Lafayette, and many tales and songs were written about life on the canal. The popular song \"Low Bridge\" by Thomas S. Allen was written in 1905 to memorialize the canal's early heyday, when barges were pulled by mules rather than engines.\nSunday closing debate.\nThe New York State Legislature debated closing the locks of the Erie Canal on Sundays, when they convened in 1858. However, George Jeremiah and Dwight Bacheller, two of the bill's opponents, argued that the state had no right to stop canal traffic on the grounds that the Erie Canal and its tributaries had ceased to be wards of the state. The canal at its inception had been imagined as an extension of nature, an artificial river where there had been none. The canal succeeded by sharing more in common with lakes and seas than it had with public roads. Jeremiah and Bacheller argued, successfully, that just as it was unthinkable to halt oceangoing navigation on Sunday, so it was with the canal.\n20th century.\nIn 1918, the Canal was replaced by the larger New York State Barge Canal. This new canal replaced much of the original route, leaving many abandoned sections (most notably between Syracuse and Rome). New digging and flood control technologies allowed engineers to canalize rivers that the original canal had sought to avoid, such as the Mohawk, Seneca, and Clyde rivers, and Oneida Lake. In sections that did not consist of canalized rivers (particularly between Rochester and Buffalo), the original Erie Canal channel was enlarged to wide and deep. The expansion allowed barges up to to use the Canal. This expensive project was politically unpopular in parts of the state not served by the canal, and failed to save it from becoming obsolete for commercial shipping.\nThe new alignment began on the Hudson River at the border between Cohoes and Waterford, where it ran northwest with five locks (the so-called \"Waterford Flight\"), running into the Mohawk River east of Crescent. The Waterford Flight is claimed to be one of the steepest series of locks in the world.\nWhile the old Canal ran next to the Mohawk all the way to Rome, the new canal ran through the river, which was straightened or widened where necessary. At Ilion, the new canal left the river for good, but continued to run on a new alignment parallel to both the river and the old canal to Rome. From Rome, the new route continued almost due west, merging with Fish Creek just east of its entry into Oneida Lake.\nFrom Oneida Lake, the new canal ran west along the Oneida River, with cutoffs to shorten the route. At Three Rivers, the Oneida River turns northwest, and was deepened for the Oswego Canal to Lake Ontario. The new Erie Canal turned south there along the Seneca River, which turns west near Syracuse and continues west to a point in the Montezuma Marsh. There the Cayuga and Seneca Canal continued south with the Seneca River, and the new Erie Canal again ran parallel to the old canal along the bottom of the Niagara Escarpment, in some places running along the Clyde River, and in some places replacing the old canal. At Pittsford, southeast of Rochester, the canal turned west to run around the south side of Rochester, rather than through downtown. The canal crosses the Genesee River at the Genesee Valley Park, then rejoins the old path near North Gates.\nFrom there it was again roughly an upgrade to the original canal, running west to Lockport. This reach of from Henrietta to Lockport is called \"the 60\u2011mile level\" since there are no locks and the water level rises only over the entire segment. Diversions from and to adjacent natural streams along the way are used to maintain the canal's level. It runs southwest to Tonawanda, where the new alignment discharges into the Niagara River, which is navigable upstream to the New York Barge Canal's Black Rock Lock and thence to the Canal's original \"Western Terminus\" at Buffalo's Inner Harbor.\nThe growth of railroads and highways across the state, and the opening of the Saint Lawrence Seaway, caused commercial traffic on the canal to decline dramatically during the second half of the 20th century.\nNew York State Canal System.\nIn 1992, the New York State Barge Canal was renamed the New York State Canal System (including the Erie, Cayuga-Seneca, Oswego, and Champlain canals) and placed under the newly created New York State Canal Corporation, a subsidiary of the New York State Thruway Authority. While part of the Thruway, the canal system was operated using money generated by Thruway tolls.\n21st century.\nSince the 1990s, the canal system has been used primarily by recreational traffic, although a small but growing amount of cargo traffic still uses it.\nToday, the Erie Canalway National Heritage Corridor covers of navigable water from Lake Champlain to the Capital Region and west to Buffalo. The area has a population of 2.7 million; about 75% of Central and Western New York's population lives within of the Erie Canal.\nThe Erie Canal is open to small craft and some larger vessels from May through November each year. During winter, water is drained from parts of the canal for maintenance. The Champlain Canal, Lake Champlain, and the Chambly Canal, and Richelieu River in Canada form the Lakes to Locks Passage, making a tourist attraction of the former waterway linking eastern Canada to the Erie Canal. In 2006 recreational boating fees were eliminated to attract more visitors.\nTravel on the canal's middle section (particularly in the Mohawk Valley) was severely hampered by flooding in late June and early July 2006. Flood damage to the canal and its facilities was estimated as at least $15 million.\nThere were some 42 commercial shipments on the canal in 2008, compared to 15 such shipments in 2007 and more than 33,000 shipments in 1855, the canal's peak year. The new growth in commercial traffic is due to the rising cost of diesel fuel. Canal barges can carry a short ton of cargo on one gallon of diesel fuel, while a gallon allows a train to haul the same amount of cargo and a truck . Canal barges can carry loads up to , and are used to transport objects that would be too large for road or rail shipment. Today, the system is served by several commercial towing companies. In 2012, the New York State Canal System (which consists of the Erie Canal and a few smaller canals) was used to ship 42,000 tons of cargo.\nAside from transportation, numerous businesses, farms, factories and communities alongside its banks still utilize the canal's waters for other purposes such as irrigation for farmland, hydroelectricity, research, industry, and even drinking. Use of the canal system has an estimated total economic impact of $6.2 billion annually.\nIn 2017, the New York State Canal Corporation was transferred from the New York State Thruway to the New York Power Authority.\nOld Erie Canal.\nSections of the old Erie Canal not used after 1918 are owned by New York State, or have been ceded to or purchased by counties or municipalities. Many stretches of the old canal have been filled in to create roads such as Erie Boulevard in Syracuse and Schenectady, and Broad Street and the Rochester Subway in Rochester. A 36\u2011mile (58\u00a0km) stretch of the old canal from the town of DeWitt, New York, east of Syracuse, to just outside Rome, New York, is preserved as the Old Erie Canal State Historic Park. In 1960 the Schoharie Crossing State Historic Site, a section of the canal in Montgomery County, was one of the first sites recognized as a National Historic Landmark.\nSome municipalities have preserved sections as town or county canal parks, or have plans to do so. Camillus Erie Canal Park preserves a stretch and has restored Nine Mile Creek Aqueduct, built in 1841 as part of the First Enlargement of the canal. In some communities, the old canal has refilled with overgrowth and debris. Proposals have been made to rehydrate the old canal through downtown Rochester or Syracuse as a tourist attraction. In Syracuse, the location of the old canal is represented by a reflecting pool in downtown's Clinton Square and the downtown hosts a canal barge and weigh lock structure, now dry. Buffalo's Commercial Slip is the restored and re-watered segment of the canal which formed its \"Western Terminus\".\nThe Erie Canal is a destination for tourists from all over the world, and has inspired guidebooks dedicated to exploration of the waterway. An Erie Canal Cruise company, based in Herkimer, operates from mid-May until mid-October with daily cruises. The cruise goes through the history of the canal and also takes passengers through Lock 18.\nIn 2004, the administration of New York Governor George Pataki was criticized when officials of New York State Canal Corporation attempted to sell private development rights to large stretches of the Old Erie Canal to a single developer for $30,000, far less than the land was worth on the open market. After an investigation by the \"Syracuse Post-Standard\" newspaper, the Pataki administration nullified the deal.\nRecords of the planning, design, construction, and administration of the Erie Canal are vast and can be found in the New York State Archives. Except for two years (1827\u20131829), the State of New York did not require canal boat operators to maintain or submit passenger lists.\nParks and museums.\nParks and museums related to the old Erie Canal include (listed from East to West):\nLocks.\nThe following list of locks is provided for the current canal, from east to west. There are a total of 36 (35 numbered) locks on the Erie Canal.\nAll locks on the New York State Canal System are single-chamber; the dimensions are long and wide with a minimum depth of water over the miter sills at the upstream gates upon lift. They can accommodate a vessel up to long and wide. Overall sidewall height will vary by lock, ranging between depending on the lift and navigable stages. Lock E17 at Little Falls has the tallest sidewall height at .\nDistance is based on position markers from an interactive canal map provided online by the New York State Canal Corporation and may not exactly match specifications on signs posted along the canal. Mean surface elevations are comprised from a combination of older canal profiles and history books as well as specifications on signs posted along the canal. The margin of error should normally be within .\nThe Waterford Flight series of locks (comprising Locks E2 through E6) is one of the steepest in the world, lifting boats in less than .\n\"All surface elevations are approximate.\"\n Denotes federally managed locks.\nThere is a natural rise between locks E33 and E34 as well as a natural rise between Lock E35 and the Niagara River.\nThere is no Lock E1 or Lock E31 on the Erie Canal. The place of \"Lock E1\" on the passage from the lower Hudson River to Lake Erie is taken by the Troy Federal Lock, located just north of Troy, New York, and is not part of the Erie Canal System proper. It is operated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers. The Erie Canal officially begins at the confluence of the Hudson and Mohawk rivers at Waterford, New York.\nAlthough the original alignment of the Erie Canal through Buffalo has been filled in, travel by water is still possible from Buffalo via the Black Rock Lock in the Niagara River to the canal's modern western terminus in Tonawanda, and eastward to Albany. The Black Rock Lock is operated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers.\nOneida Lake lies between locks E22 and E23, and has a mean surface elevation of . Lake Erie has a mean surface elevation of ."}
